Mr. Olguin Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We congratulate you, Mr. President, and your team
for your balanced and firm conduct of the work of
the Security Council this month. We welcome the
convening of this public wrap-up session, which we
consider to be an indispensable tool of the Security
Council that must be maintained. We also commend
the initiative of your presidency, Sir, for suggesting the
field visit to the Central African Republic and Burundi,
which was a useful exercise to observe realities in the
field, as well as to Addis Ababa to exchange ideas and
opinions on the main issues of shared concern to the
Council and the African Union.

With respect to Yemen, the developments of
recent weeks have brought the worst-case scenario to
reality. Obviously, the action of the Security Council
has not been effective, since we have used the various
tools available to this organ without achieving the
desired effects. On the contrary, it would appear that
the influence that can be exercised over the parties
to the conflict has diminished rather than grown. We
believe that the Council should work harder to better
understand the situation, avoiding the repetition of
solutions or ideas that may be counterproductive. The
conflict must be ended now to benefit the civilian
population of Yemen.

This month, the Council has held consultations on
the situations in Darfur, South Sudan and between the
Sudan and South Sudan. No progress has been made in
reducing tensions in any of those crises, or in achieving
an agreement that would address the root causes of
those conflict situations. Furthermore, the security
conditions and humanitarian situation appear to have
deteriorated.

We thank the French presidency for conducting
inclusive negotiations on renewing the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
The adoption by consensus of resolution 2211 (2015)
will, we hope, accelerate the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
and assist in achieving lasting peace in the country.
We underscore the agreement reached during the
negotiations on the resolution to request the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations to inform the Council
of MONUSCO's operations in monthly meetings at
the expert level, pursuant to the proposal of the New
Zealand delegation. We also appreciate the fact that, in
accordance with Chile's request, it has been agreed to
include troop-contributing countries in those meetings.
We hope that those countries will be informed in
a timely manner regarding the first meeting to be
convened on Friday, 3 April.

The 25 March open debate on children and armed
conflict (see S/PV.7414), focused on non-State armed
groups that perpetrate the worst crimes against girls
and boys, including kidnapping by terrorist groups,
will no doubt contribute to lay the groundwork for
the next debate, which we hope will take place under
the Malaysian presidency in the context of the tenth
anniversary of the adoption resolution 1612 (2005).
During the open debate, cross-cutting support was
expressed for dealing with child abduction in the
near future, and for strengthening mechanisms to
ensure children's right to education, in accordance
with resolution 2143 (2014), including appropriate
support to protect girls' educational facilities through,
among others, the Lucens Guidelines. We welcome the
participation of civil society in such debates. At the
same time, we call for the depoliticization ofthe agenda
so as to ensure that debates will focus first and foremost
on safeguarding the higher interests of children, inter
alia by promoting best practices and specific initiatives
to that end, such as the aforementioned Guidelines.

Chile thanks France for convening an open debate
on victims of attacks and abuses on ethnic or religious
grounds in the Middle East (see S/PV.7419). We are
especially pleased that many delegations responded
in their statements to Chile's proposal that religious
freedom be fully guaranteed and respected, as it is
derived from people's fundamental right to hold or
to not hold a religious belief and to not convert or be
converted to another.

Finally, we appreciate the discussion on the draft
resolution against Boko Haram and the consultations
concerning the threat to international peace and security
posed by that terrorist group. We take this opportunity
to express our political support for the decision of the
States members of the Lake Chad Basin Commission
and the Republic of Benin to establish a multinational
joint task force against Boko Haram, under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, as necessary.
We believe that the affected countries of the region
must find a consensus solution on the draft resolution,
without losing sight of the need for coordinated action
in the fight against Boko Haram.

