Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Since I began the
proceedings this morning on a slightly discordant note,
I would like to ensure that they end on a sweet note. I
would like to explain to Ambassador Jean-David
Levitte that my intervention was not intended in any
way to spoil the atmosphere. From time to time,
however, after 20 years of experience in multilateral
work, I have discovered that, sometimes, to make
strong substantive points, you have to raise procedural
issues. But this will be pursued in informal
consultations.

I am actually very happy to be the last speaker
because, as the last speaker, I can happily endorse and
reconfirm all the thanks and tributes that have been
paid. Indeed, I can say that, from my personal point of
view, as someone who was not scheduled to go on the
mission and was a last-minute addition, I was very
pleased to be included, because, frankly, it was both
personally and professionally one of the most
rewarding experiences I have had. It was professionally
rewarding, as many have said, thanks to the leadership
of Ambassador Levitte of this mission. He was truly
dedicated and indefatigable and, as I said in informal
consultations yesterday, he makes Singaporeans look
lazy in comparison.

I just want to add three points which I hope will
help to complement some of the points that have been
made in the discussion so far.

The first point is that I think the phrase that has
been used most frequently today in the discussion of
our mission has been "window of opportunity". I hope,
however, that we will all be aware that windows of
opportunity are, almost by definition, fragile and
fleeting. You do not have windows of opportunity in
areas of light and hope; you have windows of
opportunity in areas of doom and gloom. Therefore, it
is important that, after this mission, if we have
achieved any positive results, we maintain the
momentum.
In this regard, several speakers have pointed to
many individual elements that are encouraging: the
ceasefire, the disengagement, the withdrawal of foreign
forces and the inter-Congolese dialogue. All these
elements, however, add up to a larger process and it is
important that the larger process keep moving on, in
addition to all the individual elements. In this regard, I
should like to mention that perhaps, for me and as
hinted by our colleague from Ireland a few minutes
ago, one of the most encouraging meetings was the one
we had with the signatories of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement. No doubt, a lot depends on the actions of
the signatories. In this regard, hopefully, in our meeting
with them, we have developed what I would call a
healthy symbiotic relationship: they, in a sense, take
positive actions that lead to positive responses from the
Council. Of course, if they do not, if they take negative
steps again and again, as our colleague from Ireland
hinted a few minutes ago, if there is a repetition of the
negative rhetoric instead of the positive words that we
heard at the meeting in Lusaka, that could in turn
create a negative, vicious circle.

Thus, I hope that the positive results of this
mission will not be fleeting and that they will persist.
Again, as I said in the informal consultations yesterday,
there is some obligation on our part, having gone on
the mission, to ensure that there is follow-up and that
whatever concrete follow-up action is needed is taken
in the next month or so.

My second point is on Burundi. Here, I hope that,
even though the report has come out only today and I
doubt whether many people have had time to read it in
full, some attention will be paid to the first sentence of
paragraph 133, which actually conveys a very strong
statement. It says:

"The mission was struck by the complexity
and intractability of the situation in Burundi, and
its serious potential for large-scale violence."
(5/2001/521, para. 133)

This, I would say, is a very strong warning to the
Council and, insofar as the Council has Charter
responsibilities, I hope its members will take note of
that sentence.

At the same time, I hope that they will also take
note of paragraphs 39 to 45, which describe - I think
well - the conversation that members of the mission
had with Mr. Jean-Bosco Ndayikengurukiye, as well as
paragraphs 88 and 89 on the meetings with the Forces
nationales pour la liberation, at which I think the
members of the mission tried, with as much persuasive
force as they had, to send a signal to both these parties
that they have to come aboard the Arusha process, that
they should renounce violence and that they should
join the rest on the road of peace. I sincerely hope that
these messages have had an impact and I am glad that,
in the review that we have had today, virtually every
speaker has stressed the importance of paying very
careful attention to the Burundi question.

My third and final point is on the question of
Security Council missions. Here, I am, in a sense,
following up what our colleague from Ukraine said. It
was, as we have all agreed, a successful mission, but if
it was successful, perhaps we should try to reflect on
why it was successful. I hope in this regard that the
Security Council will try to become more self-
reflective as an institution, because it neither reflects
on its failures - including such spectacular failures as
Rwanda and Srebrenica - nor on its successes. Now,
however, that we have a valuable success story, we
should try to study why this mission was successful.
Here, to get the discussion going, let me suggest five
factors which I think helped to ensure that the mission
was a success.

The first and most important one - and I am glad
that several people have emphasized this - is
leadership. Here, I would like to tell Ambassador J ean-
David Levitte that his work is not complete - he has
to write the manual on how to lead missions for all
future mission leaders.

Secondly, we clearly need unity of purpose. Here,
I believe that Ambassador Greenstock said that it was
remarkable that this was probably one of the largest
Security Council missions ever sent out and yet one of
the most cohesive. It was the combination of large size
and cohesiveness that I think added to the impact of the
mission wherever we went.

Thirdly, I think the mission should be given a
realistic mandate. Wherever we went, we tried to
ensure that we neither raised expectations nor
dampened them. We tried, I think, each in his own way,
to give a very realistic picture of what the Council
could and could not do to ensure that, at the end of the
day, there were no unrealistic expectations of it. That is
very important, because if the Council does not do that
and people expect some major actions, they might, in a
sense, miscalculate their own responsibilities in the
situation.

The fourth factor is timing. I guess we had the
good fortune that, this year, several positive
developments led to a change of attitude among many
of the key parties involved in these issues. In that
sense, the timing of our mission, I think, was just right
in providing just the right boost to build on the positive
developments that have taken place since January this
year. I think this is a point to bear in mind when we
send out missions in the future.

Fifthly and finally, and I am glad that several
speakers have spoken about this, this was a very good
mission with regard to the political, logistical and
administrative support given by the entire United
Nations family. I would say that we were truly
impressed by what they did wherever we went, not just
in terms of supporting our mission but also in terms of
the work that they were doing on the ground. We saw
this while visiting a town like Mbandaka and seeing
how, from virtually nothing, the United Nations had
built an infrastructure to accommodate its contingents,
and that had given a tremendous boost in confidence. I
think that sort of contribution on the ground is rarely
noticed. The tragedy here, of course, is that the United
Nations never gets sufficient credit for the contribution
that it makes. I think it is quite clear, both from the
mission and from the work on the ground, that the
United Nations has actually made many positive
contributions, which we hope the international
community will take note of. To those who want to
deny that, I would challenge them to come and do a
better job than what the United Nations has done in this
region.

