Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
Mr. Michael Keating, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and Mr. Francisco Madeira, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission for Somalia, for their detailed and
informative briefings today.

We would first like to commend the joint work
being done by the United Nations and the African
Union in Somalia. Their deployment of civilian,
military and police personnel in peacebuilding
efforts - rebuilding the State, strengthening the rule
oflaw, reforming the security sector and other essential
objectives - is crucial to the quest for stability and
security in the subregion. We believe that the support
and assistance efforts of the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM), the United Nation Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia must be conducted with
a high degree of transparency as well as greater and
better coordination and information exchanges.

In that regard, the road map for political stabilization
in Somalia is crucial, consisting principally of
formalizing the statute of the federal member states,
implementing the security strategy, and building
resilience and promoting socioeconomic change, which
requires the Somali Government to define its priorities
within the framework of its sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity. With regard to Somalia's
socioeconomic transformation, we believe that in order
to ensure lasting and sustainable peace and make the
Somali State less fragile, it is essential not only to
reform the security sector but also to work to restructure
its foreign debt, since in the post-conflict phase there
can be no sustainable peace without development and
there will be no development at all if the debt issue is
not resolved. With regard to security-sector reform,
Somali ownership is essential, based on a relationship
of trust, consensus and inclusivity on the part of both
the Federal Government and the federal states. In that
regard, we want to emphasize UNSOM's important role
in supporting the National Security Council, which we
consider crucial to improving capacities in the areas
of demobilization, reintegration and disarmament, as
well as the handling of arms, maritime security and
strengthening the country's police forces.

Bolivia fully supports the efforts of the African
Union to implement all initiatives for mediation,
preventive diplomacy and dialogue aimed at arriving at
peaceful and sustainable solutions to conflicts. In that
regard, we would like to highlight the work ofAMISOM
and its personnel, some of whom have sacrificed their
lives in fulfilling their mandate. The Security Council
and the United Nations must continue helping to
strengthen its capacity so that Somalia's security forces
can take on full responsibility for the maintenance of
security in their country as soon as possible.

We are very concerned about the threat that
Al-Shabaab continues to pose in Somalia, constantly
endangering the process of political stabilization and
increasing tensions in the subregion through its deadly
and complex attacks on innocent civilians, the Somali
security forces and AMISOM. The attacks have once
again demonstrated the impact of this terrorist group
and the importance of coming up with measures to
counter its threats, especially in Mogadishu, where
attacks such as the one that occurred on 14 October
of last year have resulted in the loss of hundreds of
innocent lives and great material damage due to the
use of improvised explosive devices, car bombs and
large-calibre weapons.

We are also concerned about the continued
precarious humanitarian situation. The abduction,
recruitment and indoctrination of child soldiers
persist, as does sexual violence against women and
girls, especially those who have suffered forced
displacement. We appreciate UNSOM's coordination
with the United Nations Development Programme in
implementing support programmes for protecting the
Victims of sexual violence and establishing preventive
measures. At the same time, the risk of famine is having
serious consequences for the most vulnerable sectors
of the population. In that regard, Bolivia condemns
anyone who obstructs humanitarian aid and demands
that the parties permit and facilitate the people's full
and speedy access to supplies.

In conclusion, we urge the international community
to continue working in close coordination with the
United Nations and the African Union in the interests of
consolidating peace, stability and security in Somalia
through inclusive dialogue and the implementation of
effective security mechanisms that will enable it once
and for all to eliminate threats to the peace process and
above all to the entire Somali people.

