Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I wish to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this meeting. I also
thank General Ahmed and the Force Commanders for
their briefings. Like all other members of the Council, I
express our extremely sincere appreciation to them and
the men and women with whom they serve. Our role in
this Chamber in New York is meaningless without what
they do, and we need them to know that - especially
as they do their job in increasingly dangerous and
unpredictable situations. The 10 deaths in Mali in the
past week show once again how dangerous their work
IS.

We have heard a mix of presentations today from
the Force Commanders of one of newest such United
Nations peacekeeping operations - the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), one of the oldest - the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF),
and the largest - the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO). Those missions are different in
size, scope and history, but clearly they are all grappling
with institutional and environmental challenges that
reflect similar changes in the nature of peacekeeping,
from generating forces and building infrastructure
in vast, remote and hostile environments - not just
hostile on account of armed groups but, if we look at
northern Mali, we see how incredibly physically hostile
that environment is, in particular during the summer
months - to implementing a robust security posture
to protect peacekeepers and civilians, and confronting
non-State actors employing deadly and more violent
unconventional tactics.

We need to draw out lessons from each mission
and apply them with good effect to improve the
responsiveness and discipline of United Nations
peacekeeping as a whole. The Secretary-General's
forthcoming strategic review of peace operations will
be important, as it will provide a structured way to do
that. It is a necessary and critical initiative. It should
be a fundamental review. As Ambassador Gasana said
at the beginning, we need to change our way of doing
business, since we are not working in the same market
any more. The Force Commanders know this much
better than we do.

We all know that the protection of civilians is a
defining task for United Nations peacekeeping, and
indeed is the measure by which the international
community - our own stakeholders - measure those
of us in the Council and the mission staff in the field.
It is now written into the majority of the Council's
mandates. It needs to be written into most of them,
if not all. The deployment of the Force Intervention
Brigade in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
represented a necessary seismic shift, embracing the
need for clear, offensive action to defeat armed rebel
groups that threaten civilians. As General Dos Santos
Cruz said, missions must be proactive, not reactive.
Under his leadership and that of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Martin Kobler, the results
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo speak for
themselves, but collectively we can improve - again,
to quote General Dos Santos Cruz - across the system,
both in mindset and operational practice.

One of the key lessons to emerge from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo experience is the
importance of new technologies, such as satellite
imagery and unmanned aerial systems (UAVs), and
improved training in order for our troops to know when
and how to protect vulnerable populations. Any enabler
that allows those in the field to achieve their mandates
in a safer, more effective and efficient manner must be
embraced and incorporated more broadly.

We all know that peacekeeping is under
unprecedented pressure, with a more simultaneous
number of conflicts with a bigger impact over a larger
number of people that at any time since the Second
World War. Member States must get more serious about
doing much more to sustain peacekeeping. The United
States and Rwandan initiative during the General
Assembly general debate to catalyse more contributions
was very much needed, and we hope that initiative will
be maintained and increase pressure on all Member
States. We need to respond to it. China's indication
just a moment ago of an increase in contributions is
extremely welcome.

On the very specific point of enablers, I would
welcome any further views that General Dos Santos
Cruz might have on how UAVs are assisting his Mission's
strategy to shape, clear, hold and build and what other
technologies and capabilities would be welcome in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I would also
welcome his advice on how the framework brigades
could be made more mobile and better integrated into
the planning and support of the Intervention Brigade's
offensive operations.

General Kazura has described the difficulties that
missions face when operating in an evolving asymmetric
threat environment and, indeed, where a peacekeeping
mission is increasingly operating in an environment in
which not only is there no peace to keep, as General
Maqsood Ahmed reminded us at the beginning, but the
mission has become a primary target of terrorist and
extremist elements. That situation is one that requires a
serious response from the Council.

I will be chairing a meeting of the Council's
Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee this
afternoon. At that meeting, we will review the most
recent report from the Committee's Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team on the current threat.
The threat is increasing far beyondjust the Islamic State
in Iraq and Syria. Terrorists are much younger, much
more violent and far less inhibited. They do not listen
to traditional communal and religious leaders anymore
and are seizing territory and cleverly exploiting local
conflicts, making those conflicts themselves worse
while increasing their own presence, influence and
success. This is the new reality, and it will be here for
a long time. It has clear implications for peacekeeping
operations. The Secretary- General's review will need to
look at this, but we cannot wait. As Force Commanders
know, operational and defensive adjustments need to
be made now. The Council needs to ensure that we
are providing them with whatever assistance we can
to allow for that. The Council is very conscious of
that, and its role in countering terrorism will continue
to be a key feature of our discussions into the future.
My own country will try to make this a key feature of
our own presidency next month, building on the two
resolutions we have just adopted, one in August and one
in September (resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014)).

On a very specific comment, intelligence and the
capacity to analyse and assess new and emerging threats
should be an essential element of all peacekeeping,
particularly when it can underpin the safety of
peacekeepers and civilians. In Mali, the deployment
of the All Sources Information Fusion Unit is breaking
new ground in peacekeeping. I would welcome any
comment from General Kazura about the value of the
Unit.

Referring also to the scourge of improvised
explosive devices (IEDs), the threat of that is reaching
new heights, with very tragic results. Ten peacekeepers
were killed by IEDs in Mali in September, including
those from Chad, who were killed earlier in the month
of September. We need to do more to counter that threat.
We know that, but is there any further comment from
Force Commanders on how we might be able to utilize
the expertise that has been developed in a number of
countries, including my own, how to handle that with
our national forces, and what more can we do to ensure
that that experience is being transferred to United
Nations peacekeeping?

General Singha has illustrated the challenge faced
by peacekeepers in adapting to a rapidly shifting
operational environment. We thank him for the
explanation this morning ofthe circumstances he faced.
The changed security circumstances in and around the
area of separation in recent weeks have been dramatic,
culminating in the redeployment, as he explained, of
mission personnel to the Alpha side. However, as he
also said, the monitoring and liaison functions remain
vital - indispensable, in fact - to ensuring that
respect for the 1974 Agreement on Disengagement
between Israeli and Syrian forces is maintained.
That mission is needed. We would welcome any
further insights he might have about how the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force mandate can
be fulfilled in the changed circumstances, given the
current disposition of forces, and what he sees as the
future needs.

To conclude, we welcome the opportunity this
morning to engage directly with our commanders - and
indeed they are our commanders. We need to remind
ourselves of the importance of that relationship as a
result of that simple and ineluctable fact. They have
the day-to-day practical task of translating what we try
to do in this Chamber in formulating good mandates
into results. We need more interaction in order for
them to keep us honest and for us to understand the
challenges they face every day and what they anticipate
the future needs will be so we can properly calibrate
those mandates to the challenges on the ground, but
also, above all, ensure that they have the adequate tools
and resources. It is our responsibility to help to deliver
those. All Member States and the Council, which needs
to take an increasingly leadership role, given the threat
to the sustainability of peacekeeping throughout the
world, must ensure that that is done.

Australia looks forward to replicating this format
during our own presidency next month, when we intend
to hold the first-ever Council briefing with heads of
police components, as they are part of our peacekeeping
missions overseas as well.

