Mr. Lambertini (Italy) (spoke in French): I
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Ms. Sandra Honore for her briefing and for
her commitment all these years as Head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
That has been one of the keys to the Mission's success,
and we should acknowledge it. I would also like to
welcome the Permanent Representative of Haiti to the
United Nations.

Italy associates itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union.

The Security Council took the decision to initiate
a transition from MINUSTAH to the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH),
whichisfocusedonHaiti'scurrentneeds-strengthening
the Haitian National Police, justice and the rule of
law, and promoting and defending human rights. The
Council's decision reflects the historical changes that
have occurred in Haiti with the re-establishment of
constitutional order, the revitalization of the National
Assembly and the Council's confidence in the new
Government's programme. This progress paves the way
for the consolidation of a stable democracy that can
meet the major challenges that the country is facing.
We urge Haiti not to lose this window of opportunity
to launch the reforms it will need to take its future into
its own hands.

What needs to be done now is to establish a vision

for a shared effort and put it into action, a vision based
on accessible, fair justice for everyone, a functional
electoral system and a firmly established rule of law
that ensures that all can enjoy their fundamental
rights and have equitable access to development. We
urge the authorities to engage in an inclusive national
dialogue with all sectors of Haitian society with a view
to restoring their full trust in the country's institutions
and engaging them in the reform process. In that regard,
women's participation in the country's political, social
and economic life must be assured. We encourage the
Government to take specific measures to develop and
increase their role.
The maintenance of security is a fundamental
precondition for the implementation of this process.
The enormous progress made by the Haitian National
Police, with MINUSTAH'S help, represents an
essential starting point, but its strengthening and
professionalization, and the resources that entails,
must now be a top priority. These are objectives that
are at the core of MINUJUSTH'S assistance mandate,
but the primary responsibility for them rests with the
Haitian authorities. In that regard, Haiti is on the way to
becoming a model for future action by the Council on
issues of transition and stabilization by strengthening
the elements of peacekeeping missions related to
training and organizing police forces, with the goal
of building and consolidating national capacities for
maintaining peace and preventing conflict.

We believe that national ownership is essential to
every peace and stabilization effort, and Haiti is no
exception. We believe firmly that with the tools made
available to it by the Council, Haiti will be able to move
gradually towards a full transfer of powers to the Haitian
authorities. There will also have to be an open dialogue
and close cooperation with MINUJUSTH, and we urge
MINUJUSTH, when it is implementing its mandate,
to use its political influence and good offices to the
maximum as it implements its mandate. In that regard,
we look forward to seeing a Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of Mission appointed
as soon as possible.

Since it is very important to ensure a responsible
transition, we would like to emphasize the role that the
United Nations will continue to play in assisting the
country. We reiterate our thanks to MINUSTAH for its
vital contribution to maintaining law and order and for
intervening at critical and urgent times in the country
over the years.

We appreciate the integrated planning efforts of the
Mission and the country team and encourage them to
continue to implement those plans so that MINUJUSTH
can be operational from the beginning of its mandate.
The United Nations on the ground must continue to
act in a coordinated, cohesive manner with the goal
of transitioning from emergency assistance to the
long-term development of the country. In conclusion,
I would like to reiterate Italy's commitment to Haiti,
which we have affirmed through our support to the
United Nations Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner
Trust Fund and to Special Envoy Josette Sheeran, who
has been appointed to implement the new strategy for
eradicating the epidemic.

