Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): Let me first of all
thank you, Mr. President, for the effective organization
of today's open meeting and for your consistent efforts
to focus the discussions on practical questions related
to the issue of the protection of civilians.

I should like also to thank the Deputy Secretary-
General for introducing the report and for her useful
contribution to this debate. I am particularly grateful to
Mrs. Mary Robinson for her statement. We are quite
impressed by the work accomplished by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, and we
find it important that the specific problems of civilians
in armed conflict are being addressed through the
coordination of efforts with other partners within and
outside the United Nations system.

The Secretary-General's report can, in fact, be a
useful source of reference, not only for the Security
Council but for other United Nations bodies in their
consideration of this issue within their respective
competencies and areas of responsibility. This should
be carefully taken into account by the Council when
considering follow-up steps and future actions on this
matter. It is obvious that the mandate of the Council
does not allow it to embrace all aspects of the activities
related to the protection of distressed populations in
times of war.

That is why a regular exchange of views with
other organs of the United Nations system will be
crucial to the future success of international efforts in
this field. I believe that we can start this process later
this week by discussing the relevant issues within the
context of our debate with the Economic and Social
Council Bureau on the coordination of conflict
management. The Economic and Social Council, in
fact, may provide us with a fresh perspective on how
best the provisions of resolution 1296 (2000) can be
implemented and where these two Councils can best
assist each other in implementing the relevant
recommendations of the Secretary-General. In one
example - the recommendation regarding fact-finding
missions to conflict areas with a focus on humanitarian
assistance - there is ample room for the Economic
and Social Council not only to participate in such
missions, but also to lead them. I am convinced that
similar work could be undertaken with other United
Nations organs as well.

We strongly support the Secretary-General in his
appeal to the Council to shift the focus of its work to
practical measures aimed at the protection of civilians.
In fact, the Council has done some important work over
the past 12 months to carry out a number of practical
steps leading to enhancing such protection, including in
the area of peacekeeping operations and sanctions. This
work is not over yet. The draft reports of the relevant
working groups of the Council are still to be adopted
and implemented. We hope that this will be done in the
nearest future, which in turn will lead to the
implementation of a number of the Secretary-General's
recommendations and of the relevant provisions of
resolution 1296 (2000).

However, the effective approach of the Council to
the issue of the protection of civilians will be
safeguarded only when those decisions are routinely
applied by this body in the process of its consideration
of specific conflict situations on its agenda, whether in
Africa, in the Balkans or in the Middle East. At the
same time, I wish specifically to point out several other
areas outlined by the Secretary-General in his latest
report, where, in the View of our delegation, more can
be done, including by the Security Council, to enhance
the protection of civilians.

One of these is the issue of the separation of
civilians and armed elements in camps for refugees and
internally displaced persons. We believe that it is
important for the Security Council to develop clear
criteria and procedures for the separation and
identification of armed elements and, while
contemplating specific peacekeeping or peace-building
measures, to consider sending military monitors or
units to major refugee camps and areas in order to
assess the situation on the ground, to protect civilians
in the camps and to prevent the deterioration of the
security situation in the region. The effectiveness of
such measures can be enhanced if they are undertaken
in close cooperation with the host country and regional
organizations concerned.

Another useful recommendation that deserves
positive consideration by the Council, in our View, is
on the need to establish, during the crafting of
peacekeeping mandates, arrangements to address
impunity and for truth and reconciliation. We believe
that these tasks can be practically incorporated into the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Finally, the last question you addressed in your
opening remarks, Sir, concerning

"what pressure can be brought to bear on the
parties to conflicts, including non-state actors, to
live up to their moral and legal responsibilities to
afford protection to civilians" (supra),

is probably the most difficult one. The Secretary-
General very clearly describes the existing problems in
this area and we cannot but agree with the
recommendations he presents in this regard. However,
when it comes to non-state actors and the problem of
their engagement in a dialogue, one should recognize
that there is probably no satisfactory solution at the
moment, especially in situations where armed
groups operate not as an organized military force with
clear political objectives, but rather as gangs of
criminals profiting from the lack of security and from
general instability. They are most often responsible for
targeting civilians and for committing the most
unspeakable crimes against them. These groups
represent a real challenge to Governments, humanitarian
agencies and, of course, the Security Council. We
welcome the intention of the Secretary-General to ask
the Inter-Agency Standing Committee to develop a
manual of best practices for engagement with armed
groups. We hope that this work will lead to some
effective approaches in this regard in the future.

In conclusion, I think that the proposal made by
Mrs. Mary Robinson to provide the Council members
with additional briefings - specifically on the results
of human rights fact-finding missions, on human rights
mechanisms reports and so on - deserves our full
endorsement.

