Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking Rosemary DiCarlo for her informative and
timely briefing and by thanking the United States for
requesting this meeting.

Let me also begin by saying that I agree with
everything that the German Ambassador said today, in
particular about the importance of the Security Council
addressing this issue. I note that the agenda for today's
discussion does not mention the situation in the region
or wider threats to international peace and security.
The agenda item, to which we have all agreed, is the
situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

Years of misrule and corruption have wrecked
the Venezuelan economy. The actions of the Maduro
regime have led to economic collapse, which threatens
the peace and security of the region. Over 3.5 million
Venezuelans have left their country for other countries
in the region. This is one of the greatest migrant crises
ever faced by Latin America. It has placed huge strain
on the social services of nations of the region. That is
why, together with the human rights situation mentioned
by my German colleague, it is completely appropriate
that the Council continues to address the issue.

I was disappointed to hear the Russian Ambassador
attempt to ridicule what he called moans and groans
about the humanitarian situation in Venezuela. No
one on the Council should belittle the suffering of
the Venezuelan people. I also note that the Russian
Ambassador asked all of us a question, which I will
attempt to answer. He asked which of us on the Council
would have acted any differently, faced with unwanted
attempts to deliver humanitarian assistance. Well, let
me tell him that we would have acted differently and,
looking around the Council today, I think a majority
of Council members would have acted differently. We
would not have used live fire against civilians attempting
to deliver aid. We would not direct paramilitary thugs
to attack civilians. We would not arrest and detain our
political opponents and we would not have mismanaged
the country through years of misrule and corruption,
causing economic collapse and a humanitarian crisis.
I hope that goes some way to answering his question.

The United Kingdom joins other members of the
Council in condemning the violence that took place
on Venezuela's borders with Colombia and Brazil
at the weekend. Maduro's use of deadly violence
against his own people and other concerning acts of
aggression to block the supply of desperately needed
humanitarian aid are simply repugnant. The Maduro
regime's oppressive policies affect all sectors of the
population, from the innocent civilians - including
women and children - who lack access to essential
medical and other basic supplies, to journalists whose
work is censored by the regime. As we heard from the
United Nations, just yesterday the renowned journalist
Jorge Ramos was reportedly detained in the Miraflores
Palace, later to be released and deported while his
team's equipment was confiscated.

As with the lack of freedom given to journalists,
other essential freedoms - such as democratic
ones - are simply not present in Venezuela. Only a
democratic solution will resolve this crisis. The United
Kingdom thanks the Lima Group and the Organization
of American States for their clear words and strong
action towards that goal. It is important that the region
continue to take the lead. We stand with these regional
bodies and with Juan Guaido in pursuit of our shared
goal to bring peace and stability to Venezuela.

The only way to achieve peace and stability is by
democratic transition through free and fair presidential
elections, as demanded by interim President Guaido
and the National Assembly in line with the Venezuelan
Constitution. Until this is achieved, the current
humanitarian crisis caused by the Maduro regime's
corrupt policies will continue. The United Kingdom has
committed to giving $8.6 million dollars in emergency
aid to treat malnourished children and provide
vaccinations and clean water to the most vulnerable
communities affected by the crisis.

We encourage our partners in the international
community and on the Council to consider what more
can be done to send a clear signal to the Maduro regime
that nothing short of free and fair presidential elections
will do. This includes considering additional sanctions
against individual members of the Maduro regime who
have benefited from their corrupt policies. This should
not negatively affect the dire humanitarian situation,
which is solely the responsibility of the regime.

The world cannot stand by in the face of this man-
made crisis. The Venezuelan people deserve a better
future. They have suffered enough at the hands of the
Maduro regime. Free and fair presidential elections are
the only solution. The Council and the international
community should do our utmost to support this aim.

