Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The United Nations
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, Richard
Falk, recently voiced his concern over the murder of
four Palestinian citizens by the Israeli Defense Forces
in the West Bank and the demolition of the historic
Hotel Shepherd in the centre of Jerusalem to make way
for an Israeli settlement. The West Bank Director of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, Barbara Shenstone,
indicated that the demolitions of dwellings of
Palestinian citizens occupied since prior to 1948 are
reprehensible acts of devastating effect and violate
Israeli obligations pursuant to international law and the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child.

These facts continue to occur without this body
adopting efficient measures to avoid such excesses.
Therefore, it is imperative to reiterate that all activities
connected with the establishment of Israeli settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, are illegal and constitute a major obstacle to
the achievement of peace in the region.

These and other reprehensible actions repeatedly
carried out by Israel, the occupying Power, which are
aimed at changing the demographic composition,
character and status of Palestinian territories, in clear
violation of international humanitarian law and the
relevant resolutions of this body and of the United
Nations, require the international community to
demand the immediate cessation of such illegal
activities.

Against this backdrop, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela co-sponsors and therefore firmly supports
the draft resolution urging Israel to cease the
construction of settlements. The United Nations must
condemn in the firmest possible manner these repeated
violations of international law carried out by the State
of Israel and adopt practical and effective measures to
prevent them, at the risk of its historic relevance.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela welcomes
the increasing number of countries, in particular those
of Latin America and the Caribbean, that have joined
the dozens of countries throughout the world
recognizing Palestine as a free and independent State.
The delegation of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
wishes to recall the importance of ensuring the
implementation of all Security Council and other
United Nations resolutions promoting a peaceful
solution that will lead to the establishment of two
States. The Madrid terms of reference, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Road Map are equally relevant
proposals that urge direct negotiations between the
parties so that the State of Israel and the State of
Palestine can live side by side within secure and
recognized borders.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reaffirms
the need to implement the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Times of War in
the Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem and
the other Arab territories occupied since 1967.

Our country emphasizes the importance of the
annual international United Nations International
Meeting on the Question of Palestine, to be held on
7 and 8 February in Cairo on the theme "The urgency
of addressing the plight of Palestinian political
prisoners in Israeli prisons and detention facilities".
This praiseworthy initiative, supported by the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, will offer the opportunity to
address the repeated violations of human rights
suffered by hundreds of men and women who
heroically and with dignity have fought for the just,
legal and heroic cause of their people.

We cannot fail to mention the delicate
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. The daily
suffering of Palestinians in this territory requires us to
demand once again the immediate lifting of the
merciless blockade imposed by the Government of the
State of Israel.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela once again
calls on the State of Israel to respect the sovereignty of
Lebanon so that situations such those of July 2006 may
avoid recurrence. In that respect, efforts to promote
direct negotiations between the parties must be
encouraged, pursuant to resolution 1701 (2006).

All illegal actions aimed at Violating the
territorial area of the occupied Syrian Golan are also an
11-21096
impediment to comprehensive peace in the region.
Hence, Member States must address the need for Israel
to withdraw pursuant to the demands of resolution 498
(1981). Moreover, resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) must be implemented in order to preserve the
territorial integrity of Syria and thereby contribute to
the peace that is so sorely needed throughout the
region.

I would conclude by stating that cruelty, injustice
and unfairness throughout the world can constitute
major obstacles to the implementation of the provisions
of international law. That is why we once again call on
the State of Israel to comply with the resolutions
adopted by the United Nations on the Middle East and
the question of Palestine. We very much hope that
today's debate of the Security Council will contribute
to achieving the longed-for peace in that region of the
world.

