Mr. Kooijmans (Netherlands): The representative of
Portugal will make a statement on behalf of the European
Union later in this debate. As the Netherlands associates
itself fully with that statement, my delegation will limit
itself to a few brief comments on the issue under
consideration.

The Panel of Experts, in its report on violations of
Security Council sanctions against UNIT A, concluded that
the long-suffering people of Angola need and deserve the
support of the international community in the search to
bring peace and political reconciliation to that country.
Rendering that support is indeed in essence what the
Council is doing today by tightening the noose around
UNITA's capacity to defy the international community
and bring further misery to the Angolan people.

The draft resolution the Council is to adopt today
entails basically two steps that should curtail future
infringements of the UNITA sanctions regime. First, it
puts in place a new monitoring mechanism that could be
an effective instrument in the hands of the Council and
the sanctions Committee to oversee the implementation of
resolutions 864 (1993), 1127 (1997) and 1173 (1998), as
long as that mechanism is allowed to collect, analyse and
submit information independently. Secondly, the draft
resolution sets a deadline for the Council to consider
action vis-a-vis those States considered to be in violation
of the terms of the sanctions regime. We are very grateful
for the important contribution of the Panel of Experts, and
especially that of Ambassador Fowler, to making the
sanctions against UNITA more effective.

Even before adopting this draft resolution, we have
already seen some remedial effects of the report of the
Panel. In this connection, we wish to commend those
countries mentioned in the report for the steps taken so
far, and we call upon the others to follow suit. In our
view, Belgium in particular deserves praise for taking the
Panel's remarks in stride and addressing its
recommendations expeditiously and in such a transparent

 

manner. Other countries have got away too easily simply by
ignoring the Panel's request for information. We expect,
therefore, that the new monitoring mechanism will pick up
where the Panel had to stop and will build upon the
information that has been collected so far. Again, we repeat
that it is essential for the new mechanism's future
effectiveness that it be able to operate independently. We
look forward to receiving the mechanism's report six
months from now.

Our ultimate goal in tightening the sanctions is not so
much simply to punish UNITA, but to reduce UNITA's
capacity to wage war and prevent a peaceful solution to
Angola's bloody conflict. UNITA deliberately chose to
abandon the road to peace as mapped out by the Lusaka
Protocol and left the Government of Angola no option but
to seize the initiative militarily. The draft resolution before
us is meant to create a situation in which military
offensives will no longer be needed to achieve a peaceful
solution. That solution is what the Council ultimately
should offer to the Angolan people, whose suffering has
gone on for much too long.

However, the fact that we hold UNITA responsible for
the present situation of conflict and humanitarian misery
does not diminish the responsibility of the Government of
Angola to make its own substantial contribution to the well-
being of its own people. In his report of last week on the
operations of the United Nations Office in Angola, the
Secretary-General referred to allegations of grave human
rights violations on both sides and the dire humanitarian
situation in Angola. It proves, in our view, that close
monitoring by the international community of both areas of
concern is still warranted. The Government of Angola owes
that not only to the people of Angola but also to the
international community, which today is going to take
far-reaching steps to assist the Government in its efforts to
pacify the country effectively.

Lastly, our progress in the UNITA sanctions dossier
should not obscure the need for the Council, at a later
stage, to look into the general problem of conflicts fueled
and prolonged by access to minerals.

