I thank Special Representative Zahir Tanin for his detailed briefing. I also regret that it was not possible for the Special Representative of the European Union, Mr. Miroslav Lajeak, to give a complementary briefing. However, it is in particular thanks to his resolute effort that we have been able to make further progress in the dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade. The European Union (EU) is therefore demonstrating once again its firm determination to fully carry out its role as facilitator. Belgium welcomes the resumption of the dialogue on 12 July and the commitment of both parties. We encourage both parties to continue along that path in a spirit of openness and compromise. Belgium calls on both parties to work in good faith with a view to reaching a comprehensive and legally binding agreement on the normalization of their relations. Such an agreement will not only contribute to regional stability, but is also indispensable if the two parties are to continue to make progress on the European path. We call for the implementation of the agreements already reached in the framework of the dialogue. This would make it possible to significantly improve the lives of many Serbian and Kosovar citizens. The recent developments regarding the Merdare common crossing point, financed and built with EU assistance, are an important step in this regard. We welcome the renewed commitment by the parties to make progress on the humanitarian issues of refugees, displaced persons and missing persons. These issues are essential to any lasting reconciliation and healing. We call for further efforts in this regard. Women and youth play a key role in peacebuilding, and their meaningful participation must be ensured. This includes significant representation of women in delegations as well as in working groups created to foster dialogue. The new Kosovar Government has reaffirmed its strategic commitment to the European path. Kosovo must now do its utmost to relaunch the reform process. We call on all Kosovar political parties to come together to that end. Belgium remains extremely attentive to the situation of the rule of law. In particular, we strongly condemn the extremely worrisome attempts to weaken the Specialist Chambers in Kosovo or to obstruct their work. This transitional justice mechanism, by providing victims with the truth and establishing responsibility for very serious crimes, is essential in order to restore people's trust, and therefore achieve lasting peace. We reiterate our full support for the efforts of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, which plays an important role in the further development of strong, effective and accountable rule of law institutions. We welcome the recent adoption by the Assembly of Kosovo of a constitutional amendment that makes the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence directly applicable. We welcome the commitment of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo and the United Nations Kosovo team in the fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in cooperation with the local authorities. TheEuropean Union and its member States have also proved to be an important partner in this fight. Substantive regional cooperation is essential to combat the virus and its consequences, and we encourage the parties to work towards that end. We reiterate the Special Representative's call on all Kosovo institutions and stakeholders to respect human rights and leave no one behind in the fight against COVID-19.
