Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): First of all, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening the
quarterly debate on the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), as well as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Yamamoto
and Mr. Ramiz Bakhtiar for their briefings.

In Uzbekistan we are continuing to closely follow
the situation in Afghanistan, given the upcoming
parliamentary elections, because the prospects of stable
and sustainable development in Central Asia are directly
intertwined with the achievement of durable peace
in that country. Given the circumstances, Uzbekistan
strives to make its own contribution to the international
community's efforts in advancing the peace process in
Afghanistan. As some of my colleagues have mentioned
today, Uzbekistan hosted an international conference
on Afghanistan in March, entitled "Afghanistan:
Peace Process, Security Cooperation And Regional
Connectivity", which was convened at the joint
initiative of Uzbekistan's President Shavkat Mirziyoyev
and Afghanistan's President Ashraf Ghani.

At the end of the conference, high-ranking officials
from 21 States and leading international organizations,
such as the United Nations, the European Union, NATO
and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, adopted
the Tashkent Declaration, which calls for the full
support of the international community for the Afghan
Government's proposal to launch direct negotiations
with the Taliban, without any preconditions, in an effort
to achieve a comprehensive peace agreement.

The participants in the conference urged the
Taliban to accept that proposal and to start an
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process. It was
specifically underlined that all parties would benefit
from a comprehensive peace process, which should
also guarantee the inclusion of the Taliban in the
political process as a legitimate political player. In
turn, the Taliban movement should recognize its own
responsibility for peace and stability in the country,
renounce violence and cut ties with international
terrorists groups, as well as respect equal rights for all
Afghans, in accordance with the main provisions of
the Constitution.

As a practical step in facilitating a peace process
in Afghanistan and in implementing the Tashkent
Declaration, the Uzbek side recently held negotiations
with representatives of the Taliban from the movement's
Qatar-based political commission. During the meeting
held in Tashkent on 7 August, the Uzbek side underlined
the importance of enforcing a ceasefire and its extension
for the delivery of humanitarian assistance, as well as
the implementation of large-scale economic projects in
the country.

One should underline that Uzbekistan closely
coordinates with the highest leadership of Afghanistan
all of its efforts pertaining to negotiations and contacts
with the Taliban movement. The Uzbek side conducts
prior consultations with the Afghan authorities on its
meetings or negotiations with the Taliban and informs
them about their outcomes. In particular, on 28 August
a delegation of Uzbekistan, led by Minister for Foreign
Affairs Abdulaziz Kamilov, visited Afghanistan and
held a number of meetings, including with President
Ghani, Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah, National
Security Adviser Hamdullah Mohib and Deputy
Foreign Minister Nasir Andisha. The Afghan side has
been fully briefed on the outcomes of the Tashkent
negotiations with the Taliban.

From Uzbekistan's perspective, contacts with
the Taliban are a necessary prerequisite to creating
conditions for the peace process in Afghanistan and to
encouraging the Taliban to take up direct talks with the
Government. In Tashkent, we strongly believe that peace
in Afghanistan can be achieved only through national
reconciliation, with the involvement in the negotiation
process of the representatives of the Taliban movement.

In concluding my remarks, I would like to emphasize
that ultimate peace on Afghan soil would open up new
opportunities and bring real benefits to all States of the
greater Eurasian continent. It would advance common
security and stability, create conditions favourable to
the construction of highways and railroads, the laying
of pipelines and the development of regional and
transregional trade, thereby contributing to ensuring
peace and stability in that vast region.

Uzbekistan will therefore continue its efforts
to support the earliest launch of the peace process
between the Government of the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan and the Taliban movement, without any
preconditions, aimed at creating a peaceful future for
all people of Afghanistan. In that regard, Uzbekistan
remains committed to continue close collaboration with
the United Nations, the Government of Afghanistan
and other stakeholders in advancing the peace process
in the country.

