Mr. Alcalay (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of the Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, I would like to express my gratitude to the
members of the Security Council for supporting the
request made by a group of countries with regard to
holding this open debate at a crucial moment that casts
a shadow on the future of the United Nations and that
of humanity.

The current situation necessitates that each of us
urgently shoulder our own responsibilities with regard
to the situation in Iraq. It also requires that, in the
prevailing situation of anguish and frustration
confronting us today, we jointly find a solution that
restores the hope of the peoples of the world. The
peoples of the world and a majority of its Governments
have rejected the use of force against the people of
Iraq. They also hope that the Security Council and the
United Nations will take the right decisions to enable
us to overcome the current conflict.

A solution must be based on unity and must
respect the guidelines enshrined in the Charter, whose
principal and unshirkable mission is to preserve
international peace and security and to ensure respect
for human rights and the sovereignty of peoples. Today
we must give special consideration to the humanitarian
assistance necessary as a consequence of the war that
has been started.

Last Sunday, the President of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, Mr. Hugo Chavez Frias, added
the voice of our country to those rejecting war in Iraq
and calling for peace. In our most recent statement in
the Security Council, which we made on 13 March, we
said that the Iraqi crisis had to be dealt with peacefully
and diplomatically. We also said that the solution to the
conflict had to be in line with international law, and
that it should be achieved through diplomacy based on
dialogue and agreement, which is the appropriate way
to resolve conflicts between nations.

That implies the full implementation of the
resolutions that have already been adopted by the
Security Council, as well as compliance with the
forthcoming resolutions soon to be adopted by it. We
believe that there is still time to avoid even worse evils
and that there is still room to find peace. But in order
to find peace, the Security Council must shoulder its
responsibility in the maintenance of international peace
and security. It must also categorically reject the use of
force. The efforts of the Council must therefore be
directed towards achieving an immediate ceasefire. The
search for peace must guide its actions. Moreover, in
addition to caring for the Iraqi people through the
provision of humanitarian assistance, we must also put
an end to the use of force.

The best humanitarian assistance we could
provide today would be to cease hostilities. That would
make it possible to return to the search for a diplomatic
solution, thereby avoiding the danger bearing down on
humanity. Putting an end to military action should be
discussed with the same urgency as is employed in
discussions of humanitarian assistance. In this regard,
we believe that the Secretary-General must
immediately make a statement rejecting the use of
force. To that end, the United Nations as a whole, and
the Security Council in particular, must play their part
and adopt the necessary decision to find a solution to
the conflict.

In short, we believe that the Council should
reaffirm its adherence to international law; ensure that
its decisions are respected; urge all parties to continue
diplomatic efforts to resolve the situation in Iraq;
protect the right of all Iraqis - including minorities -
to live in peace and dignity; and, finally, adopt the
decisions necessary to provide urgent humanitarian
assistance. That assistance must be multilateral and
coordinated and should be provided through existing
United Nations mechanisms.

