Mr. Renden Barnica (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): Let me begin, Sir, by congratulating you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. Your great experience and personal qualities
will guarantee the success of the Council's deliberations. I
wish also to express my delegation's thanks to the
Permanent Representative of France, Ambassador Merimee,
for the able way in which he guided the work of the
Council in May.

My delegation thanks the Secretary-General for his
report dated 4 June 1995 on the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR), in which he concludes
that the situation in Rwanda has changed radically and that
the changes call for adjustments in the mandate of
UNAMIR. The situation in Rwanda has indeed changed;
the current circumstances there are not those of a year ago,
which saw the end of the war and the genocide that caused
the most unspeakable suffering. But the situation remains
complex. Behind the apparent stability and normality in the
country, problems persist, giving rise to tension and
uncertainty for the people and the Government of Rwanda,
and to justifiable concern for the international community.
In our view, these problems must be rapidly resolved in
order to create a climate of security and confidence
conducive to the return of the refugees, to peace and to
national reconciliation.

First and foremost, the people of Rwanda must have
justice. A year ago nearly a million persons were massacred
in that country, and the victims and their families are still
waiting for the perpetrators to be tried. Thousands are now
in Rwandan gaols without indictment or trial because the
national judicial system is paralysed by lack of personnel
and resources. Unless the judicial system is quickly rebuilt,
with the assistance of the international community, many
will long languish in prison, some guilty, others innocent.
The cycle of violence threatens to continue in Rwanda if
the victims of genocide and other serious violations of
international law do not see justice done.

The decisions on the establishment of the
International Tribunal for Rwanda and on the appointment
of a Deputy Prosecutor were important for bringing to
trial suspected perpetrators of genocide and for beginning
the investigation of such acts. But we consider that as a
priority matter Rwanda's national judicial system should
simultaneously be reconstituted through the optimal use
of all the urgently needed resources and experts pledged
by the international community. In that connection, we
must be aware that the great majority of cases will have
to be investigated and tried by Rwandan courts.

We also believe that neighbouring countries have an
important role to play in achieving justice in Rwanda. In
that connection, my delegation encourages the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General in Rwanda to remind the
Governments of Burundi, Tanzania and Zaire of their
responsibility to bring to justice those responsible for
violations of human rights, and to cooperate with the
International Tribunal for Rwanda by facilitating
investigations on their respective territories.

The Government and the people of Rwanda are also
concerned about continued military activities in the border
areas and by the provision of weapons and training to
elements of the forces of the former Government. These
activities exacerbate tension, inspire fear and are a
destabilizing factor. My Government urges the countries
neighbouring Rwanda to take measures to prevent these
activities, and to comply scrupulously with the restrictions
set out in resolution 918 (1994) on the sale or supply of
arms and related materiel to Rwanda.

A third element noted in the report of the Secretary-
General is the slow delivery of the economic assistance
pledged at the round table held by the United Nations
Development Programme in Geneva in January this year.
In this connection, we must recall that the disastrous
events of spring 1994 largely destroyed Rwanda's
economic and social infrastructure and diminished its
administrative capacities. The country must be enabled to
recover its national production capacity, to promote
national reconciliation and to create the climate of
confidence that is needed for the return of the refugees.
Rwanda does not need a trickle of international
assistance; it needs a sustained contribution that will
enable the Government quickly to meet its budgetary
requirements and carry out rehabilitation and
reconstruction activities.

 

UNAMIR, United Nations agencies, human rights
observers, the International Tribunal and non-governmental
organizations have an essential role to play in the joint
effort to help the people of Rwanda achieve peace, stability
and reconstruction in accordance with the principles of the
Arusha Peace Agreement. We consider that UNAMIR's
presence in Rwanda has made and is making a great
contribution to engendering the stability, security and
confidence the country needs so badly. My delegation
therefore agrees that the Mission's mandate should be
adjusted in favour of functions aimed principally at
confidence-building in the areas of national reconciliation,
the voluntary and safe return of refugees, humanitarian
assistance and the training of a national police force. Active
cooperation from the Government of Rwanda is critical if
UNAMIR is to carry out these new functions. We therefore
urge that Government to continue its full cooperation with
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda.

My delegation supports the Secretary-General's
initiative on convening a regional conference on security,
stability and development in consultation with the
Organization of African Unity, for, as the report says, the
return of Rwandan refugees depends not only on improved
conditions inside the country but also on better relations
between the countries of the Great Lakes region.

Having said that, my delegation supports the
Secretary-General's proposal for the extension of the
mandate of UNAMIR, and will vote in favour of the draft
resolution. We hope that its adoption will contribute to the
efforts of the Government of Rwanda to achieve justice,
national reconciliation and reconstruction.

