Mr. Lucas (Angola): At the outset, we
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the Presidency of the Security Council. We extend our
delegation's full cooperation to the presidency. We also
take this occasion to congratulate Ambassador Mihnea
Motoc and the Romanian delegation for the excellent
work accomplished during the presidency of the
Council in the month of July.

We are very honoured by the presence of the
Minister of Serbia and Montenegro. We appreciate his
insightful statement on the situation in Kosovo.

We thank Assistant Secretary-General Hedi
Annabi for presenting the Secretary-General's report
on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) covering the period subsequent to
the violent events of mid-March 2004 (8/2004/613).
The situation in the province of Kosovo that it
describes contrasts sharply with the climate of relative
optimism that prevailed before those events took place.

The events of March were, indeed, a wake-up call
to the international community and the Security
Council with respect to the need for greater realism and
the need to take into account the real situation in
Kosovo, with the background presence of extremist
forces for whom the international community's high
hopes and expectations for the future of Kosovo are but
a hindrance to the attainment of their sinister agenda.

The implementation of the standards for Kosovo
policy remains the core of developments in Kosovo.
We understand the challenge of translating them into
real change on the ground. The lack of capacity and
experience within the Provisional Institutions is,
according to the Secretary-General's assessment, the
main obstacle to standards implementation, which has
been slow and difficult. The decision of UNMIK to
make minority protection, returns and freedom of
movement key areas for standards implementation
reflects the central issue of the question of Kosovo.

In the final analysis, the standards for Kosovo
policy will make sense only if the rights of all
communities are fully protected and respected.
Anything short of the attainment of that goal will mean
failure for the great efforts and the investment that the
international community has made in Kosovo.

Thus, much remains to be done, without further
delay, in those crucial areas. To apply justice with rigor
to all those directly or indirectly involved in acts of
ethnic violence and deploy real and determined efforts
in the reconstruction of property damaged or destroyed
during the events of March creates the conditions for
the sustainable return of refugees and people displaced
by the March events and ensures the freedom of
movement of minorities living in Kosovo. In our view,
those are benchmarks that the Provisional Institutions
and UNMIK must achieve in the shortest possible time
in order to contribute to the re-establishment of inter-
ethnic confidence.

We have to acknowledge the profound differences
of analysis between the Secretary-General's report
under consideration and the information provided by
Bishop Artemije of Raska-Prizren and Kosovo-
Metohija to the Secretary-General. The perceptions of
Kosovo Serbs as conveyed by the Bishop without
diplomatic subtleties do not give much credit to what
has been done in the province in terms of
reconstruction, returns and freedom of movement.

Their rights scorned, their freedom of movement
impaired and subject to assault and discrimination, it is
not surprising that Kosovo Serbs refuse to participate
in political life. We take to be an encouraging sign the
recent initiatives for renewed inter-ethnic dialogue. In
that regard, we welcome the joint declaration of 14
July concerning the reconstruction of infrastructure and
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons,
as well as the creation of the Kosovo Security
Advisory Group, aimed at enhancing the flow of
security information and preventing the recurrence of
violence. As shown at various times in the course - of
the current inter-ethnic dialogue, direct international
involvement is a crucial element for promoting that
process.

The Secretary-General's report states that the
concrete, sustainable reform of local government is
likely to be the most important political process that
will affect the Kosovo Serb community. We fully
concur with that proposition. We would go further by
considering decentralization of the administration as a
primary option aimed at the long-term normalization of
the situation and as a priority for action by UNMIK
and by the Provisional Institutions. We hope that, by
the time of the holding of municipal elections in mid-
2006, legislation on the devolution of competencies
and on the creation of new municipalities and
administrative units will be in place with the required
political framework, meeting with the agreement of all
who are concerned for real decentralization. We also
hope that the province of Kosovo will be able to
undergo this experiment, which, in our view, will be
rewarding if it creates conditions for the peaceful
coexistence of the communities, thus laying solid
foundations for a multi-ethnic and democratic society.

In conclusion, we believe that the standards
policy, in its philosophy, its character, its objectives
and its means to be translated into real change, will
require a great deal of political will, commitment and
perseverance. It will also require much investment in
the political and social processes, in youth, in men and
women, in the economy and in patience to see tangible
results that will take time to show.

The events of March in Kosovo proved, above
all, that the international community cannot force a
hasty withdrawal from Kosovo or a hasty definition of
the territory's status. It is clear that the international
community must remain focused and determined for a
long period of time in implementing the policies
formulated for Kosovo. In our view, those policies are
just, sound and realistic, and they can surely succeed.

