Mr. Sevilla Siero (Nicaragua) (interpretation from Spanish): First and foremost, I would like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. Nicaragua feels honoured to be
represented by the fraternal Republic of Honduras. We
would also like to congratulate Ambassador Alfredo Lopes
Cabral, Permanent Representative of Guinea-Bissau, on
having presided over the Security Council last month.

Nicaragua is participating in the Security Council
debate on the situation in Angola because we identify with
the Angolan people and are deeply concerned by the
situation in that fraternal country, with which we have
important bonds of friendship and cooperation. We identify
with them because, inter alia, just a few years ago
Nicaragua, located at the very centre of the American
continent, was also a country afflicted by a serious politico-
military confrontation that was the focus of world attention.
Just a few years ago, our people was the victims of war, of
fratricidal struggle, of the destruction of its own economy
and of great social upheaval.

Just a few years ago, Nicaragua maintained a large
army and devoted a large part of its national budget to meet
high military expenditures, to the detriment of its economic
and social development. Just a few years ago, many of you,
and even we ourselves, were looking with sceptism at the
possibility of peace reigning in Nicaragua or of the country
enjoying full liberty. We found even more remote the
possibility of starting anew on the path towards

 

development and the consolidation of a democratic
process without precedent in our political history. At that
time, national reconciliation also seemed to be nothing but
a Utopian ideal.

Today we can say to our Angolan brothers that in
Nicaragua everything that seemed impossible yesterday is
today a reality. We had to take a long, hard road, not
without its shocks, and the Government of Nicaragua,
presided over by Mrs. Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, has
continuously promoted the process of national
reconciliation. Just as we have received the support of
countries in our region, from the international community
and from the United Nations in particular, in the same
way, the Angolan people will achieve the objectives laid
down in the Lusaka agreements with the support of the
United Nations as a whole.

We wished to emphasize here our own experience as
an example of optimism and confidence in the peaceful
solution of disputes of whatever kind, particularly when
the solution is found with the participation of all the
parties involved and taking into account the particularities
of each case. When there is political will to negotiate, no
initiative can fail.

We have read with care and interest the Secretary-
General's latest report on the situation in Angola, and
after having heard the debate on the situation in that
country, we could feel perturbed or sceptical as to
whether the various obstacles can be surmounted once
and for all. We might think that the United Nations
should withdraw from Angola and that the UNAVEM. III
mandate should not be extended beyond January 1997,
both because of the financial costs of the operation and
because of the lack of compliance with the commitments
entered into.

However, our delegation is optimistic. We believe
that if the international community, represented here, were
in error, not only would we be denying the progress made
but we would also be making it impossible for additional
efforts to be made to help the suffering people of Angola,
which, after all, bears the brunt of the consequences.

From our own experience, we can say that the road
seems to be very hard and the process very complicated.
We know that it is not easy to reconcile positions that
frequently appear irreconcilable. Nonetheless, we are
convinced that both the Government of Angola, presided
over by His Excellency Mr. Jose Eduardo Dos Santos,
and Mr. Jonas Savimbi, the leader of UNITA, are aware

 

that in the current world situation, peace, reconciliation and
democracy are the sole options for bringing prosperity to
our poor nations. There is no option but continuing
negotiations until the last obstacle has been removed.
However, it is necessary to strengthen confidence-building
measures.

Just as peace in Nicaragua served as an example of
conflict resolution and the deepening of the democratic
process for Central America and the American continent, a
totally peaceful Angola on the road to the consolidation of
democracy and social and economic development would
constitute a significant contribution to the world and the
fraternal countries of Africa.

In the report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in Angola, we are particularly concerned by the military
aspects. As long as compliance with the Lusaka Protocol is
not being carried out, within the timetable recommended by
the Joint Commission, it will be very difficult to achieve
the comprehensive pacification of the country. All
Angolans, after so many years of sorrow and waste, must
be aware that without lasting peace progress cannot be
made towards consolidation of democracy. While important
strides have been made in that direction, there must be a
more serious commitment to ensuring full respect for the
ceasefire, the quartering of the military forces of UNITA
and the selection of its soldiers for incorporation into the
Angolan Armed Forces. A country needs a single national
body of armed forces that can undertake reconstruction
efforts and support humanitarian assistance and demining
operations in the territory to put an end, once and for all, to
the loss of human life, in particular that of innocent
civilians.

In Nicaragua, we know what that means. After years
of setbacks, and now on the road leading forward, we are
still reconstructing our own infrastructure, clearing roads
and demining, and the armed forces of our country are
playing an important role in these endeavours. The same
can occur in Angola.

For Nicaragua, which stands in solidarity with the
people and the Government of Angola, it is important for
the Lusaka commitments to be complied with. Efforts have
been made. The Government of President Dos Santos has
taken specific steps. UNITA, too, has taken important steps,
and the international community has stepped up its efforts
to build the necessary confidence between the parties. It
was in this spirit that the Heads of State of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) invited
Mr. Savimbi to attend the meeting that that organization

 

held in Luanda with a View to giving impetus to the
peace process in Angola. We believe that now is the time
to strengthen confidence and credibility and for both
parties to respond to the many efforts made.
Nicaragua, which supports development and peace in
Africa, would like to thank the Ministers of Zimbabwe,
Mozambique, Botswana, Angola and South Africa for
having requested that the Security Council consider the
situation in Angola once again. We are convinced that the
interest that has motivated these fraternal countries of
Africa will serve to help Angola and will ensure that the
United Nations participates in the process.

We would like to emphasize that all initiatives must
lead to a single goal: the pacification and reconciliation of
the Angolan family. We are convinced that the only ones
who have suffered the consequences are the people of
Angola, towards whom their leaders bear today a greater
responsibility than ever.

We appeal to the parties to reflect again upon the
economic and social crisis in Angola. No one can govern
a country in peace without the cooperation of its people.
Only the Angolans themselves can ensure progress in
their country.

It is therefore important for the agreements to be
fully complied with. In Angola it is important for the
leaders of UNITA, in particular, to join in all aspects of
the peace process, becoming a part of the armed forces,
the Government and, most importantly, the efforts that the
Angolan people as a whole is making for its own benefit.

