Mr. Milanovic' (Serbia): Regional stability and
the development of overall cooperation in the Western
Balkans have been long-standing foreign-policy
priorities of Serbia. The pursuit of those goals has
long been reflected in the activities of my country, as
we believe that that is the best way to bring about a
politically stable and economically dynamic region.
The joint projects we undertake are therefore of
paramount importance in our endeavours to provide
realistic prospects for a better future for Serbia and its
neighbours. We are convinced that Serbia's goodwill
is acknowledged and recognized, and have therefore
always been ready and willing to invest additional
efforts to achieve more in that regard. To achieve those
goals, Bosnia and Herzegovina is a crucial and reliable
partner in our joint march along the same road.

Serbia's ties with Bosnia and Herzegovina are deep-
rooted and manifold. In 1995, the milestone Dayton
Peace Agreement was signed, ending a protracted
and bitter war in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Serbia is a
guarantor of the Agreement and continues to believe
that it is very important. It provides a basis for peace
and stability and is key to the promotion of the all-
important goal of genuine reconciliation and mutual
trust and confidence. However, we are still called upon
to continue to invest our best efforts in its achievement,
notwithstanding occasional discordant tones heard in
the region that remind us of events of the tragic past.
Detrimental to the efforts that we have all elected to
promote, they often burden the political situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, create unnecessary problems
among the country's entities and constituent peoples
and affect the situation in the entire region.

Serbia has been a staunch and consistent supporter
of the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The Western Balkans' recent past is indicative of their
importance to peace and stability and the creation of
sustainable confidence. Respect for such principles is a
sine qua non in relations with neighbours. Based on the
provisions of the Dayton Peace Agreement, Serbia has
been firmly and genuinely committed to Bosnia and
Herzegovina's sovereignty and territorial integrity.

Serbia believes that potential differences in the
positions of the entities on important issues, both
with regard to jurisdiction and election law, as well as
other issues, belong in the realm of internal questions
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and supports genuine
and open dialogue, which it believes is conducive to
implementable solutions acceptable to all. All sides
are called upon to work towards building mutual
confidence and respect.

Serbia supports an unimpeded election cycle in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Transparency, good faith
and responsibility will help much in that regard. They
will also help the country's joint institutions function
more effectively and make a greater contribution to
its reform processes. One-sided acts, exchanges of
heated, negative messages and the recycling of old
divisions and problems and the creation of new ones are
contrary to the true interests of all citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Serbia is convinced that political dialogue at all
levels with Bosnia and Herzegovina is of particular
importance for the development of all-round relations.
Officials of the two countries took part in many
meetings - bilateral and multilateral - in the
preceding period. One very important meeting was the
trilateral meeting among the members ofthe Presidency
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Presidents of Croatia
and Serbia in Mostar on 6 March.
Economic cooperation between Serbia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina and continued efforts by the two
countries to constantly develop it have had a positive
impact on overall bilateral relations. Over the past
10 years, Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina have
doubled their trade exchange. We are also well aware
of the importance of strengthening regional efforts
in order to bring people together and link economies.
Such efforts will continue to be bolstered in no small
measure by regular discussions of concrete projects in
the areas of infrastructure, energy, tourism, free trade
and, in particular, the modernization of roads and rail
road corridors.

We are joined in our common endeavours with
Bosnia and Herzegovina and by our common aspirations
to join the European Union (EU). The European Union
may face multiple challenges and be in the process of
consolidation, but we are emboldened by the fact that
our efforts are appreciated and accorded the attention
that we in the region expect. The fact that the European
Union's policy of enlargement to the Western Balkans
is a continuous and stable process that provides for the
admission of new members, perhaps even before 2025,
is also evinced by documents it adopted recently. Their
message is constructive and encouraging and grist
to the mill of the region's reforms and development
of mutual cooperation. The processes of reform and
cooperation are of great importance for my country,
widely seen as a Viable candidate for EU membership
in 2025, for Bosnia and Herzegovina and for some of
Serbia's other neighbouring countries. While carrying
out its own reform processes, Serbia looks forward
to each and every success Bosnia and Herzegovina
achieves and is willing to share its own experiences and
help Bosnia and Herzegovina in its progress towards
European integration.

The people of Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina
are very close. After all, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and in
particular Republika Srpska, is home to a large number
of Serbs. For the sake of a better future, Serbia is ready
to cooperate extensively with Bosnia and Herzegovina
and its entities. Through common will andjoint efforts,
we can make our relations catalytic to the processes
of regional rapprochement and good-neighbourliness.
Developing the region, employing its considerable
economic potential, linking its infrastructure and
ensuring better communications and movement will
help us meet the justified expectations of our citizens.
We should address unanswered questions about the
past. However, we must do so in stride and not allow
them to affect our present interests and achievements.
The meeting rose at 12.10p.m.
