Mr. Cardi (Italy): At the outset, I wish to thank
the Japanese presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this meeting. The intimate link between
violations of human rights and the repercussions for the
maintenance of international peace and security cannot
be denied. This is particularly evident in the case of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, as highlighted
by resolutions 2371 (2017) and 2375 (2017). Hence we
believe that the present meeting fully falls within the
scope and the mandate of the Security Council.

I also wish to thank Mr. Jenca and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their briefings.
I look forward to Mr. Feltman's upcoming briefing on
his recent Visit to the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea.

Italy expresses its gravest concern about the
human rights situation and the lack of accountability
for human rights violations in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. The North Korean regime continues
to deny its citizens even the most basic of rights and
liberties enshrined in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and other relevant human rights
conventions and instruments. In particular, we have
noted with great concern the reported surge in arbitrary
detentions, unsolved cases of abductions and enforced
disappearances and widespread torture, as well as
forced repatriations and numerous other gross human
rights violations that continue to affect North Korean
people in different ways, some of which can be rightly
considered as crimes against humanity.

Social and political repression is a distinctive
feature of the protracted isolation in which North
Koreans are forced to live. The systematic suppression
of such rights is among the regime's top priorities as
it suffocates any form of dissent in order to ensure its
own survival. We must not forget the tens of thousands
of political prisoners who continue to be subjected to
the harshest forms of abuse in the regime's network
of camps.

Full accountability for those flagrant violations of
international norms and conventions must be ensured,
including through International Criminal Court
referrals. While regretting that the Special Rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, Mr. Ojea Quintana, has
not yet been allowed to visit the country, we paid close
attention to his Visit to the Republic of Korea in July.
We are gravely concerned in particular by the
issue of abductions of Japanese citizens and other
nationals. In that regard, we firmly call upon the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea authorities to
show genuine commitment and make concrete steps to
address the issue and to resume full investigations on
what happened.

We also strongly condemn the exploitation by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea of its own
national workers abroad, whose revenues are forcibly
employed by the Government to fund its illegal
programmes and activities. The Security Council took
a firm stance on this issue in resolution 2375 (2017) by
prohibiting the issuance of permits for North Korean
workers in connection with admission to their respective
territories. We urge all Member States to ensure the full
and effective implementation of that provision.

Moreover, we remain deeply concerned about
the consequences of the protracted, entrenched
humanitarian situation in the country, where well over
half of the population suffers from major insecurity in
food and medical care. That falls within the context of
direct responsibility of the leadership of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, which diverges essential
resources away from the population's needs to fund
its nuclear programme. We therefore wish to reiterate
our call on the Government of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to take action on the accepted
recommendations of the Universal Periodic Review
and those of the Commission of Inquiry as a matter
of priority. We also call upon the authorities of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to seriously
enact constructive engagement with international
interlocutors, particularly in the field of human rights,
in order to promote dialogue and explore possibilities
of cooperation.

Throughout our Security Council mandate in 2017,

we have closely monitored the evolution of the overall
situation in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
We believe that the protection of human rights should
be central to any policy of rapprochement and dialogue
with Pyongyang authorities in order to ensure the
welfare and dignity of people in the country. As Chair
of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006) this year, Italy has made its
best efforts, in close cooperation with other Council
members, to ensure that human rights and humanitarian
concerns are given primary consideration.

Allow me to recall that Security Council resolutions
clearly state that the Committee may, on a case-by-
case basis, exempt any activity from the measures
imposed by the Council if the Committee determines
that such an exemption is necessary to facilitate the
work of such organizations in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. In that spirit, this afternoon the 1718
Committee will hear a briefing by Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on
United Nations operations in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea and how humanitarian activities can
be carried out without being affected or hindered by the
strengthening of the sanctions regime.

I would also like to recall that, in the framework of
the General Assembly Third Committee, as a member
of the European Union, together with Japan we have
been among the main sponsors of the draft resolution
on the situation of human rights in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea adopted by consensus a few
weeks ago.

Allow me to conclude by underscoring that
the two aims of pursuing accountability for human
rights violations and promoting engagement with the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to address the
situation reinforce rather than undermine one another,
as highlighted also by Mr. Ojea Quintana in his latest
report (see A/72/394).

