Mr. Kandeel (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to extend my thanks to Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her briefing today and for introducing
her twelfth report pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
The report sets out a number of important observations
and challenges relating to the performance of the Court
in relation to the situation in Libya. In this regard, I
would like to emphasize the following points.

First, the Libyan Government needs to consult with
the Court with respect to the application to surrender
Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the Court. We
emphasize the need to extend all forms of assistance to
the Libyan Government in a manner that enables it to
fulfil its obligations to the Court on this matter.

Secondly, all crimes of torture and inhuman
acts perpetrated in Libya need to be stopped, and
the international community should support the
Government of National Accord in the preparation of
a comprehensive strategy to tackle the brutal crimes
committed in the country. In addition, assistance
should be extended to the Libyan authorities to help
them administer justice to the defendants, including
by supplying the Government with the weapons it has
requested and implementing relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2214 (2015).

Thirdly, we underline the importance stated in
the report of the Office of the Prosecutor undertaking
investigations in Libya during 2017 as amatter ofpriority,
in particular in the light of the crimes perpetrated by
Da'esh and Ansar Al-Sharia. Accordingly, the Court
must abide by international law and the principle of
complementarity between national jurisdictions and
that of the ICC, taking into account the fact that the
work of the Court is part of a broader action of the
international community aimed at bringing terrorists
to justice and guaranteeing their accountability for the
crimes they have perpetrated.

Fourthly, we emphasize the need for all States
as well as the relevant regional and international
organizations to cooperate with the Court and the
Prosecutor to the greatest extent possible.

Fifthly, there is a need to welcome cooperation and
assistance received by the Prosecutor's Office from the
Office of the Libyan Prosecutor General, particularly
with regard to the submission of information and
evidence, continuing the implementation of the
memorandum of understanding concluded in November
2013 on burden-sharing in the investigation of former
Al-Qadhafi officials and their prosecution.

In conclusion, I would like to voice our appreciation
for the important work and great efforts deployed
by Ms. Bensouda, the International Criminal Court
Prosecutor, and her Office, in pursuit of justice and
accountability. We are determined to continue our
cooperation with her in that regard.

