Mr. Akahori (Japan) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her report and
her briefing.

Japan emphasizes its belief that the perpetrators
of serious crimes must be held accountable for their
actions. Japan also commends the accomplishments of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) to date. Japan
has consistently supported the ICC so that it can function
effectively and sustainably in promoting the rule of law,
with the support of the international community.

Japan strongly believes that more States should join
the ICC so as to ensure that the Court can effectively
promote the rule of law. In the long run, the ICC should
aim to become a truly universal criminal Court and
gain stronger support for its work. In this regard, we
are worried, as is Spain, by the recent decisions taken
by some African States to withdraw from the ICC. In
order to secure support and cooperation from a greater
number of States, the ICC and its States parties should
listen to the concerns expressed by some as to its role.

Allow me now to turn to the issue of Libya.
Japan welcomes the fact that the Libyan Prosecutor-
General's Office has been cooperative with the ICC on
many issues. We encourage the Libyan Government
of National Accord and all countries concerned to
cooperate with the Court pursuant to resolutions 1970
(2011) and 2259 (2015). We are aware of the current
political and security situation in Libya and the serious
difficulties that its authorities are facing. Under these
circumstances, Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi has not yet
been handed over to the Court.

Japan hopes that with the improvement of
the situation, the cooperation between the Libyan
authorities and the Court will be strengthened and that
this will enable the ICC to play a greater role in the
fight against impunity.

With regard to violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law in Libya, Japan
notes with particular interest that the Prosecutor's
report mentions her hope that additional arrest warrants
will be obtained. We hope to hear detailed updates on
this matter.

Japan reiterates the importance of forming a
representative, united Libyan Government. The
Presidency Council should work swiftly to submit
a revised list of Cabinet members to the House of
Representatives. The House of Representative should
in turn give due consideration to the list. It is essential
that all parties uphold their obligations under the Libyan
Political Agreement.

Japan continues to support the ongoing efforts made
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Martin Kobler; the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya; and the Government of National Accord to
promote the political process.

Japan fully supports the activities of the ICC,
including those of the Office of the Prosecutor. My
delegation looks forward to hearing oftangible progress
on the issue we are considering today.

