Mr. Ndonga Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would first like to commend the efforts of
the United Nations, and particularly those of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, who has just provided us with a detailed
description of current events in Syria. His briefing was
very alarming and worrying - 1,000 civilians killed in
the space of a week, 1,200 internally displaced persons
and the shelling of residential areas in Damascus are
indeed issues of great concern.

The worsening violence is not only disturbing for
millions of Syrian citizens, with its numerous casualties
and massive displacement, it is also undermining our
shared political and humanitarian commitment. The
situation in Syria is deteriorating rapidly, with civilians
suffering the impact of the political crisis, and in this
chaotic scenario we are likely to be facing yet another
major humanitarian disaster.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea underscores the
need for the parties to the conflict to strictly comply
with the obligations incumbent upon them under
international law. Actions by parties at the national and
international levels should always be carried out within
the framework of Security Council resolutions. In that
regard, resolution 2254 (2015) urges the belligerents to
adopt measures that promote the re-establishment of
lasting peace.

The actions of the warring parties that prevent
access to humanitarian aid constitute a clear
violation of the rules of international law. In the
case of a non-international armed conflict, impeding
humanitarian assistance violates human dignity,
according to the parameters of Common Article 3 to
the four Geneva Conventions of 1949 and to Protocol
Additional II, of 8 June 1977. It should be noted that the
attack on humanitarian assistance personnel, facilities,
materials, units or vehicles is considered a war crime
pursuant to the Rome Statute, both in the context of
international and non-international armed conflicts.

Likewise, we join the request made by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in calling
for an immediate cessation of hostilities in order to
guarantee the provision of humanitarian assistance in
Afrin, Raqqa, Idlib, eastern Ghouta, Fo'ah, Kefriya and
the Rukban camp - areas besieged by armed groups
and where the level of violence is critical.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea always advocates
a negotiated solution to problems, however complex
the situation. In order to achieve the desired political
agreement, direct, frank and inclusive negotiations are
an inevitable step, which is what Equatorial Guinea
advocates. For that reason, our Government welcomes
the holding ofpeace talks in Vienna on the Syrian issue
and is glad that, for the first time since the beginning
of the conflict in 2011, 1,500 Syrian representatives
from all backgrounds, creeds and almost all political
views came together under the framework of the Syrian
National Dialogue Congress held in Sochi at the end of
last month.

Although criticized by some countries, the Sochi
conference was unique in being driven, reshaped and
framed by the United Nations. The participation in
that intra-Syrian meeting by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General in Syria, Mr. De Mistura, gave way
to the creation of a constitutional committee. Efforts
must now be made to ensure the effective functioning
of that committee. Equatorial Guinea congratulates
the participants for their efforts to engage in dialogue
through direct and inclusive negotiations and hopes that
the decisions taken in Sochi will lend new impetus to
the United-Nations sponsored negotiations in Genevaon
the political and humanitarian situation in Syria.

Despite all of those efforts, it is entirely necessary
to drain the country of all terrorist activity. That must
be a priority for the international community, given
that the presence of terrorists significantly hinders
the possibility of reaching a peaceful and definitive
solution to the Syrian issue.

