Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Mr. Thiaw,
Special Adviser of the Secretary-General for the
Sahel, for briefing us today. We are pleased to hear
of the progress made to operationalize and deliver the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. He
and his team deserve real credit for the 2018 Support
Plan, which has rightly prioritized getting better
coordination between agencies and improved buy-in
from the Governments and peoples of the Sahel region.

As I think Mr. Thiaw's briefing has established, the
Integrated Strategy has been through an important and
formative year. The Support Plan has helped highlight
the need to realistic and targeted in our ambitions and
serves as a reminder that, despite some very difficult
challenges, the Sahel is also full of opportunities.
The more that can be done to unlock the potential of
the Sahel, particularly through support to education,
jobs and family planning, the more we will see young
entrepreneurs and young leaders finding local solutions
to the challenges they face, including the challenges of
climate change.

We are therefore delighted to see the international
community and the United Nations system redoubling
our efforts through the Integrated Strategy for the Sahel,
while seeking to learn from the challenges of the past
five years and taking a more deliberative partnership
approach with the countries and peoples of the region.
The Security Council has previously discussed the
risk of the Integrated Strategy for the Sahel seeming
distant or disconnected from the realities of the region.
We therefore welcome the increased focus on local
engagement, particularly with girls and women.

Similarly, the past few years have shown the need
to be realistic, patient and ensure that major pledges
and announcements are matched with sufficient people,
resources and capabilities to actually deliver in the
region. That has not always been the case, and there
is much more that could be done centrally from New
York to ensure existing resources are fully mobilized
and that coordination mechanisms in-country are
working as effectively as possible. In particular, we
would highlight the need to deploy the best people to
the toughest problems in the region itself.

We also need to ensure that the development
agenda is working closely with the other institutions
and sectors, particularly those focused on defence
and security. It is trite but true that there can be no
development without stability, or vice versa. We would
encourage more frequent and honest conversations
between the development and security sectors in the
Sahel. It is notable that West Africa, and the Sahel region
in particular, is attracting ever-more international
solidarity and support, which is absolutely right and
arguably overdue. Nonetheless, we need to ensure that
organizational mandates are clear and that strong lines
of communication are set up between them.

The United Kingdom is in the process of expanding
our diplomatic, defence and development assistance
to the Sahel region. We believe that will enable us to
fully explore the links and opportunities and build up
an approach that knits together our security, diplomatic
development and humanitarian work. We are opening
new Embassies in the Niger and Chad, increasing our
presence in Mali and have already deployed three
Chinook helicopters to provide logistical support to the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel through
Operation Barkhane.

We will also be significantly increasing our
development assistance to the region in the coming
years. We see an approach that joins up the immediate
and life-saving aid to long-term development and
security outcomes as critical to changing the Sahel's
current trajectory. That demands United Nations
leadership, and I am pleased to hear that the Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel will be entering 2019 in a better
state to deliver that.

