Mr. Vrailas: I speak on behalf of the Europan
Union (EU) and its member States. The acceding
country Croatia; the candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Iceland and Serbia;
the countries of the Stabilization and Association
Process and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, Armenia and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

At the outset, allow me to congratulate the
Permanent Representative of Bangladesh, Ambassador
Momen, on his leadership as Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) over the past 12 months.

Today's debate represents a very good opportunity
to take stock of the efforts and results achieved over the
past years in the peacebuilding realm. In this context,
let me start by putting one question forward: Are the
United Nations and the international community better
equipped today, compared to three years ago, to face
the multifaceted challenges of peacebuilding?
The answer, coming directly from the latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2012/746) of October 8, is
yes. However, it is clear that there is still a long way
to go. The report indicates areas where achievements
have been accomplished in enhancing efforts to build
lasting peace in post-conflict countries. Examples
include accountability of United Nations leaders;
deployment of senior leadership, field staff and experts;
working within integrated strategic frameworks;
partnerships with the international community; and
institution-building expertise.

However, the report also provides a frank assessment
of the shortcomings and points out the critical
areas where further work is required. These include
gender-responsive planning, women's engagement in
peacebuilding and governance, and economic recovery.

Tackling the challenges presented by post-conflict
peacebuilding is an ongoing effort that requires the
continuing commitment and coordinated and integrated
efforts of all parties involved. While the United Nations
is the most relevant entity capable of supporting the
recovery of post-conflict countries, it cannot do so
exclusively on its own. The United Nations must
continue to align with its partners - including Member
States, national counterparts, regional organizations
and civil society actors - to collaboratively leverage
their skills and expertise to ensure progress. All
this must be done under the overarching principle of
national ownership.

The European Union and its member States stand
ready to play their role. The Lisbon Treaty has, for
the first time, explicitly enshrined as one of the key
objectives of the EU's external action to preserve peace,
prevent conflicts and strengthen international security,
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter.

The EU is heavily involved in peacebuilding and
has a wide array of external policies, instruments and
tools - diplomacy, development cooperation, actions
under the Common Foreign and Security Policy and
the Common Security and Defence Policy, among
others - aimed at assisting in addressing the challenges
presented by it. Our effectiveness in pursuing the
complex task of building peace depends not only on
our ability to define the right mix of such policies,
instruments and tools, but also to adopt comprehensive
approaches to the assignment and ensure overall
consistency.

The European Union is already cooperating with the
United Nations on peacebuilding efforts. The Secretary-
General's report acknowledges some of these examples,
such as the United Nations-EU Partnership on Natural
Resources and Conflict Prevention, a project that seeks
to improve reporting on peacebuilding assistance in
Liberia; the EU-UN-Women partnership on promoting
women and peace and security; EU assistance to the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) on
insider mediation; and regular contact with United
Nations counterparts working on conflict prevention
and peacebuilding issues, principally the UNDP and
the United Nations Department for Political Affairs.

In the same vein, the European Union supports
strongly the civilian capacity initiative. As the report
of the Secretary-General states, the initiative will apply
across the various responses of the United Nations
system. We encourage the United Nations system to
continue to work in finding the optimal ways to be
more nimble, responsive and innovative in post-conflict
situations.

The European Union and its member States are eager
to continue to pursue their peacebuilding efforts in the
following three areas: the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) and the Peacebuilding Fund, the New Deal for
International Engagement in Fragile States, and women
in peacebuilding. On the PBC, we have been a firm
supporter from the outset, and we remain determined to
help that body realize its maximum potential. We share
the view of the Secretary-General that the PBC should
continue to explore lighter and more flexible forms of
engagement. The PBC should better coordinate and
support various United Nations and national actors in
the field. These changes would allow the PBC to add
greater value to Security Council decision-making and
thereby strengthen the relationship between the two
bodies.

The Peacebuilding Fund is an integral part of the
United Nations peacebuilding structure. It is a nimble
funding mechanism strongly supported by many
European Union member States.

On the New Deal, we will further enhance our
support, particularly through development aid, and
sustain the International Dialogue on Peacebuilding
and Statebuilding and the Group of Seven Plus fragile
countries in piloting the New Deal, bearing in mind
the need to prepare post-2015 contexts. We call for
synergies between the PBC and the New Deal to be
utilized so that work efforts are not duplicated and
synergies are maximized.

On women in peacebuilding, we will continue to
advance women's role in promoting peace and security.
Last year, the Security Council reported that women's
participation in conflict resolution remained too low.
Of the nine peace agreements signed since 2011, only
two have provisions ensuring women's rights. We need
to ensure women's participation in all stages of peace
processes, and from early on. This will help guarantee
the inclusion of women's rights and perspectives in the
later stages of the peace process.

Women's absence from formal peace negotiations
results in their absence from bodies that are instrumental
in laying the foundations for a new, post-conflict
society, such as political decision-making bodies,
constitutional and legislative reform commissions, and
truth and reconciliation bodies. The European Union
and its member States are firmly behind resolution 1325
(2000) and fully support setting concrete targets in the
areas of women's equal participation in the maintenance
and promotion of peace and security, and for the
mainstreaming of gender perspectives into conflict
prevention, peace negotiations, peacekeeping operations,
peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction.

To conclude, the international community cannot
fail to meet the challenge of supporting post-conflict
countries in building lasting peace. The United Nations,
with its global legitimacy, and in close partnership and
coordination with the main actors, has a central role
to play. The European Union and its member States
remain resolutely determined actively to support these
collective efforts to better assist countries in building
sustainable peace.

The President (spoke in French) I now give the
floor to the representative of Sweden.

