Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): I should like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
meeting. We appreciate the presence earlier this
morning of the Secretary-General and the statement
that he made.

The Council mission to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo was very useful. It demonstrated the
Council's commitment to pursuing peace and security
in a proactive manner. The report introduced by
Ambassador Levitte bears testimony to the fact that the
Council could, by taking such an initiative, make a
difference in the areas of conflict. Colleagues
participating in the mission deserve our great
appreciation for their individual and collective
contributions. I would like to pay a special tribute to
Ambassador Levitte for his leadership in this crucial
undertaking of the Council.

Bangladesh agrees with all the recommendations
of the mission report. We will not go into details, but
look forward to interacting with our colleagues in
shaping the action to be taken by the Council on this
report.

We recognize five major issues in the conflict on
which our attention should be focused.

The first is the withdrawal of foreign forces. This
requirement under Council resolutions must be fulfilled
by all the parties, as stressed by the mission, without
any further delay, in a phased and orderly manner. We
would like to emphasize that the monitoring of the
withdrawal, the blocking of any security gaps and the
protection of civilians are fundamentally important
aspects to focus on. We understand the difficulties to
be expected with regard to gaining a clear idea about
the administrative arrangements to be set up in those
areas.

Secondly, the message we received from the
mission report is the imperative of the inter-Congolese
dialogue. We expect the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to facilitate the dialogue as
outlined in the Lusaka Agreement. The international
community must come forward with the necessary
support. This really is the key to peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Thirdly, with regard to the question of "negative
forces", we would like to underline that, in pursuing
the Lusaka Agreement and subsequent plans, the
parties must take a realistic approach. We stress that
the resolution of the most complex and intractable
conflict of recent times will naturally require the most
courageous decisions on the part of the leadership of
the region. It will require hard concessions, difficult
compromises and, above all, a lot of pragmatism and
courage.

In our view, the security concerns of neighbours
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and related
issues will need careful consideration. Given the
sensitivity of the issues, we stress that the imperative
of justice should be pursued, with the ultimate goal
being healing past wounds and promoting
reconciliation between societies.

Fourthly, in view of the report of the Panel of
Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
all concerned should have to assume due responsibility
and adopt measures to break the nexus between the
illegal exploitation of the resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the continuation of the war.
Yesterday's New York Times editorial on the looting of
the Congo deserves our particular attention.

With regard to the economic situation, we would
like to underscore the appeal made by the team leader,
Ambassador Levitte, about sending a message to the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank about
the critical economic situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its close linkage to the
peace process. We also believe that the process to set
up the Congo River Basin Commission should be
expedited.

My final point relates to the preparation for the
third phase of the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).
With the recommendations of the mission to hand, we
should now decide on concrete actions at our end. We
attach the greatest importance to the preparations for
the third phase of MONUC. In this regard, we support
the recommendation in paragraph 120 of the mission's
report and the outlines provided therein. The United
Nations must now start the mobilization of the
resources for this phase, which, as the Secretary-
General noted in his last report, will be a major
undertaking.

The Council mission brings us a worrying
assessment of the Burundi situation. The Arusha
process must not be allowed to fall apart. We would
recommend serious consideration of that situation by
the Council at an early date. Council members should
give the next presidency ofthe Council a clear message
on this.

Let me conclude by saying that Bangladesh
appreciates very much the Secretary-General's
statement to the Council this morning, particularly his
emphasis on the need for adequate resources to address
the humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo; the proactive initiatives he has already
taken in the area of human rights; and the special
attention he is giving to the issue of child soldiers with
the dispatch of his Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu, to the area.
The Secretary-General's raising of the security
situation in general and of the security situation of
United Nations and humanitarian personnel in
particular has been very timely. Yesterday, under the
Arria formula, the Council had its first meeting in
history with United Nations staff members to discuss
security issues. We would like the Council to give
special attention to that aspect in its follow-up to the
report of the mission.

