Mr. Merores (Haiti) (spoke in French): I have
the pleasure to deliver, on behalf of Her Excellency
Ms. Haya Rashed Al-Khalifa, President of the General
Assembly, the following statement.
"The Security Council meets today to
convene a thematic debate on its role in conflict
prevention and resolution, in particular in Africa.
I am pleased to participate in today's debate in
my capacity as President of the sixty-first session
of the General Assembly, which is the chief
deliberative, policymaking and representative
organ of the United Nations. I would like to thank
Mr. Pascal Gayama, the President of the Council
for the month of August, for his invitation to
address the Council today.

"At the 2005 World Summit, when heads of
State and Government gathered in New York,
they stressed the importance of the prevention of
armed conflicts and solemnly renewed their
commitment to strengthen the capacity of the
United Nations in that regard.

"They also stressed the need for the
Security Council, the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the Secretary-
General to coordinate their activities within their
respective Charter mandates. I am convinced that
there is still room for progress to enhance that
coordination and cooperation.

"The prevention of armed conflict is one of
the principal purposes of the United Nations and
lies at the centre of many of the Organization's
efforts. The issue has been included as a specific
item on the agenda of the General Assembly in
2002 and every session since - an indication of
the increasing perception of the concept's
importance.

"By establishing the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) in 2005, the General
Assembly took an important step forward in the
field of conflict prevention. The efforts of the
Commission constitute an essential component in
solidifying peace and preventing relapse into
conflicts. But that is not enough. We need to
reinforce the mediation and good offices
capabilities of the United Nations system in its
entirety. We should strive to provide the
necessary tools for the United Nations to play
that crucial role, while fully respecting the
sovereignty of all Member States.

"Just as conflict prevention is a
multidimensional task involving a set of political,
humanitarian, development and other measures
tailored to each specific context, a successful
preventive strategy is dependent upon the
cooperation of many different actors, including
Member States, international, regional and
subregional organizations, the private sector, non-
governmental organizations and other civil
society actors.

"However, in the final analysis, it is up to
each State to take responsibility to prevent
conflicts. In his 2006 report on the prevention of
armed conflict (A/60/89l), the Secretary-General
remarked that 'A culture of prevention is
beginning to take hold at the United Nations' but
that 'An unacceptable gap still remains between
rhetoric and reality'. The most important priority
is, then, to make conflict prevention an
operational reality.

"In conclusion, I would like express the
hope that cooperation and coordination among
the principal organs of the United Nations will
intensify in this crucial domain, which remains at
the heart of the goals of our Organization."

