Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me, first of all, to welcome Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mariano
Fernandez Amunategui, as well as to thank him for his
introduction of a very sober and concise report
(S/2011/540), which extensively covered such
important topics as political developments and the
humanitarian situation, including the full range of
reconstruction and security issues, as well as some very
important considerations concerning the role and future
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH).

I should also like to express my gratitude to
Mr. Edmond Mulet, who led MINUSTAH during a
critical time for both Haiti and the Mission. His
dedication, experience and efforts were crucial to
addressing the complex challenges facing the Mission
as a consequence of the earthquake that struck the
country.

We are meeting in the Security Council once
again today to evaluate the progress made in Haiti and
to recommend the measures that should be expanded to
achieve stability, well-being and development. First of
all, we welcome the democratic process that began
seven months ago, which brought His Excellency
Mr. Michel Joseph Martelly to the presidency. This was
a historic step in Haiti's democracy that will without a
doubt make it possible for this sisterly country to

strengthen its institutions, consolidate national unity,
make progress on the implementation of economic and
social programmes in line with the plans and
programmes to be decided upon, and bolster
reconstruction in response to the 2010 earthquake.

The election of President Martelly and his
assumption of power underscored the contribution
MINUSTAH has made to maintaining a secure and
stable environment, acting as a crucial support helping
the Haitian people to better face the numerous
political, economic and social challenges before them.
However, significant challenges remain in several
areas, including in terms of security, as stated by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
following recent events.

We believe that consolidating peace in Haiti still
requires continued assistance from MINUSTAH, in
particular under the central pillar of its mandate to
promote and build conditions of security, well-being
and stability necessary for development in a way that
gradually reduces dependence on aid. In this context,
while the Secretary-General correctly states in his
report that conditions are now in place to start reducing
the number of troops deployed to pre-earthquake
levels, he also spurs us to consider the opportunity to
consolidate security and take action to strengthen the
central elements of socio-economic development in
Haiti.

In our view, if troop levels are drawn down,
continuity must be ensured for the ongoing
reconstruction efforts. In particular, the achievements
made by cooperating countries in the field of military
engineering support for recovery and reconstruction
activities must be safeguarded. This position is based
on our view that security is strengthened when the
physical environment allows for greater protection of
citizens, starting with services such as electric light,
access routes, hospitals and anti-flooding waterways.
As stated in the Secretary-General's report, a total of
125 project proposals have been received in this area.
The reconstruction support we continue providing to
Haiti is therefore crucial for the State to continue
carrying out its functions and for the implementation of
these projects to be adequately organized.

We are convinced that there is a need to
undertake a fresh evaluation of the sort carried out by
MINUSTAH prior to the earthquake with regard to the
military and police presence in order to plan - instead
of simply returning to pre-2010 troop levels - any
adjustment to the force configuration on the basis of
needs on the ground. It is of great importance that
action be carried out gradually, in keeping with the
criteria set out by the United Nations and in
consultation with the Haitian authorities so as to avoid
any shortfall in this area.

The future configuration of the Mission, as well
as the required level of troops, should be determined
by the type of operations required. In this context, we
note said the statement of the Secretary-General in the
report with regard to the incidence of crime and
violence in Haiti, and in particular the growing
demands on the police force. From an institutional
standpoint, this reinforces the need to strengthen the
capacities of the Haitian National Police. We could
reduce troop numbers if officers became more
specialized in specific areas of criminality and in their
assigned duties. In that respect, the Special
Representative's briefing was very important with
regard to the progress that has been made in police
training.

With that same spirit and commitment, Colombia
has been part of the evolving situation on the ground in
Haiti, including through police cooperation and, more
recently, cooperation in the fight against drug
trafficking. We must also underscore our participation
in the mission of Ministers of Foreign Affairs and
Defence of the South American countries involved in
MINUSTAH, which visited Haiti from 26 June to
1 July 2011, and in the assessment mission to
coordinate cooperation projects in which Colombia is
participating.

Shortly, a decision will be made on the future of
MINUSTAH, a Mission that we believe has
accomplished important tasks. We reaffirm the
conclusions reached by the Security Council in its open
debate in April (S/PV.6510) led by President of
Colombia Juan Manuel Santos, which are contained in
the presidential statement adopted that day
(S/PRST/2011/7). In it, the Council emphasized that in
the case of Haiti security must be accompanied by
socio-economic development, and reaffirmed the
responsibility of MINUSTAH to support the Haitian
State in the areas of the rule of law, good governance,
the consolidation of State authority, and the promotion
and protection of human rights.

A fundamentally important topic addressed in that
statement was the importance of continuous
coordination and joint work among the Government of
Haiti, the United Nations, the Interim Haiti
Reconstruction Commission and other stakeholders in
order to achieve sustainable results. To that end,
coordination among donors, the Government of Haiti
and the United Nations must be guided by a coherent
framework aimed at long-term sustainable results.

Today, the Council's long-standing call for
political consensus in Haiti, issued when it established
MINUSTAH, is more urgent than ever. It is up to the
political forces in Haiti to build their own destiny on
the foundations of the gains achieved, in order to get
on track to a better future. No contribution can be
effective without such political will, and no one other
than the Haitians themselves can help in this task.

In conclusion, I express the gratitude of my
Government for the work carried out by a great number
of countries, organizations, institutions and individuals
in Haiti, among which I must single out the Haitian
people themselves, whose difficult experiences have
taught them to overcome adversity and the trials of
nature. Keeping alive the world's message of solidarity
with Haiti is an obligation, as is the spirit and desire of
the Latin American and Caribbean countries to
embrace as a brother a nation with which we have
historical and geographic links, as well as a moral
obligation.

This commitment is in harmony us with the
philosophy and spirit of the Charter of the United
Nations, which reaffirms the dignity of the human
person based on the equal rights of men and women
and of States large and small. Haiti, a nation of great
values, expects the international community not to
falter in this endeavour.

