Ms. Yparraguirre (Philippines): We congratulate
the presidency of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
for convening this open debate.

Preventing conflicts and building peace and
sustaining that peace long after the fighting has stopped
have been among the biggest challenges facing the
international community and the Security Council to
date. For decades, the United Nations has focused much
of its resources on peacekeeping. While its track record
in that field is mixed, with both successes and failures,
many lessons have already been learned regarding how
to carry out the United Nations firefighting role better.

There is a lot of work to do, however, in the areas
of conflict prevention and post-conflict peacebuilding,
which are key to real and lasting peace. The Philippines
welcomes and supports the ongoing comprehensive
review of the peacebuilding architecture aimed at
strengthening the existing architecture and ensuring
that it reaches its full potential. The current review
should be mindful of the new realities and of the
changing nature of contemporary armed conflicts.

The Philippines supports the recommendations
of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of
the Peacebuilding Architecture on the primacy of
prevention, mediation andpolitical solutions. We support
proposals towards building coherence in delivering
sustainable peace in the United Nations system through
the roles of the Security Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Secretariat, the Economic and Social
Council, the Human Rights Council and international
financial institutions.

It is deeply regrettable that with armed conflicts
raging over various causes in many parts of the
globe - conflicts at different stages, many of them
recurring - the world still lacks the wherewithal to
prevent and overcome conflicts and sustain the peace.
We still see an urgent need to inform and educate the
world on the vast amount of work to be done once
the guns are silenced and the transition from war to
development has started. There is a need to appreciate
the fact that peacebuilding requires not just the
involvement of a country, a group of international
actors or the United Nations alone, but the commitment
of the whole world to make it work.

We also need to address the misperception that
peacebuilding can begin only when conflict ends. It is
important to stress that the lasting peace is not achieved
in a rigid, linear and sequential manner. The United
Nations peacebuilding architecture should provide an
infrastructure that will support the society until it is
strong enough to stand on its own. Development is the
linchpin of any peacebuilding initiative. Development
is vital in preventing conflict and in sustaining the
peace. The fact that development and peacebuilding are
interconnected cannot be overemphasized.

Following the signing of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front in
March 2014, the Philippine Government has an ongoing
peacebuilding process in Mindanao and is working on
passing legislation that would grant autonomy to several
provinces in Mindanao. The Bangsamoro Basic Law,
once passed by the Philippine Congress, is envisioned
to implement concrete initiatives linking peace and
security, development and human rights.

All stakeholders remain firmly on the peace
track, and no one is backing out of the peace process.
A comprehensive normalization track is being put in
place involving the decommissioning of the Moro
Islamic Liberation Front's Bangsamoro Islamic Armed
Forces, socioeconomic interventions in communities
affected by the decades-long conflict, interim security
arrangements, the reform and strengthening of the
police force in the Bangsamoro, addressing transitional
justice issues and confidence-building components.
The seeds of development have been planted, and
socioeconomic projects for the transformation of
Moro Islamic Liberation Front camps into productive
communities are continuing.

It is also worth mentioning that the Bangsamoro
Basic Law carries concrete gender-sensitive provisions,
which recognize that women in conflict and post-
conflict situations are to be protected and empowered
and should play a decisive role in peace and security
mechanisms and processes. The Comprehensive Peace
Agreement with the Bangsamoro is historic, not only
because it signalled the end of a long-standing war in
the southern Philippines, but also because it is the first
peace agreement of its kind in the world to bear the
signature of a woman as chief negotiator - Professor
Miriam Coronel-Ferrer. Following the signing of the
agreement, a woman was tasked to co-chair the Joint
Normalization Committee, and three of four transition
commissions are chaired by women.

While we recognize that we, the Filipino people,
are the drivers and the owners of the peace process,
we acknowledge the overwhelming support of the
international community, which is just as crucial
throughout that process. The Bangsamoro Peace
Agreement is also supported by a United Nations joint
programme that aims to reduce barriers to acceptance
of the agreement among key actors in the affected
communities. The Peacebuilding Fund helps in
stimulating discussions and promoting advocacy on the
draft legislation on the Bangsamoro Basic Law.

What we have learned from the southern Philippines'
experience is that peace is a long and arduous process.
It will not come overnight. Pitfalls and challenges will
surface along the way. What is crucial, however, is that
all parties remain resolutely on track.

