Mr. Caron (Canada): Canada warmly welcomes the
nomination of Nelson Mandela as the new Facilitator of the
Arusha peace process. We strongly support his efforts to
achieve a negotiated political and peaceful solution to the
conflict in Burundi. We are pleased to hear that Mr.
Mandela successfully launched his work in Arusha just a
few days ago.

Canada has contributed $1.25 million to this process
and wishes to reiterate that the renewed Arusha peace
process is the most viable means of achieving a durable
peace and for the resumption of a long-term sustainable
development in Burundi.

Canada also welcomes the appointment of Berhanu
Dinka as United Nations Special Representative for the
Great Lakes region as a sign of growing United Nations
engagement in the area. We hope that Ambassador Dinka
will be successful in his work to increase the international
community's efforts to address the deteriorating situation
in Burundi.

We strongly condemn the continued violence against
the civilian population perpetrated by all the parties, in
particular the massacres in rural Bujumbura in December
and in the province of Rutana earlier this month, as well
as attacks on humanitarian workers. The Council must
urge all parties to the conflict in Burundi to cease these
attacks and must insist that all perpetrators of human
rights and humanitarian law violations be held
accountable for their actions.

Canada urges the Council to call on all parties to the
conflict to ensure that safe and unhindered access to
affected populations is given; to guarantee fully the
safety, security and freedom of personnel, including
locally engaged staff; and to ensure that refugees are
protected, respected and enabled to return voluntarily and
in safety to their homes.

Canada has condemned in the past, and continues to
do so, the policy of forced displacement of the population
into regroupment camps where access by humanitarian
personnel is restricted. We are encouraged by the
comments made by the Secretary-General this morning
indicating that there may be some movement on this
important issue. We believe very strongly that these
camps are a violation of the human rights of Burundians.
Canada calls for the dismantling of the camps and, in the
meantime, for full and unconditional access to these
camps by humanitarian workers and human rights
observers.

In conclusion, Canada believes that the people of
Burundi, and indeed all of those who care about peace
and stability in that unfortunate country, are immensely
fortunate that the peace process is facilitated by a man of
such political wisdom, experience, stature and humanity
as Madiba Mandela.

