I would like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui and Jamal Usseni for their briefings. My delegation strongly condemns the recent attack on the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) that resulted in the death of a peacekeeper and injured another. We would like to extend our sincere condolences to the family of the victim, the Government of Indonesia and MONUSCO. On this occasion, we reiterate the vital importance of ensuring the safety and security of United Nations personnel in accordance with resolution 2518 (2020). This aforementioned incident, among others, shows how volatile the security situation still is in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and, accordingly, how insecure the livelihood of millions of civilians is. We remain gravely concerned over the deterioration of the security situation in several parts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, especially in Ituri province, where over 300 civilians have been killed in the past three months and 300,000 have been displaced since the beginning of the year. Continuing violence perpetrated by various armed groups and intercommunal clashes are hampering our core mandate of protecting civilians on the ground. On a positive note, we welcome the determination of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in maintaining a favourable political climate, as well as improving relations and promoting reconciliation among countries of the region. We commend the swift action of the Government to minimize the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. This is an important step to avoid major impacts to the challenging socioeconomic and humanitarian situation in the country. In light of the current situation, we would like to make the following observations. First, apart from military measures that are being undertaken, my delegation would like to stress the importance of working towards a sustained solution to the continuing instability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. A comprehensive approach should include promoting dialogue and mediation for the sake of reconciliation and tolerance, and strengthening State authority in different conflict areas. It is also important to lay emphasis on the enhancement of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes, as well as those for security sector reform. Secondly, we have always had confidence in the contribution of regional cooperation. The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo has been showing practical outcomes. We praise the efforts of signatory countries and the guarantors of this framework agreement. Its full implementation is crucial to eliminating threats posed by armed groups and to settling the issues of the illicit exploitation and trafficking of natural resources and other cross-border illegal activities. Thirdly, addressing the root causes of instability, including those that fuel intercommunal conflicts, demands efforts to improve the livelihoods of the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We are deeply worried about the high number of people in need of assistance across the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the plight of millions of internally displaced persons and refugees. The already dire humanitarian situation continues to be aggravated by the current uncertain security situation in the east, the COVID-19 pandemic and the re-emergence of Ebola. We therefore call for greater support from the international community for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which should also anticipate the response to and recovery from COVID-19. Last but not least, we fully support the important role played by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and MONUSCO towards peace and stability for the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We also welcome the good partnership between the Democratic Republic of the Congo Government and MONUSCO. Given the current volatile security situation, we feel that there is a pressing need for the formulation of a most comprehensive and prudent set of benchmarks for the MONUSCO exit strategy so as to avoid an unwanted relapse.
