The President: (spoke in Russian) The result of
the sixth ballot is as follows:

Number of ballot papers: 15
Number ofinvalid ballots: 0
Number of valid ballots: 15
Required majority: 8
Number of votes obtained:
Mr. Mohamed Bennouna 12
Mr. Thomas Buergenthal 13
Mr. Julio D. Gonzalez Campos 7
Mr. Kenneth Keith 11
Mr. Bernardo Sepulveda Amor 12
Mr. Leonid Skotnikov 13

Accordingly, five candidates have obtained the
required majority of votes in the Security Council:
Mr. Mohamed Bennouna, Mr. Thomas Buergenthal,
Mr. Kenneth Keith, Mr. Bernardo Sepulveda Amor and
Mr. Leonid Skotnikov.

I have communicated the result of the voting to
the President of the General Assembly in writing.

The President of the General Assembly has
confirmed receipt of my letter and has sent me another
letter, which I will read out to members once the
President of the General Assembly begins to make an
announcement to the General Assembly. In keeping
with the usual procedure, those things must be done
simultaneously.
I therefore request the Council to remain in
session while we wait for a communication from the
President of the General Assembly, which we will
receive very soon, following which I will read out the
letter of the President of the General Assembly.

I wish to inform the Council that I have just
received from the President of the General Assembly
the following letter:

"I am writing to inform you that at the 44th
plenary meeting of the General Assembly, which
was held today for the purpose of electing five
members of the International Court of Justice, the
following five candidates received the required
majority of votes in the General Assembly:
Mr. Mohamed Bennouna, Mr. Thomas
Buergenthal, Mr. Kenneth Keith, Mr. Bernardo
Sepulveda Amor and Mr. Leonid Skotnikov.

"I note from your letter dated 7 November
2005 that at the 5299m meeting of the Security
Council the following five candidates received
the required majority of votes in the Council:
Mr. Mohamed Bennouna, Mr. Thomas
Buergenthal, Mr. Kenneth Keith, Mr. Bernardo
Sepulveda Amor and Mr. Leonid Skotnikov.

"I have informed the General Assembly that
the same five candidates obtained the required
majority both in the General Assembly and in the
Security Council and therefore are elected
members of the International Court of Justice."

Thus the required majority of votes both in the
Security Council and the General Assembly has been
received by the same five candidates that I have just
named.

Since both the Security Council and the General
Assembly have agreed on the same candidates, the
jurists Mr. Mohamed Bennouna, Mr. Thomas
Buergenthal, Mr. Kenneth Keith, Mr. Bernardo
Sepulveda Amor and Mr. Leonid Skotnikov have been
elected members of the International Court of Justice
for a term of office of nine years, beginning on
6 February 2006. I should like to congratulate them
and wish them every success in the high office to
which they have been elected.

I also wish to thank, on the Council's behalf, the
tellers for their assistance in the conduct of the
elections."

The Security Council has thus concluded its
consideration of the item on its agenda."
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.
