Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and
Mr. Rajasingham, Director ofthe Coordination Division
of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, for their briefings.
We commend the efforts made by the United Nations
and relevant parties to facilitate a political solution and
improve the humanitarian situation in Syria. Years of
conflict in Syria have brought about untold misery for
Syria and its people. The Syrian people yearn for peace
to be achieved as soon as possible so that they can
return, rebuild and resume their lives in tranquillity. In
order to help the Syrian Government and people achieve
those goals, the international community should focus
on the following issues.

First, the international community should continue
to push for a political process in Syria. The United
Nations should enhance its coordination with the
Syrian Government to facilitate the early formation of
a constitutional committee that is representative and
acceptable to the parties concerned. At the same time, it
is necessary to take into account the legitimate concerns
of the relevant parties, including the Syrian Government,
in a balanced manner, with a view to setting in motion
a viable, sustainable political process. Security Council
members should maintain unity and speak with one
voice in support of the work of the United Nations and
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General.

Secondly, the international community should
continue the fight terrorist forces. It should strengthen
cooperation on counter-terrorism efforts and adopt a
unified standard to combat all Council-listed terrorist
organizations so as to prevent their return, which would
jeopardize the hard-won security gains achieved on the
ground. In Idlib, there are signs pointing to a resurgence
of terrorist organizations that would threaten the
security and stability of Syria; we must not turn a blind
eye. China supports the efforts by the parties concerned
to find a proper solution to the situation in Idlib.

Thirdly, the international community should
continue efforts to improve the humanitarian situation.
It should enhance its assistance to the country on the
basis of humanitarian needs on the ground. Relevant
operations should be carried out in strict conformity
with relevant resolutions and on the basis of respect for
Syrian sovereignty. China pays close attention to the
humanitarian issue in Syria - through bilateral and
multilateral channels, it has provided the Syrian people,
including Syrian refugees beyond Syria's borders, with
emergency humanitarian supplies and cash assistance
in the amount of RMB770 million.

Fourthly, the international community should
find a proper solution to the question of refugees and
move forward with reconstruction. A fundamental
improvement of the humanitarian situation in Syria
requires that the international community lend active
support to the Syrian Government and people in their
economic and social reconstruction in order to create
appropriate conditions for the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons and to help the Syrian
people rebuild their confidence and resume a normal
life. The return of Syrian refugees would also help to
ease the pressure faced by their host countries.

China supports the efforts of the UnitedNations in its
role as a principal mediator to facilitate the engagement
of the Syrian parties in an inclusive political process
in order to arrive at a settlement that is acceptable to
the parties concerned and conforms with the Syrian-led
and Syrian-owned principle and the spirit of resolution
2254 (2015). The sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Syria must be upheld throughout
that entire process. China has consistently supported
a political solution to the Syrian question and stands
ready to enhance its communication and coordination
with the relevant parties, including the United Nations,
in order to play a positive and constructive role in
moving the political process forward.

