Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Sweden aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered later on behalf of the
European Union. I would like to make the following
additional remarks in my national capacity.

As the scenario of terrorist organizations gaining
access to weapons of mass destruction has become a
disconcerting reality, the objectives of the Security
Council laid out in resolution 1540 (2004) take on
new relevance and urgency. This open debate is very
timely and important, and we pay tribute to the Spanish
chairmanship of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We
welcome the report of the Committee, and we were
pleased to co-sponsor resolution 2325 (2016), adopted
this morning. We look forward to championing its
implementation as a member of the Security Council
for the coming two years.

Before embarking upon today's subject, I would
like to State what is perhaps obvious, that is, that there
is a close connection between the lack of disarmament
when it comes to weapons of mass destruction and
the risk that such capacities could fall into the wrong
hands. We must therefore redouble our efforts to reach
tangible results in the field of disarmament.

Sweden is deeply concerned by the reports of the
United Nations and Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) with regard to the use of
chemical weapons in Syria and Iraq and by the OPCW
Director-General's assessment that the terrorist group
Da'esh may have the capacity to produce chemical
weapons. We are disappointed with the outcome of
the recent Review Conference of the Parties to the
Biological Weapons Convention, which we believe
could have been more ambitious and robust. That
is particularly regrettable as we face the real threat
of terrorist organizations with access to weapons
of mass destruction, and rapid advances in science
and technology.

Nuclear security also remains a concern. We have
been an active partner in the Nuclear Security Summit
process, which reached its conclusion in Washington,
DC, earlier in the year. We need to remain vigilant and
must continue to engage within the framework of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Sweden
welcomes the successful outcome of the ministerial
conference on nuclear security held earlier this month.
We hope that the upcoming review cycle on the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the
negotiations of a treaty banning nuclear weapons will
contribute to the enhancement on nuclear security.

We have taken a number of measures at the national
level to engage on the topic of today's debate. We have
made a substantial special voluntary contribution to
the United Nations Trust Fund for Global and Regional
Disarmament Activities, part of which is earmarked
for the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
We also recently made a significant contribution to
the Joint Investigation Mechanism (JIM) and the
missions of OPCW in Syria, as well as the IAEA
Nuclear Security Fund. We continue successful nuclear
security cooperation with Georgia, Moldova, Russia
and Ukraine, and we have recently engaged with health
institutes in Tajikistan and Zambia in the field of
biological security.

Turning to the contents of the report of the
1540 Committee, we strongly agree with the
recommendations regarding the significance of
national control lists in implementing resolution 1540
(2004). However, it is important that we do not limit
our vigilance to items and materials. Knowledge and
information also constitute important factors in the
acquisition of weapons of mass destruction. We share
the report's conclusions on cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations, and we are concerned
with the challenges described in the report as pertains
to the shortages in assistance match-making as an
important task as we move forward.

The threat of the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction by non-State actors is a matter of
grave concern, and one with which the Council must
remain fully engaged. Following the excellent work of
the Spanish presidency, my team and I look forward
to working closely with our Bolivian friends and
colleagues in the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and the implementation of the recommendations
of the comprehensive review over the coming years.
