Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): Mr. President, Ijoin
previous speakers in expressing appreciation to you for
convening today's open debate and for the useful
concept paper highlighting the thematic issues under
focus (S/2009/567, annex). We also thank the
Secretary-General, Under-Secretary-General Sir John
Holmes and the Deputy High Commissioner for
Human Rights for their briefings.
During the debate last June (see S/PV.6151), we
focused on the report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2009/277).
My delegation is of the view that the protection task
cannot be understood and addressed solely in
humanitarian terms, as it requires us to examine a
multiplicity of different areas ranging from politics to
human rights to disarmament. As we mark the tenth
anniversary of the Security Council's initial

consideration of this issue, we can acknowledge that
progress has been achieved in establishing a normative
framework. Unfortunately, however, the politicization
and selectivity that characterize the debate have
affected credibility. That has called into question the
humanitarian concerns expressed by some for the
plight of civilians affected by armed conflict. Even the
Secretary-General's report does not manifest a
consistent approach to protection issues.

At the outset, let me state categorically that Sri
Lanka is deeply committed to the protection of human
rights and the implementation of international
humanitarian law. During almost three decades of
combating terrorism in our country, we have taken the
utmost care to draw a close distinction between
civilians and terrorists. We are engaged closely with
the international community and related human rights
and humanitarian mechanisms, United Nations
agencies, the International Committee of the Red Cross
and local and international non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). That close cooperation has
extended to the aftermath of the conflict, in providing
for the needs of the displaced population. We also
welcome the progressive strengthening of this concept
by the international community over the past decade,
including through focusing on vulnerable categories
such as women and children.

The normative framework on civilian protection
cannot be applied in a theoretical manner regardless of
circumstances. The nature of contemporary conflict has
posed new challenges to the commitment of the
international community to the protection of civilians.
Many of today's conflicts take place within States, and
involve non-State armed groups. Sri Lanka's
observations relate in particular to the challenges we
have faced in protecting civilians in the context of an
internal conflict involving a ruthless terrorist group,
namely, the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE).

In Sri Lanka, the LTTE terrorist group made the
Tamil civilian population a part of its military strategy.
That posed extraordinary operational challenges to our
security forces in engaging and combating that terrorist
group while ensuring civilian protection. The terrorists'
inhuman strategy was to create a situation conducive to
large-scale civilian casualties by herding civilians to
form a human shield and by placing heavy guns in their
midst.
This terrorist group continued to forcibly
conscript civilians - including children, some of

whom were under 12 years of age - and used them as
combatants and forced labour. They even withheld food
supplies sent to civilians by the Government and
diverted those supplies for use by their armed cadres.
That challenged our Government in many ways.
Civilians being held hostage by the terrorist group
were our own people, towards whom we had
consistently applied a zero-casualty policy.

Our troops were trained to distinguish between
combatants and civilians. The protection and liberation
of civilians from the clutches of the terrorist group was
the highest priority. Our security forces, consistent
with their orders, had no choice but to intervene to
rescue civilians by creating a safe passage for them.
That operation was done at tremendous cost to the lives
of our own service personnel, as only infantry action
was used in order to ensure the rescue of civilians. Our
security forces at all times did not use disproportionate
force. The eagerness with which civilians fled to
Government-controlled areas bears testimony to the
reputation they had established for themselves. At the
same time, we established facilities to host internally
displaced persons (IDPs) well ahead of their rescue. In
that way, we averted the humanitarian catastrophe that
some had predicted.

In that context, the challenges posed by terrorism
in many parts of the world today may necessitate a
re-evaluation of the rules of military engagement.
Many of the rules of war are based on the presumption
that the parties to a conflict are conventional armies of
responsible States engaging other States. But terrorists
totally disregard those laws and principles as they
wage asymmetric warfare. They mingle with and use
civilians to achieve their goals. Once again, the
practical realities based on the experiences of Member
States must be seriously looked at, instead of
undertaking a theoretical application of humanitarian
norms to all situations.
It is also necessary to examine the causes for the
escalation of armed conflict. The proliferation of illicit
arms has contributed significantly to the spread of
violence and terrorism everywhere. Unless we are able
to stop the proliferation of arms, as agreed by Council
resolution 1612 (2005), civilian safety will remain at
stake and our best efforts to deal with the humanitarian
consequences of conflicts will soon exceed existing
capacities and available resources. Many States in our

region are affected by internal armed conflicts. While
control measures can be imposed, albeit selectively, on
States legitimately engaged in protecting their civilian
populations from terrorists, non-State actors such as
terrorist groups have relatively easy access to illicit
weapons. That is because there is no dedicated
international regime to monitor and conduct
surveillance, let alone interdict, such illicit arms
supplies.

On the other hand, external actors such as
diaspora communities openly fund arms purchases
aimed at destabilizing States, while they receive
support and protection in their host countries and their
criminal agents cross international boundaries at will.
The legal frameworks of democracies designed to
safeguard the rights of law-abiding citizens are
exploited to carry out their illicit activities. The
smuggling of arms across international waters and
across boundaries continues to render regimes such as
those established in resolution 1373 (2001) rather
ineffective in this area.

In his report, the Secretary-General refers to
enhancing compliance by non-State armed groups as
one of the challenges in strengthening the protection of
civilians. In our experience, that expectation has
proved to be unrealistic when dealing with a ruthless
organization that, in its perverted logic, advances its
political objectives by causing large-scale civilian
casualties. While the report encourages engagement
with non-State armed groups, terrorist groups pay lip
service to humanitarian principles, and often ruthlessly
misuse such principles as cover for further violence.

There is also a need to recognize the legitimate
role of the military in civilian protection. It is
noteworthy that protective responsibilities are part of
the mandate of United Nations peacekeeping forces, as
per resolution 1674 (2006). The role of Governments in
the protection of civilians should be respected, as it is
their primary responsibility to protect their own
citizens. The United Nations and humanitarian
agencies must support and assist Governments. In
doing so they should be sensitive to realities on the
ground, including by respecting the sovereignty of
States. Access for humanitarian personnel must also be
respected, but one cannot disregard the State's
responsibility to ensure the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel.

Terrorists do not distinguish between military and
humanitarian personnel. The assumption that civilians
can best be protected and cared for only by civilian
humanitarian workers from overseas and specific
NGOs that originate in particular regions of the world
contradicts the training provided to our armed forces to
respect humanitarian law at all times and to handle
peacekeeping responsibilities. Often, local NGOs and
their local staff who render yeoman service do not get
the recognition that they deserve.

An inevitable consequence of armed conflict is
internal displacement. The Secretary-General's report
brings out the concern that internal displacement
worldwide is on the rise. According to United Nations
reports, there are some 26 million IDPs throughout the
world. Internal displacement poses several challenges,
key among them is that armed groups use displacement
to exploit civilian populations, sometimes by hiding
among them and by seeking to regroup and recruit. The
State has the primary responsibility not only to provide
for the welfare of displaced civilians in terms of food,
clothing, medical care and shelter, but also to ensure
their safety, in keeping with the provisions of the
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement. The
Guiding Principles fully recognize the right of national
authorities to screen IDPs and, where their safety and
security is at stake, to restrict their movement for a
temporary period.

The resettlement issue is also politicized. In my
country, we have resettled nearly 156,000 IDPs out of a
total number of 294,000. We did so within five months
of concluding a 27-year-long conflict. Further
resettlement necessitates clearance of uncharted
minefields laid by the terrorist group in civilian areas,
farmlands and roads. It is estimated that the terrorist
group laid around 1.5 million landmines. We also have
to remove unexploded ordnance and booby traps, quite
apart from the reconstruction activities that would
create favourable conditions for resettlement in secure
surroundings and meet the resettlement criteria of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees.

Later this week, Under-Secretary-General
Holmes will travel to Colombo at the invitation of our
Government to witness and assess the resettlement of
internally displaced persons. We are confident that
most of the internally displaced persons will go back to
their homes by the end of January, making it one of the
fastest resettlement operations in recent history. We
hope this could soon be cited as an example of best
practice.

My delegation hopes that the Council discussion
on protection of civilians will facilitate practical
decisions based on realities on the ground and inspire
all of us to invest greater efforts in preventing conflicts
and their recurrence and to respond practically and
proportionately to situations affecting civilian
populations. For that reason my delegation has sought
to share our experience from the early part of this year.

In conclusion, we would like to acknowledge the
valuable contribution of the United Nations agencies,
particularly the Office of the Emergency Relief
Coordinator and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, and other national and
international partners in providing support and
assistance to Governments, including Sri Lanka, and
the Austrian presidency for convening this discussion
today.

