Mr. Fowler (Canada): Like others, Canada wishes to
express its deep appreciation for what we consider to be the
remarkable efforts and achievements of Sergio Vieira de
Mello. Mr. Vieira de Mello deserves special praise for
involving the East Timorese so closely in the work of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) and for working, through the creation of the
National Consultative Council to build local capacity for
security and self-governance throughout the territory.

We welcome the constructive steps taken by
UNTAET, the National Council of Timorese Resistance and
the Indonesian Government to work together to speed the
return of refugees, coordinate the establishment of
checkpoints and refugee border crossings and otherwise
limit the incidence of border skirmishes. We remain
concerned, however, at continuing instances of West
Timorese militias targeting civilians and International Force
in East Timor (INTERFET) troops, and we take this
occasion to ask the Indonesian Government to redouble its
efforts to bring such acts of violence to a complete stop.

Canada welcomes the release this week of reports of
both the International Commission of Inquiry on East
Timor and of the Indonesian Commission of Inquiry into
Human Rights Violations in East Timor. Canada has
supported these parallel investigations, as we strongly
believe in reconciliation through truth and justice. Indonesia
will have the opportunity to prosecute its nationals for
serious violations of human rights and humanitarian law,
and in this regard we are encouraged by President Wahid's
statement that there will be no impunity for human rights
abusers.

Canada joins Mr. Vieira de Mello and others in
expressing concern over the recent rise in Violent crime in
East Timor and the potential for additional serious social
problems resulting from dramatically high and persistent
unemployment and a shattered infrastructure. In this regard,
we fully support Mr. Vieira de Mello's focused efforts to
integrate East Timorese into UNTAET functions and
decision-making processes.

Canada is currently contributing a reinforced infantry
company of about 250 soldiers to INTERFET. The naval
support ship and the C-130 transport aircraft that were part
of the Canadian contribution completed their missions and
returned to Canada before Christmas. Canada's current
contribution will be withdrawn by April this year.

We are pleased, however, that the Canadian infantry
company will rehat as Blue Berets on 21 February. As I
have stated in both formal and informal meetings on
several occasions, this could and should have been a
United Nations peacekeeping operation from the
beginning. Had that been the case, it would have been
structured in a politically more congenial manner, and its
significant costs would have been more equitably and
more appropriately apportioned among member States.

Five Canadian staff officers will remain with
UNTAET, if they are required; but the bulk of Canada's
future contribution is likely to take the form of
humanitarian assistance. Since last April, Canada has
provided almost $7 million in support of the United
Nations consultation process, humanitarian assistance and
reconciliation efforts in East Timor. Canada is currently
working closely with non-govemmental and international
organizations and, of course, with the East Timorese to
determine the most appropriate form of longer-term future
Canadian assistance to the people of East Timor.

