Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, for his briefing and we
commend his tireless efforts to facilitate the relaunching
of the intra-Yemeni dialogue. China regrets that the
parties failed to seize the opportunity represented by
the United Nations-sponsored Geneva consultations in
Yemen, which were not held as planned. The Special
Envoy indicated that he would remain engaged with
various parties in Yemen in order to bring them back to
the track of political dialogue. We commend his efforts.

Soon after taking office, the newly appointed
Chinese Ambassador to Yemen went to Geneva to meet
with the Special Envoy and other stakeholders, thereby
demonstrating China's willingness to actively advance
the political settlement process. China will continue
to provide its constructive support to the Yemeni
political process.

At present, the protracted conflict and worsening
humanitarian situation profoundly impact regional
peace, stability and security. The Yemeni people and the
international community fully expect that the Yemeni
issue can be restored to the political track. We hope that
parties with influence will continue to push the Yemeni
parties to demonstrate a spirit of reconciliation, narrow
their differences and prevent the escalation of the
conflict so as to achieve peace, security and stability in
Yemen as soon as possible.

A political settlement is the only way to achieve
lasting peace in Yemen. The international community
should continue to support Yemen's sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity. It
should also support the good offices and efforts of the
United Nations and the Special Envoy, push for the
early resumption of intra-Yemeni dialogue and build
a sustained political process on the basis of relevant
Council resolutions, the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative and its implementation mechanism, and
the outcome of the National Dialogue Conference in
Yemen. An inclusive settlement can be reached through
dialogue and reconciliation.

It is important to ensure unhindered humanitarian
access. That is critical. The relevant parties should
come together in order to ensure safe and unimpeded
humanitarian assistance so as to create conditions
conducive to alleviating humanitarian suffering in
Yemen. China stands ready, alongside the international
community, to support the Special Envoy in continuing
his constructive role in moving forward the process to
settle the Yemeni issue.

