The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Somalia, document S/2000/1211.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council notes with
appreciation the Secretary-General's report of 19
December 2000 on the situation in Somalia
(S/2000/ 1211) and reaffirms its commitment to a
comprehensive and lasting settlement of the
situation in Somalia, consistent with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
bearing in mind respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence and
unity of Somalia.

"The Security Council welcomes and
supports the outcome of the Arta peace
conference, the establishment of the Transitional
National Assembly and the Transitional National
Government. It expresses gratitude for the efforts
undertaken by the Government and people of
Djibouti in convening the peace conference.
Furthermore, it recognizes with appreciation the
impetus provided to the process by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), including the mandate extended by the
Ministerial meeting in Djibouti in March 2000.

"The Security Council further welcomes the
efforts of the Transitional National Government
to promote reconciliation within Somalia. It
strongly urges all political groups in the country,
in particular those which have remained outside
the Arta peace process, to engage in peaceful and

constructive dialogue with the Transitional
National Government in order to promote
national reconciliation and facilitate the
democratic elections scheduled for 2003, as
called for in the Transitional National Charter. It
further calls upon all groups, in particular armed
movements, to support and participate in the
demobilization efforts undertaken by the
Transitional National Government. It encourages
the Transitional National Government to
continue, in a spirit of constructive dialogue, the
process of engaging all groups in the country,
including in the north-eastern and north-western
areas, with the view to preparing for the
installation of permanent governance
arrangements through the democratic process.

"The Security Council underlines the
massive challenges facing Somalia with respect
to reconstruction and development, and the
immediate need for urgent assistance, particularly
in the areas of demobilization (with special attention to measures to combat HIV/AIDS and
other communicable diseases), disarmament and
rehabilitation of basic infrastructure. It calls upon
the United Nations, its Member States and
specialized agencies, non-governmental
organizations as well as the Bretton Woods
institutions to assist in addressing these
challenges.

"The Security Council, emphasizing the
importance of respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law, notes with
concern that the humanitarian and security
situation remains fragile in several parts of
Somalia, including Mogadishu. It strongly
condemns attacks by armed groups on civilians
and humanitarian personnel and calls upon all
Somalis to respect fully the security and safety of
personnel of the United Nations and its
specialized agencies, the International Committee
of the Red Cross and of non-governmental
organizations, and to guarantee their complete
freedom of movement and safe access throughout
Somalia.

"The Security Council reiterates to all
States their obligation to comply with measures
imposed by resolution 733 (1992) of 23 January
1992 and urges each State to take the necessary
steps to ensure full implementation and

enforcement of the arms embargo. It strongly
condemns the illegal supply of weapons to
recipients in Somalia. It reiterates its call upon all
States, the United Nations and other international
organizations and entities to report to the
Committee established by resolution 751 (1992)
of 24 April 1992 information on possible
violations of the arms embargo.

"The Security Council insists that all States
should refrain from any military intervention in
the internal situation in Somalia and that the
territory of Somalia should not be used to
undermine the stability in the subregion.

"The Security Council welcomes the
Secretary-General's intention to put in place a
trust fund for peace-building in Somalia. It notes
that despite the recent positive developments in
Somalia, the security situation in the country is
still a cause for serious concern. The Security
Council therefore invites the Secretary-General to
prepare a proposal for a peace-building mission
for Somalia. Such a proposal should, with
specific attention to the security situation in the
country, outline possible ways to advance the
peace process further.

"The Security Council remains seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of

the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2001/ 1.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 5.15 pm.
