Mr. Fowler (Canada) (spoke in French): Violence
and instability continue to plague Burundi, with tragic
consequences for the civilian population and the
subregion as a whole. The Arusha peace process remains
the best hope to bring that violence and instability to an
end. Allow me to reaffirm at the outset my Government's
continued strong support for that process.

The Arusha peace process suffered a serious setback
with the death of its Facilitator, Mwalimu Julius Nyerere.
We join others in expressing deep regret at his death, and
we pay tribute to his valuable contribution to peace and
national reconciliation in Burundi.
A new facilitator must be named soon if we wish to
maintain the momentum generated by the negotiations to
date and the commitment of the parties to the process.
We encourage the Secretary-General to use his good
offices to help to identify an appropriate successor to
Mwalimu Nyerere as facilitator of the Burundi peace
process.

Canada welcomes the appointment of Mr. Ayite
Jean-Claude Kpakpo as the new Senior United Nations
Adviser to the facilitator of the Burundi peace process. A
further enhancement of the role of the United Nations in
the Burundi peace process may also be advisable. In this
respect, Canada encourages the Secretary-General to
consider nominating a special representative for Burundi
to support the peace process and contribute to
coordinating humanitarian activities.

 

(spoke in English)

The humanitarian situation with respect to Burundi
remains grim. We very much share Assistant Secretary-
General Ibrahima Fall's concern over the growing reports
of numbers of Burundi refugees fleeing continuing fighting
between rebels and Government forces in Burundi. United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees staff in the
United Republic of Tanzania registered 7,000 new Burundi
refugees in October and 2,650 in the first week of
November. These are in addition, of course, to the
approximately 300,000 refugees from Burundi already
resident in Tanzania and the over 800,000 internally
displaced persons within Burundi itself. There is,
unfortunately, no reason to believe that these refugee flows
will subside anytime soon. Further increases in the numbers
of refugees in the United Republic of Tanzania stand to
feed the growing tensions between the Burundi refugees
and the local Tanzanian population. We are also deeply
concerned at the reports of forced displacements, even if for
defensive reasons, of Burundi civilians into camps in
Bujumbura, where access by humanitarian personnel is
restricted and where the population lacks access to adequate
water, food and shelter.

The human rights situation also continues to give
cause for concern. The report of the Special Rapporteur on
Burundi to the Commission on Human Rights notes
massacres, disappearances, and arbitrary arrests and
detention. We call upon all parties to the conflict to end the
cycle of violence and indiscriminate killing, and on the
Government of Burundi in particular to take measures to
end impunity for those who commit such acts.

The prevailing environment of insecurity seriously
inhibits the ability of humanitarian personnel to assist
populations in need. In the past two months nine
humanitarian workers, including United Nations personnel,
have been killed in Burundi. All parties to the conflict share
responsibility for the safety and security of humanitarian
staff. We therefore call on all those parties to provide
concrete assurances that they will indeed ensure the safety,
security and freedom of movement of all humanitarian
personnel. Furthermore, we insist that the conditions
necessary for a resumption of humanitarian assistance be
restored.

Wider instability in the region continues to impair
peace efforts in Burundi. We are concerned by reports,
reiterated a moment ago by our new colleague from
Burundi, of the destabilizing presence in Burundi of
Interahamwe and the ex-Rwandan Armed Forces, who have
moved from the Democratic Republic of the Congo as a
result of the Lusaka ceasefire. In essence, the front line
seems to have migrated, at least in part, to Burundi.

Peace in Burundi is unlikely to be achieved on a
durable basis in the absence of a settlement to the conflict
in neighbouring Democratic Republic of the Congo. I
therefore take this opportunity to urge all parties to the
Lusaka agreement to respect in detail their commitments.
It is imperative that efforts to restore peace throughout the
subregion receive the full support of the international
community and, of course, of the Council.

For its part, the Government of Burundi must
intensify its efforts to achieve national reconciliation
involving all parties to the conflict. While the
international community has demonstrated in the past its
willingness to assist, it is, and it must remain, primarily
the people of Burundi who are responsible for achieving
a durable peace in their country.

I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
what we consider to be an extremely useful open briefing
on and discussion of a vitally important subject of such
immediate concern to the broader membership.

