Mr. Albanai (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to sincerely thank Mr. Taye-Brook
Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, and Ambassador Mauro Vieira, in his capacity
as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), for their valuable
briefings on the latest developments in Guinea-Bissau.
I would also like to commend the pivotal role that the
PBC is playing in Guinea-Bissau.

I will comment on two fundamental aspects
concerning today's subject: the political situation
and the strategic assessment of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS).

First, with regard to the political situation, we
regret the slow pace of preparatory work for holding
the elections, especially the voter registration process,
which is necessary for holding the legislative elections.
We also regret the Government's decision to postpone
those elections, which were supposed to be held on
18 November, as well as its non-compliance with the
electoral calendar. In that regard, the State of Kuwait
appreciates and supports the role that the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) is
playing to resolve that issue. We also support the
ECOWAS request to the Government of Guinea-Bissau
to schedule the date for the elections before the next
ECOWAS summit, to be held on 22 December. In that
regard, we welcome yesterday's announcement by the
Government of Guinea-Bissau of its intention to hold
the legislative elections on 10 March 2019.

Over this year, we have noted the progress made
in the implementation of the Conakry Agreement and
hope that the postponement of the elections will not
impact it, especially given that the date for holding
the presidential elections in 2019 is fast approaching.
The concurrent holding of legislative and presidential
elections would have an impact on all the political
actors in the country. Therefore, work must be done
mow to ensure that the elections are held on the date set
according to the most recent electoral calendar.

We renew our full support for the five
organizations - ECOWAS, the African Union, the
United Nations, the European Union and the Community
ofPortuguese-speaking Countries - seeking to achieve
progress in resolving the political crisis in the coming
period. I also commend the support of the neighbouring
countries in funding the electoral process. We look
forward to the outcome of the ECOWAS summit with
regard to the Guinea-Bissau situation

Secondly, with regard to the strategic assessment, I

thank the Secretary-General and the Secretariat for his
report (S/2018/ 1086) submitted pursuant to resolution
2404 (2018). We take note of the recommendations
contained therein pertaining to the reconfiguration of
UNIOGBIS after the presidential elections are held
next year and the drawdown plan for the upcoming two
years. We hope that all efforts - international, regional
and those of the United Nations - will be coordinated
with Guinea-Bissau. We are ready to take account of
all the recommendations contained in the report when
the Security Council considers renewing UNIOGBIS
mandate during February 2019.

In conclusion, I commend once again the efforts
made by UNIOGBIS and its cooperation with the
various active elements in Guinea-Bissau. We stress the
need for all parties to cooperate in order to guarantee
the success of the transition plan, as proposed by the
strategic assessment, because many challenges in the
country are long term and require the participation
of various United Nations offices, such as the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel.
Moreover, regional organizations and the Peacebuilding
Commission have fundamental roles to play in the
implementation of development strategies.

