Mr. Faki Mahamat (spoke in French): The African
Union echoes the President of the Security Council
in conveying its condolences to the United States of
America following the passing of former President
George H.W. Bush, who, in the course of his long
career, served as his country's representative here in
the Security Council.

By choosing the topic of peacebuilding and
sustaining peace, post-conflict reconstruction and
peace, security and stability, and by sharing with us
today its post-conflict experience, Cote d'Ivoire has
made a real contribution. Countries where recurrent
conflicts persist, particularly in Africa, would do well
to be inspired by that experience, which is enlightening
at more than one level. I wish therefore to pay tribute to
President Alassane Ouattara, whose presence heightens
the importance of this meeting. I wish also to reiterate
my appreciation to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres
for his commitment. Since taking office, he has been
working continuously to strengthen partnerships,
including with the African Union.

The quest for peace is a lengthy process requiring
a continuing commitment on the part of national
stakeholders and ongoing support from the international
community. In the absence of international support,
national efforts cannot overcome the countless obstacles
that stand in the way of peace. In the absence of strong
national political will, international assistance cannot
lead to sustainable results.

Cote d'lvoire is a clear demonstration of the fact
that peace is within reach when the will to achieve it
exists. As Africa redoubles its efforts to silence the guns
by 2020, the path taken by Cote d'Ivoire is a source of
encouragement, as are the recent developments in the
Horn of Africa. I am pleased to note that the political
will and determination that made it possible to end the
crisis in Cote d'Ivoire have continued to be shown by
the Ivorian authorities during the post-conflict phase.

At the political level, extending a hand to former
enemies made it possible to take decisive steps on
the path to reconciliation. The courageous measures
announced by President Ouattara last August, on the
fifty-eighth anniversary of his country's independence,
are of landmark importance in that respect. On
the economic front, the strong growth recorded in
recent years, in parallel with an impressive level of
infrastructure development, has brought Cote d'Ivoire
closer to the desired emergence and laid considerable
groundwork for its long-term stability.

In any conflict, silencing the guns is only the
first step in a long process. Establishing lasting peace
requires sustained efforts and a long-term commitment
that extend well past the end of a peacekeeping
mission's mandate. There can be no clearer illustration
of the need to pay close attention to this question than
the finding that 40 per cent of post-conflict countries
relapse into violence 10 years after emerging from it.

That is why in 2006 the African Union adopted a
framework document on post-conflict reconstruction
and development to serve as a guide in efforts to address
the root causes of conflict and prevent the resurgence
of violence. It was followed by the launch in 2010 of
the African Solidarity Initiative, which is based on the
principle of mutual assistance on the continent. On
the ground, the African Union is providing a tangible
contribution to many Member States in post-conflict
situations through quick-impact projects, technical
support in key areas and advocacy aimed at mobilizing
the required support. This practical involvement on the
part of the African Union reflects the resolute will of
African leaders to assume their share of responsibility
in promoting peace and security on the continent. Self-
reliance is an essential element ofAfrica's revitalization,
and it is on the basis of that principle that our leaders
have committed to financing 25 per cent of the costs of
the continental agenda for peace and security.

In line with the relevant African Union instruments
and based on past and current experiences on the
continent, we cannot overemphasize the importance
of political inclusion, democratic governance and
a national leadership that is dedicated to the success
of peacebuilding. It is equally important to promote
balanced development, to fight resolutely against
inequality and to meet the specific needs of young
people and women, who are the primary victims of
such conflicts.

The dialectic relation between peace and development
is of course evident. Similarly, it is important to
harmonize activities related to the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process with security-
sector reform and the fight against impunity in a way
that takes account of the specifics of each situation.

The restoration of peace in Cote d'Ivoire is a
victory for the partnership among the United Nations,
the African Union and the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS). The United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire took over from the mission
that ECOWAS had deployed on the ground since
December 2002. Politically, the three organizations
worked closely together throughout the peace process.
The resolutions of the Council on Cote d'Ivoire were
very often the outcome of decisions taken at the regional
level, as signed off on by the African Union Peace and
Security Council.

We are pleased to note that over the years, and
learning from our common experience in Cote d'Ivoire
and elsewhere on the continent, the partnership
between the African Union and the United Nations
has been significantly strengthened, both between
the Commission and the Secretariat and between the
African Union Peace and Security Council and the
United Nations Security Council. I also take note of
the promising cooperation that has developed between
the Peace and Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission. I reaffirm here the commitment of the
African Union to continue and deepen that collaboration,
with a particular focus not only on African countries
that are on the agenda ofthe Peacebuilding Commission,
but also on those in which peacekeeping missions are
preparing to wrap up their operations. In the context
of strengthening our partnership, I believe it useful
to recall the principles that should guide our common
action in support of peace, stability and development
on the continent.

First, there needs to be national ownership. In that
area, as in many others, nothing sustainable can be
achieved if national actors do not provide leadership of
the peacebuilding process.

Secondly, solutions must be promoted that are
adapted to the realities of each country; this applies
in particular to the issue of post-conflict justice. In
accordance with its Constitutive Act, the African Union
is deeply committed to the fight against impunity. But
the fight for justice must be conducted in a manner that
promotes reconciliation and lasting peace on the basis
of the triptych ofjustice, truth and reconciliation. Any
other approach could perpetuate divisions and recreate
conditions conducive to violence. It is therefore
pertinent and timely to call for a fresh review of the
principles underlying the concept of transitional justice.

Thirdly, long-term international support is
required. Unfortunately, international mobilization
often dwindles as soon as a crisis stops making
headlines, even though that marks the start of the most
critical part of the process of the sustainable promotion
of peace.
I wish to conclude by stressing the timeliness
of this debate on peacebuilding, and I hope that it
will lead to increased mobilization on the part of the
international community in this area, as it is necessary,
in order to succeed, to judiciously combine the need
for solidarity with the African continent with a long-
term perspective.

