The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in which she requests to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mrs. Booto
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

I should like to draw attention to document
S/2005/223, which contains the text of a letter dated
4 April 2005 from the Permanent Representative of
Rwanda addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council welcomes the
statement issued by the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda (FDLR) in Rome, on 31
March 2005, in which they condemn the 1994
genocide and commit themselves to renounce the
use of force and cease all offensive operations
against Rwanda. It considers this encouraging
statement as a significant opportunity to move
towards the return of peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, national reconciliation in
Rwanda, and full normalization of relations
between the two countries. It commends the role
of independent mediator played by the
Sant'Egidio community.

"The Security Council calls on the FDLR to
turn their positive words into action and to
demonstrate their commitment to peace by
immediately handing all their arms to the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and by taking
part in the programme put in place for their
earliest voluntary and peaceful return to Rwanda
or resettlement, as well as by assisting the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda in
Arusha to fulfil its mandate, particularly with
regard to the arrest and transfer to its custody of
indictees who remain at large.

"The Security Council encourages all other
armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo that have not yet done so to renounce
likewise the use of force and to take part without
delay in the programmes of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration.

"The Security Council urges the
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda to work together, in close
cooperation with MONUC, to make use of the
chance given to them to contribute to peace and
stability in the whole Great Lakes region of Africa.

"The Security Council welcomes the
Government of Rwanda's commitment to receive
former combatants, and urges the Government of
Rwanda to guarantee the return and reintegration
of FDLR members and their dependents to be
repatriated, in accordance with applicable
standards of international law and with respect
for the rights and freedoms of the human being.

"The Security Council recalls the need for
an effective programme of reintegration to be
quickly implemented with the support as
appropriate of the international community."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ZOOS/ 15.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

