Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank High Representative Nakamitsu
and Mr. Mulet for their briefings.

China's position on the issue of chemical weapons
has been clear and consistent. We strongly oppose the
use of chemical weapons by any State, organization or
individual for any purpose or in any circumstances.
China is deeply concerned about and strongly
condemns the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
China supports the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism in its investigation of relevant incidents
in a thorough, objective and impartial way. The
investigation should be based on solid evidence and
should reach conclusions that can stand the test of time
and are based on verifiable facts.

China takes note of the report that was recently
submitted by the Mechanism (S/2017/904, annex). We
also note that, as too much time had passed after the
incident and owing to security reasons, the Mechanism
decided not to carry out on-site field investigations
in Khan Shaykhun and Umm Hawsh. Some Council
members have expressed the hope that the Mechanism
will improve its methodology, strengthen field
investigations and refine its mandate. There is
consensus among Council members in condemning
chemical weapon attacks in Syria and on the need to
investigate relevant incidents. Council members should
continue to negotiate on the Mechanism's methodology,
mandate and extension patiently and strive for a united
message. This will help us to find the truth behind the
attacks, bring the responsible parties to justice and
deter future chemical weapon attacks in Syria.

A political solution is the only way out ofthe Syrian
issue. Thanks to the joint efforts of all parties of the
international community, there is positive momentum
towards a political settlement of the Syrian issue. The
latest round of the Astana dialogue has just concluded
and a new round of the Geneva peace talks will begin
in late November.

The political settlement of the Syrian issue has
entered a new and critical stage. China calls on
members of the Security Council to focus on the big
picture of maintaining the Syrian political process and
to stay united on the Syrian chemical weapons issue in
order to create conditions allowing all parties in Syria
to reach speedy solutions acceptable to all through the
Geneva talks and, at the same time, play a constructive
role for the comprehensive, impartial and appropriate
resolution of the Syrian issue as soon as possible.

