Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for
his briefing and to reiterate Uruguay's full support to
his work.

Paragraph 12 ofresolution 2334 (2016) says that the
Security Council

"[r]equests the Secretary-General to report to the
Council every three months on the implementation
of the provisions of the present resolution".

Regrettably, the first of those three months were up
yesterday and we still do not have the report of the
Secretary- General, which we hope will be issued as soon
as possible. Uruguay, as it has done since 1947, reiterates
its support to the aim of both Israel and Palestine to live
peacefully side by side within secure and recognized
borders in a spirit of renewed cooperation free of any
threat to peace. In order to achieve that, it is vital
that both the Israeli and Palestinian authorities fulfil
their obligations under international law in good faith,
comply with the relevant Security Council resolutions,
give clear political signals that they want to move away
from this vicious circle of violent confrontation and
refrain from taking unilateral decisions while waiting
to begin a dialogue. We are waiting for those signals.
We therefore call on the parties to think carefully about
their next steps and work to prevent the most extremist
wings of their respective Governments from prevailing
over those are genuinely committed to peace.

Uruguay, along with virtually the entire
international community, firmly supports a two-State
solution to the conflict, which is still the only possible
way to enable Israel and Palestine to live together in
peace and security. In that regard, we urge the parties to
relaunch direct bilateral negotiations as soon as possible
and without preconditions, which is an essential part of
the path to attaining the ultimate goal. But if that is to
happen, the trends on the ground that were identified
in the Quartet's last report must be reversed, or it will
be extremely difficult for Palestine to consolidate its
State. The Security Council's adoption in December of
resolution 2334 (2016) and the conference organized by
France in January were clear indications of how urgent
the international community considers the issue of
reaching a peaceful conclusion to the process. Israel's
announcements in the past two months about the
construction of thousands more settlements in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem, as well as the retroactive
legalization of settlements on Palestinian land, runs
counter to the provisions of resolution 2334 (2016),
which affirms the unacceptability of the acquisition of
land by force. Such measures do not promote peace and
endanger the prospects for a two-State solution.

We would like to firmly emphasize that we reject
all acts of terror and repudiate any glorification of
violence or incitement to it. We cannot simply remain
silent about such issues, for otherwise we become
complicit in them. Launching rockets from Gaza into
Israel is unacceptable, and it is the responsibility
of Palestine to put a stop to such attacks. Lastly, we
reiterate to the key actors in the process that moderation
is essential and unilateral actions that may endanger a
future peace process and a solution for these two States
are unacceptable.
Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(Spoke in Spanish): I am grateful for the briefing by the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, who has just given us updated
information on the situation in the Middle East, in
particular with respect to the illegal Israeli settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territories.

Bolivia reaffirms its firm commitment to resolution
2334 (2016), and we urge all members of the Security
Council to join forces to ensure that it is implemented
without further delay. We believe that all resolutions
emanating from the Council should be implemented
with the same rigour and commitment that they require,
with the sole purpose of guaranteeing international
peace and security.

Bolivia would like to express its most profound
indignation at the ongoing illegal settlement activities
by the State of Israel in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem, despite the
existence of a Council resolution that expressly
reaffirms that the settlements have no legal validity
and constitute a flagrant violation of international law
and a major obstacle to the achievement of the two-
State solution and of a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace. Along similar lines, I would like to reiterate
what resolution 242 (1967) demands in its article 1,
namely, the "[w]ithdrawal of Israel armed forces from
territories occupied in the recent conflict". It speaks of
the recent conflict because the resolution was adopted
in 1967, almost 50 years ago.

Today, three months after the Security Council
adopted resolution 2334 (2016), we find ourselves in
this meeting with less than encouraging news about
the implementation of the resolution. The Israeli
Government, using its extreme rhetoric in January and
February of this year, announced through its authorities
the construction of 6,000 new homes in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. According to the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, since January 2017 there have been almost 105
demolitions of homes of Palestinian citizens in the so-
called Areas C and 14 in East Jerusalem. This type of
expansionist and colonizing practices by Israel bring
with them the continued confiscation of Palestinian
families' land and property, leading to forced
displacement of civilians and consequently the transfer
of new Israeli settlers. If we compare the figures with
those from last year, where there were 1,093 demolitions,
we see that resolution 2334 (2016) has had no impact on
the ground. The rate of demolitions after the adoption
of resolution 2334 (2016) has been the same as the rate
before it.

We call on the Israeli Government to show political
will and commitment to the two-State solution. We
believe that it is the duty of the Security Council to
immediately urge that Israel put an end to its illegal
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem, and suspend all
actions against the Palestinian civilian population,
including the inhumane blockade of the Gaza Strip, as
well as the immediate cessation of all collective and
other forms of punishment.

Bolivia reaffirms its support for the self-

determination of the Palestinian people and their right
to a free, sovereign and independent State within pre-
1967 internationally recognized borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly of the United Nations. Bolivia of course wants
there to be peace for both peoples - for the Palestinian
people and for the Israeli people. At the same time,
Bolivia rejects all forms of terrorism. We endorse the
Ambassador of Uruguay's hope that the report called
for by resolution 2334 (2016) will be circulated, and we
would like to ask Mr. Mladenov to include in his next
briefing in this Chamber maps that show how the illegal
Israeli settlements are extinguishing the possibility ofa
two-State solution. We think it is vital that we be able to
understand visually what is happening on the ground.

Finally, it has been said in the Security Council
that the United Nations - and the Security Council in
particular - are fixated on this issue. I was thinking
about how we could respond to this claim. Some 70
years after the adoption of the General Assembly
resolution that speaks of the two States (resolution 181 (II)), 50 years after the start of the Israeli occupation
of Palestinian territories, 10 years after the start of the
Gaza blockade, and now three months after the adoption
of a resolution that still has not been implemented,
the only way I could find to respond to this claim is
to repeat the words of Nelson Mandela, who said, "we
know too well that our freedom is incomplete without
the freedom of the Palestinians".

