Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
also express our appreciation to the Ambassador of
Mali for the commendable way in which he led the
Council last month. Furthermore, we thank you,
Mr. President, for calling this important meeting.

The Sudanese delegation wishes to express its
heartfelt condolences to the families of the martyrs of
the steadfast Palestinian people who were victims of
the recent and continuing Israeli aggression and
oppression.

Seven years ago the international community's
hopes were raised that the peace process would lead to
a just and comprehensive solution to problem of the
Middle East, especially the Palestinian question.
However, that optimism has dwindled day after day,
owing to the intransigence of Israel, which consistently
refused to implement the resolutions of international
legitimacy.

The visit of Ariel Sharon to Jerusalem to
desecrate holy sites and the ensuing bloody actions,
which did not even spare the worshippers inside the Al-
Aqsa Mosque, were attempts to provoke a reaction
from the Muslims and the entire Arab nation. The visit
was undertaken under the protection of a terrorist
force. Sudan view the visit as but one in a series of
expansionist actions by which Israel seeks to
consolidate its objectives, turning them into faits
accomplis in order to render meaningless the Israeli-
Palestinian negotiations on the final-status issues. The
visit also exposed the fallacy of Israel's allegations
regarding the issue of sovereignty over Jerusalem, a
crucial issue dear to the hearts of the Palestinians and
all Arabs and Muslim peoples.

What has been happening in the occupied
Palestinian territories since the last week of
September- the wanton killing of defenceless,
unarmed Palestinian civilians - is in flagrant violation
of the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. The
Convention applies to all the territories that have been
under Israeli occupation since 1967. It is clear that the
Israeli Government supports and gives its blessing to
these provocative acts of aggression, as well as to the
torture and intimidation of unarmed Palestinian
civilians before the eyes of the international
community, without the Israelis' showing any remorse.
The Sudan strongly condemns the massacres
committed at Al-Haram Al-Sharif, massacres in which

hundreds of Palestinians - including elderly people,
youths, women and children - were killed, wounded
or maimed.

The Sudanese delegation is confident that in
addressing these heinous crimes being perpetrated
against unarmed Palestinian people the Security
Council will assume its full responsibility and protect
them against being killed and tortured by the Israeli
forces that are using the most sophisticated weapons of
destruction. We also call on the Council to force Israel
to implement all the relevant resolutions of
international legitimacy, including 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), and to withdraw completely from all occupied
Arab territories, including Palestine, the Syrian Golan
Heights and the remaining parts of southern Lebanon.

The Sudan urges the Council to put the necessary
pressure on Israel to desist from oppressive practices
and flagrant violations of human rights and to engage
in the peace process in a transparent and serious
manner. The Sudan also urges the Council to adopt the
draft resolution submitted by the Non-Aligned
Movement.
The Council's inability to fulfil its obligations
towards the people of Palestine and to see that this
people's rights are restored raises questions concerning
its credibility within the international community and
promotes the idea that the Council adopts selective
policies and double standards.

Finally, the Sudan reaffirms its full solidarity
with the people of Palestine in their struggle to defend
their territory and maintain their dignity.

