Ms. Rice (United States of America): We
welcome the news that the parties have just signed an
agreement on temporary administrative and security
arrangements for Abyei and on the withdrawal of
Sudanese Armed Forces. We are encouraged by this
news. We greatly appreciate the intensive efforts of
former President Thabo Mbeki and the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel over the past two
weeks to assist the parties in their negotiations.

Now comes the crucial task of full and timely
implementation. The Security Council will closely
monitor adherence with its statements and the progress
towards rapidly ensuring that the terms of the Addis
Ababa agreement are swiftly fulfilled. We want to
underscore the urgency of Ethiopian troops deploying
immediately to Abyei, as the agreed interim security
force, under United Nations auspices, and on the
timeline agreed to by the parties.

We also thank Prime Minister Meles Zenawi for
his extraordinary efforts and commitment to resolve
the crisis in Abyei and for his agreement to provide
Ethiopian troops. I also want to extend our gratitude to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Menkerios for his continued and intensive efforts
throughout this process. The United States will soon
circulate a draft resolution for the Council's
consideration to authorize the creation of this proposed
interim security force for Abyei.

Unfortunately, the situation in Abyei is by no
means the only crisis facing the people of the Sudan.
We are less than three weeks away from the
independence of South Sudan, and the situation in the
Sudan poses an urgent threat to the safety and security
of the Sudanese people, as well as a threat to
international peace and security, that continues to merit
the Council's sustained attention and resolve.

On 5 June violence broke out in multiple areas of
Southern Kordofan, including its capital Kadugli. The
reports my Government has been receiving of the
ongoing fighting are horrifying, both because of the
scope of human rights abuses and because of the ethnic
dimensions to the conflict. The Sudanese Armed
Forces have shelled and bombed the areas around
Kadugli, ongoing and intense aerial bombardments
threaten the lives of civilians and United Nations
personnel and a bomb fell just 100 metres from the
compound of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS) in Kauda. The Sudanese Armed Forces have
threatened to shoot down UNMIS air patrols and they
have taken control of the airport in Kadugli and refuse
landing rights to UNMIS flights - which has
continued for so long the United Nations staff located
in the compound and United Nations team sites are
running dangerously low on food and supplies.

The lack of access for UNMIS is alarming and
indefensible. UNMIS and humanitarian aid workers
must be granted full access, most especially when so
many are in need of food, water and humanitarian aid.
According to the United Nations, more than
360,000 people have been displaced in the Sudan over
the past six months. More than half were displaced in
the past month. As many as 75,000 people have fled
the fighting in Southern Kordofan. International
non-governmental organizations operating there are
evacuating their staff and a humanitarian crisis of
enormous proportions is unfolding. Up to 10,000 people
have sought refuge at the UNMIS compound in
Kadugli.

The United States calls on both parties to
facilitate access for UNMIS and humanitarian aid
workers. We are also concerned that the Sudanese
People's Liberation Army has deployed north of the
lJanuary 1956 border into Southern Kordofan, in
violation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
(CPA).

We have also received reports that forces aligned
with the Government of the Sudan search for Southern
forces and sympathizers, some of whom they have
arrested and allegedly executed. We have received
further allegations - not yet corroborated, but so
alarming that I must mention them - that the
Sudanese Armed Forces are arming elements of the
local population and placing mines in areas of Kadugli.
The United States condemns all acts of violence,
especially those that target individuals based on their
ethnicity or political affiliation.

Security services and military forces have
reportedly detained and summarily executed local
authorities, political rivals, medical personnel and
others. These acts could constitute war crimes or
crimes against humanity. We demand that the
perpetrators immediately halt these actions and be held
accountable for their crimes. We call on the United
Nations to fully investigate these incidents, and request
a report from the Secretary-General to the Council by
the end of June that details any human rights abuses
that were committed during recent hostilities in Abyei
and Southern Kordofan.

We are deeply concerned by reports that members
of the Sudan People's Liberation Army have threatened
the safety of persons of Arab origin in Southern
Kordofan, including United Nations staff. We insist
that the Sudan People's Liberation Army's leadership
condemn such actions and refrain from any reprisals.

The Government of the Sudan can prevent the
crisis from escalating further by immediately stopping
its military efforts to disarm the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement in Southern Kordofan and by
focusing on diplomatic efforts to peacefully resolve the
conflict. The Sudanese Government should also cease
trying to dissolve the joint integrated units in Southern
Kordofan, which were established under the CPA.
Security arrangements for Southern Kordofan and Blue
Nile states should be agreed upon through direct high-
level negotiations, and not dictated through the use of
force.

We call for the Government of the Sudan and the
Sudan People's Liberation Movement-North to agree
immediately on a cessation of hostilities and to
immediately end restrictions on humanitarian access
and United Nations movements. It is essential that
violence against civilians and humanitarian abuses
stop, and stop now. The United States calls on both
parties to end the conflict and to resolve the underlying
issues in Southern Kordofan and in Blue Nile, as they
are now beginning to do in Abyei.

Finally, we want to underscore the imperative for
timely and candid assessments by the Council about
the evolving situation, for which we crucially depend
on the Secretariat. That is essential in order for us to be
able to determine and to take the necessary actions to
ensure that the United Nations can carry out its

mission. Contingents unwilling to carry out their
mandate to protect civilians should not be part of that
crucial mission.

Contingents under attack also need our back-up
and support. With the failure of their Government to
live up to its responsibilities, the Sudanese people have
turned to the international community for protection.
We have an obligation to provide it.

