The Secretary-General: I am honoured to
address the Security Council after its adoption of this
historic and unprecedented resolution. By authorizing
the deployment of a hybrid operation for Darfur, the
Council is sending a clear and powerful signal of its
commitment to improve the lives of the people of the
region and close this tragic chapter in the Sudan's
history.

Today's resolution is the culmination of a serious
and painstaking collaboration within the Security
Council. I commend Council members for their efforts.
The adoption is also the result of sincere and intensive
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union. As we open this new chapter, I pay
tribute to the men and women of the African Union
Mission in the Sudan, who have given their all in the
service of peace - some paying the ultimate price.

We must now move forward, in all haste, to build
on their work. We must put in place the complex and
vital peacekeeping operation which the Council
authorized today. The Council is familiar with the
administrative, logistical and serious operational
challenges that must be overcome to establish the
hybrid mission. We must dedicate ourselves fully to
deploying a mission that will make a clear and positive
difference in the lives of the people of Darfur. They
have a right to expect nothing less.

Preparations for the operation have been under
way since early this year. Today's resolution will give
07-44445

even greater momentum to our efforts. If we are to
meet the ambitious goal established by the resolution
and assume authority in Darfur by the end of the year,
the Council must remain engaged. Member States,
especially troop- and police-contributing countries,
must provide every support. Additional capable troops
must be committed. Support systems must be put in
place. Command structures must be established.
National Governments know from their own
experience that this takes time. But time is not on our
side.

Equally fundamental will be the unequivocal and
continuous support of the Government of the Sudan. If
the Government is not a good-faith partner in this
initiative, the operation will fail. We have the same
expectation of the rebel movements.

As we recognize the importance of today's
resolution and redouble our collective efforts to
strengthen peacekeeping in Darfur, we must also
acknowledge that it is only through a political process
that can we achieve a sustainable solution to the
conflict.

The Special Envoys of the United Nations and the
African Union have stepped up their efforts and will be
meeting with the parties in Arusha later this week. It is
crucial that the Arusha meeting yield positive results,
so as to pave the way for negotiations and, ultimately, a
peace agreement. Only in this way can we end the
Violence and destruction that have afflicted Darfur for
more than three years.

We will build peace through negotiations for a
political settlement and sustain peace on the ground
with our peacekeepers. I look forward to working
closely with the members of the Council, with the
African Union and with all Governments concerned as
we advance towards our shared goal.

