I thank Mr. Singer Weisinger for hosting this important discussion today. I also thank Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing and for his report (S/2020/167) on such a critical issue. I know I am not alone in saying that our future truly does rest in the hands of our young people and that we must do everything in our power to remove the obstacles that limit their meaningful participation in public life. One way we can include young people is by listening to their voices. I am therefore delighted that we were able to welcome to the Security Council today three amazing young leaders: Jayathma, Olla and Gatwal. I wish to acknowledge their courageous work in improving communities around the world. Five years ago, the Security Council adopted resolution 2250 (2015), the first resolution fully dedicated to the vital role that young people play in the maintenance of international peace and security. Two years ago, we adopted resolution 2419 (2018), which urged the Secretary-General and his special envoys to incorporate the views of young people and involve them at decision-making levels. Today we have come together to take stock of the progress made and to consider the steps required to improve youth participation and ensure the full implementation of these resolutions. There should be no doubt that the Security Council takes young people and their concerns seriously. In so many conflicts, youth continue to be caught in the crosshairs. Ninety per cent of the 1.85 billion young women and men in the world today come from developing countries. Twenty-five per cent of them - more than 400 million people - are directly affected by violence or armed conflict. Surely this cannot continue to be the norm. When schools are shut down, hospitals are targeted or aid gets blocked, it is youth who are the most vulnerable. Now the imperative to protect them is even greater: on top of the social, education and health systems that have already been weakened by conflict or disaster, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is triggering multiple, interlinked crises affecting hundreds of millions of young people. The United States has already emphasized that effective mitigation of COVID-19 requires Government transparency and accountability, the full participation of civil society and access to information. But as we heard from Ms. Al-Sakkaf today, the situation also demands the engagement of young people. Unfortunately, barriers to that engagement remain, including through intimidation and attacks violating young people's human rights and insufficient investments in systems that facilitate their inclusion, and most especially education. As States Members of the United Nations, it is our responsibility to guarantee a safe environment for all human rights defenders, including young human rights defenders and peacebuilders. We remain concerned about attacks and limitations on young people's freedom of speech, movement, assembly and association. Neither they nor their family members should face retaliation or detention for speaking out. All young women and men have the fundamental right to take part in public life - a right they possess regardless of their nationality, ethnicity, caste, class, religion, gender, sexual orientation or political affiliation. As we strive to include young people, the Council must recognize that leaders face a deficit of trust. Many young people do not have high levels of faith in Government institutions. Furthermore, when young people are marginalized or discriminated against, it becomes easier for terrorist groups to recruit and target them. I will repeat that because I think it is important that we understand that young people, when marginalized or discriminated against, do become targets, and it becomes much easier for terrorist groups to recruit them. As leaders, we have real work to do in this space; indeed, we have a responsibility. Thankfully, many young people are already showing us how to be a part of the solution, just as our three young briefers have done today. They have played an essential role in preventing violent extremism by reaching out to their peers in positive ways through friends and social media. For our part, the Trump Administration will continue to help young people acquire the skills they need to shape the governance and politics of their countries. Our efforts are aimed at building partnerships with promising young leaders around the world and across the United Nations system, so that the voices and perspectives of young people can be amplified. In addition to the work undertaken by UNICEF, the United Nations Development Programme and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to protect and strengthen youth participation, United Nations field missions in the Central African Republic, Liberia and elsewhere are enabling young people to develop national security strategies. We encourage this kind of engagement in policymaking decisions, especially in post-conflict environments. Just and peaceful societies are ones that listen to and incorporate the opinions and aspirations of all their people. I know these are the societies we wish to build. Accordingly, the voices of young women and men must be heard, their views must be valued and their participation must be ensured.
