Mr. Okamura (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to express my sincere appreciation for the President's
leadership in convening today's open debate. I am
also grateful to Secretary-General Ban-ki Moon
and the Chairs of the Council's counter-terrorism-
related committees for their respective comprehensive
briefings.

We are all concerned about the fact that terrorism
has established an international network and has
expanded worldwide. The threat of terrorism is different
from that posed by ethnic or religious conflicts. The
recent serious threats posed by the so-called Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant has clearly shown that. It
is a serious thereat with global impact, and effective
measures mandated by the United Nations are therefore
necessary - not only in Iraq and Syria: we are now
facing widely expanding threats in Africa. We are
shocked that Boko Haram abducted more than 200
schoolgirls in April. That is not a problem that Japan
deems irrelevant. The hostage-taking in Amenas,
Algeria, in January of last year was followed by the
deaths of 10 Japanese people. I devoted myself to that
issue in my previous position as Director-General for
African Affairs at Japan's Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
I also took up that issue as one of the major topics when
we organized the Fifth Tokyo International Conference
on African Development (TICAD-V), in June last year.

There is a shared view in the TICAD process
that when people, especially the younger generation,
are frustrated about extreme poverty and youth
unemployment, terrorism expands. Needless to say,
fighting terrorism on the front lines is important.
However, it is also important to address the so-
called root causes. By achieving social and economic
development we can bring hope to people in various
regions and create a foundation that does not tolerate
terrorism. Advancing social and economic development
was the idea behind TICAD -V. At the conference, Prime
Minister Abe announced $1 billion for the development
and stability of the Sahel, as well as assistance for
enhancing the capacity of the region to engage in
counter-terrorism.

Let me summarize briefly Japan's recent
international undertakings in the field of counter-
terrorism.

First, we believe that regional cooperation is
important to cope with the challenges more effectively
and in a more practical manner. As part ofthe assistance
programmes announced at TICAD-V, Japan hosted a
workshop last week on criminal justice cooperation for
counter-terrorism among the Sahel States and States in
North Africa. Several States in the region participated.
We hope the meeting served to promote regional
cooperation.
Secondly, based on the idea that regional stability
and social and economic development are effective
in addressing the root causes in fighting terrorism,
Japan has provided a wide range of assistance to
several regions, in addition to what was announced at
TICAD-V. As a recent example, in September, Japan
decided to extend $22 million in emergency grant aid to
Iraq and Lebanon in order to provide emergency shelter
and relief items for Iraqi internally displaced persons
and Syrian refugees affected by the offensive of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).

It goes without saying that we are in close
cooperation on counter-terrorism with States in Asia,
especially the States members of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). That is reflected
in the ASEAN-Japan joint declaration for cooperation
to combat international terrorism and transnational
crime, adopted last week in Naypyidaw, Myanmar.
Since Japan established the ASEAN-Japan Counter-
Terrorism Dialogue in 2006, we have held annual
dialogues - including the ninth meeting in May in
Singapore. Japan believes such continuous efforts
are key. It makes it easier for us to have more candid
exchange of views and ideas. That makes it easier for us
to come up with more effective and practical measures
on counter-terrorism, building on past good practices.
Furthermore, I would like to underline the fact that
the East Asia Summit also released an independent
statement last week that reiterates our commitment
to work with the international community to fight
extremism, radicalism and terrorism.

With regard to resolution 2178 (2014), adopted in
September, more than 100 Member States sponsored
the resolution, including Japan, demonstrating the
solidarity of the international community on this
issue. Member States should take appropriate action
to implement the measures set out in the resolution in
order to respond effectively to threats, especially the
issue of foreign terrorist fighters. Various measures are
indispensible, including on border control, countering
violent extremism and terrorist financing, and
international cooperation.

I hope that the members of the international
community will reaffirm its determination to fight
terrorism by sharing their wisdom and expertise with
one another, so as to strengthen measures against
international terrorism.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming Japan's
position in fighting resolutely against international
terrorism. Japan, as a responsible Member ofthe United
Nations, will play an active role in making every effort
to fight terrorism hand in hand with the international
community.

