Mr. Hidayat (Indonesia): My delegation would
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of January and
to extend to you its sincere appreciation for organizing
this open meeting on one of our key concerns, children
and armed conflict. In our view, this meeting is an
indication of the Council's continued commitment to
the welfare of children in general and of its
determination to ensure their protection.

At this juncture, I would also like to express my
delegation's gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2002/ 1299), and to his Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict for his efforts on this
issue. Particularly worthy of notice in the current report
are the commitments obtained for the protection and
well-being of children in conflict and post-conflict
situations.

Indonesia continues to be concerned about the
continued use of children in armed conflict around the
world. In this regard, we take particular notice of the
list annexed to the report, as requested by the Council
in its resolution 1379 (2001), of parties to armed
conflict that recruit or use children in violation of their
international legal obligations. We are disturbed at the
abuses that children suffer in camps, and at the general
suffering and deprivation that they endure because of
conflicts.

In that connection, it is also important to point
out the persisting problem of humanitarian access in
conflict situations. In the occupied Palestinian
territories, for example, the Secretary-General reports
that the conditions imposed by Israel - notably stricter
closures, curfews, roadblocks and checkpoints - have
created humanitarian problems including frequent
school closures and a drop in immunization levels. This
kind of avoidable inhumanity to society, especially to
children, must not be allowed to continue.

In the past, we have lent our national support to
international efforts at ensuring the protection of
children in such conflicts and at alleviating the
suffering of those who have been unfortunate enough
to find themselves in the midst of them. My delegation
has always seen these two aspects of the problem: on
the one hand, children are deployed as instruments in a
situation while, on the other, they are intended and
unintended victims.

Children who are involved in battle, whether they
are hurt or not, are victims, and there is not much of an
escape once the bullets, or the logistical demands of
conflict, take over. It is the responsibility of those
formulating international law within the multilateral
system to continue to adopt measures to limit
children's involvement in and exposure to conflict. The
continued recruitment of under-age children for the
purposes of conflict should not continue with impunity.

To respond to these concerns, the international
community possesses several international instruments,
such as the 1989 Convention on the Rights of the
Child, of which Indonesia is a signatory. That
Convention underlines the political, social, economic
and civil rights of children. Indonesia also supports the
Optional Protocol that strengthens the Convention by
calling for a minimum age of 18 for eligibility for
participation in hostilities. Unfortunately, in recent
conflicts the Convention and its Optional Protocol have
conveniently been ignored.

In this connection, another key international
document by which the international community has
tried to address this issue in recent times is "A world
fit for children" (General Assembly resolution S-27/2, annex), the outcome document of the landmark May
2002 special session of the General Assembly on
children. It calls on the world community to make the
world safer for children, and outlines the
responsibilities of nations and the measures they must
take in that regard. Among other things, it specifies an
assortment of responses to protect children from armed
conflict and impunity. We are of the opinion that it is a
thorough and strong document that, if implemented,
would go a long way towards resolving several issues
relating to the protection of children in conflict
situations.

With reference to post-conflict situations, it is
important to take a brief look at the example of what
the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) has
been able to achieve in Sierra Leone. In 2001, UNICEF
helped more than 3,600 child soldiers in Sierra Leone
to leave army life and rejoin their families. The
children obtained counselling, vocational training and
education towards reintegration into their communities.
We commend and support programmes of this nature,
not only those of UNICEF and other relevant United
Nations agencies, in conflict and post-conflict
situations where children have been a factor.

Similarly, my delegation stresses the importance
of enhancing the monitoring mechanisms spelled out in
resolution 1379 (2001). Since the adoption of that
resolution, we are pleased that the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, and other
relevant international agreements and conventions have
entered into force. We cannot afford to pay only lip
service to this very important matter, and must
therefore find ways of implementing these critical
international instruments. To that end, we congratulate
those States that are already making efforts to
harmonize their national legislation with available
international child rights standards.

As we have often said, the future of humanity
depends on children, and they must be protected
because that is the only protection that the future of
mankind has. We cannot have our children exposed to
violence so early in their lives without expecting them
to bear and carry insecurity, violence and hatred within
them, especially when they have also forfeited their
youth and the chance of a good education at such an
early stage of their lives.

While conflict itself should be avoided altogether,
children should not be dragged into it if it does arise. A
child should not have to carry a gun, find himself at the
receiving end of gunfire or be hurt by conflict. Rather
than celebrate minor moral victories, the international
community should focus its attention and evaluation on
the larger picture.

