Mr. Khan (Indonesia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important open debate on post-
conflict peacebuilding. I should also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his remarks, and express my
appreciation to Ambassador Momen, Chairperson of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), for his useful
intervention.

Indonesia aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

We commend the Secretary-General and his team
for the progress made on what is a dynamic and difficult
global agenda of helping conflict-affected countries
navigate their way towards peace and development.
Yet, a more intensive and constant effort by the United
Nations and the international community is required
to deepen the impact on the ground and strengthen the
capacities and institutions of countries so that they can
consolidate peace effectively.

My delegation is heartened to learn that there
has been significant progress in the context of the
implementation of the 2009 Agenda for Action in
peacebuilding and, more modestly, the seven-point
action plan for gender-responsive peacebuilding.

As mentioned in the Secretary-General's report
(S/20l2/746), post-conflict countries often continue
to experience instability years after the end of armed
conflict, with high levels of relapse into violence.
That situation is one of deep concern. The success of
post-conflict countries depends predominantly on the
quality of their nationally identified, owned and driven
peacebuilding. At the same time, this quality in large
measure depends on the support of a robust, responsive
global peacebuilding architecture.
Indonesia is thus pleased that the Peacebuilding
Commission, as a key entity in global peacebuilding,
has been making important strides to advance post-
conflict issues and make the support to its agenda
countries more coherent and sustainable. Indonesia
fully supports the United Nations peacebuilding
agenda in post-conflict countries and will continue
to support the work of and vital role played by the
Peacebuilding Commission, on which Indonesia serves
as a member. While concurring with the Secretary-
General's recommendations to the PBC, I wish to make
the following additional observations.

First, the emphasis placed throughout the report
on advancing the national ownership principle is
very important. We also welcome the Security
Council's reaffirmation of this principle in its newly
adopted presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/29). As
underscored by President Yudhoyono in his remarks
in September this year (see A/67/PV.6), the sense
of ownership in peacebuilding is critical. We have
to ensure that when we are supporting countries'
peacebuilding efforts, we get to know the needs and
aspirations of all stakeholders better. In order to foster
ownership, nationally identified priorities must be the
blueprint of international support. Indonesia supports
the Secretary-General's observation concerning the
need for the PBC to strengthen its strategy of promoting
coherence and the alignment of donors with national
peacebuilding plans.

Secondly, effective peacebuilding is one that
unlocks the potential for economic progress and
development. To that end, the assistance of the United
Nations system and relevant bilateral, regional and
multilateral partners is crucial. In order to adequately
assist post-conflict countries, the multi-sourced
international support framework necessitates close
coordination and collaboration among its actors. The
PBC's recommendations in this regard can play a vital
role. We also believe that the support framework requires
a more transparent and accountable process. Indonesia
can testify to the significance of this, particularly given
its experience of engagement in the context of bringing
peace to Aceh after decades of conflict there.

Thirdly, I should like us to continue to explore
all available avenues in garnering support. My
delegation is heartened that the Secretary-General has
also encouraged the Commission to engage with the
foundations and the private sector. As some may be
aware, in 2008 Indonesia facilitated a PBC policy task
force on partnering with traditional and non-traditional
private sectors. Some of the recommendations made in
its outcome document are reflected in the 2012 PBC
road map of action and will, it is hoped, serve to broaden
the base for resources and partnerships in post-conflict
peacebuilding.

Fourthly, we fully support the call on the Security
Council and the PBC to build on debates and interactive
dialogues such as this. Timely advice and views from
the PBC to the Council enrich the Council's actions.
The valuable knowledge and insights developed by
the PBC and Peacebuilding Support Office should be
drawn on by other principal and subsidiary organs,
as well as United Nations agencies and departments.
We should not be hesitant to draw on the advantages
offered by each.

Fifthly, Indonesia supports the United Nations
focus on enhancing the participation of women in
peacebuilding. We commend the Security Council
for adopting the landmark resolution 1325 (2000). We
expect that the seven-point action plan for gender-
responsive peacebuilding will be implemented tangibly.
Indonesia is determined to furthering the participation
of women in post-conflict peacebuilding at home, in
the region and at the international level.

The increased participation of women in
peacebuilding must go beyond fulfilling quotas, and
should also focus on bolstering capacity-building
support for women's participation, particularly in
developing countries. In this context, we also stress
the importance of drawing on the available capacities
of women civilian experts of the global South in the
United Nations global civilian capacities system
currently being developed.

As the world's third largest democracy, which
has traversed its own transition to a well-functioning
democratic State, Indonesia bears witness to the
different challenges and opportunities in building peace.
We have directly seen the fruit of national capacity
development. We have achieved major national reforms,
including in the rule of law, governance, human rights,
political processes, elections, media development, civil
society and women's participation.

Finally, I should like to reiterate Indonesia's
unwavering support for the PBC in helping it to
undertake robust and responsive actions to the needs of
affected countries.
