Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to take the floor on
behalf of the 120 States members of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).

First of all, on behalf of the States members of the
Movement, we convey our respect to His Excellency
Mr. Jacek Czaputowicz, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Poland, and, at the same time, express
our appreciation to his delegation for convening this
open debate. We also thank the Secretary-General and
the Director-General of the International Committee of
the Red Cross their invaluable briefings.

We live in a world today that faces multiple
and complex emerging threats and challenges to
international peace and security, some of which are
the result of war or protracted conflicts. In the context
of armed conflicts, we have seen how the suffering of
innocent civilians, in particular the most vulnerable,
caught up in the middle of armed conflicts, can be
further worsened by deliberate, indiscriminate and, in
some cases, systematic attacks, in clear violation of the
norms of international humanitarian law.

During the Movement's eighteenth Mid-term
Ministerial Conference, held in April in Baku, the
Ministers stressed that the protection of civilians is
the primary responsibility of the host country, while
recognizing that such a task is also mandated in a
number of United Nations peacekeeping operations, to
which they reaffirmed their commitment.

As stated in the concept note (S/2018/444, annex)
for this open debate, the protection of civilians is one of
the core issues on the agenda ofthe Security Council, as
a result of the significant challenges faced by civilians
in conflict-affected countries, which range from threats
or attacks against them to forced displacement, food
insecurity or the need for humanitarian assistance.
For that reason, this organ must ensure, among other
things, that the norms of international law, including
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, are upheld and respected at all times,

particularly in the context of armed conflict.

NAM. takes this opportunity to call upon all parties
to armed conflict to comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law, including the principles
of taking precautions in attacks, proportionality and
distinction, by, inter alia, prohibiting the targeting
of civilian populations, civilian property and certain
special property during an armed conflict and obliging
parties to any conflict to ensure overall protection
against the dangers arising from military operations for
civilian facilities, hospitals, means oftransportation and
relief materials, and distributing such relief materials.

Moreover, the member States of the Movement
stress the fact that humanitarian agencies and their
personnel must respect international humanitarian law
and the laws of the countries in which they carry out their
work, as well as the Guiding Principles of Humanitarian
Assistance, as set forth in the annex to General
Assembly resolution 46/182, among which figure
humanity, neutrality and impartiality. Furthermore,
they must uphold the principle of non-interference in
the internal affairs of the host countries and respect
the sovereignty, territorial integrity, national unity and
independence of States.

The States members of the Movement would like
to recall that 88 per cent of peacekeeping personnel
deployed in the field come from NAM. countries and
are carrying out mandates focused on the protection of
civilians. As we have always emphasized, the fulfilment
of the mandates, among other things, depends upon
effective tripartite coordination among the troop- and
police-contributing countries, the Security Council and
the Secretariat. In any case, the protection of civilians
can be ensured only if peacekeepers are fully enabled
to operate under the highest moral standards at all
times. In that regard, the importance of every measure
needed to ensure their safety and security cannot
be overemphasized.

In conclusion, the 120 NAM. member States
categorically condemn all acts of violence, attacks and
threats against civilian populations, which in certain
instances may amount to war crimes, and deplore their
medium- and long-term consequences. They also stress
the importance of ensuring that those responsible are
held accountable before the law, in order to break any
cycle of impunity and send a clear and united message
of zero tolerance for such despicable acts.

