Mr. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I thank you, Sir,
for having convened today's meeting. I would also
like to thank the three briefers for their valuable and
sobering contributions. It is hard to disagree with the
statements made by Under-Secretary-General Feltman
and Assistant Secretary-General Simonovie that the
window of opportunity is very small and may be closing
very fast.

Following the diplomatic efforts in the Normandy
format aimed at finding a solution to the Ukrainian
conflict, a package of measures for the implementation
of the Minsk agreements of 5 and 19 September 2014
was agreed upon on 12 February. The Security Council
put its weight behind thOse agreements by adopting
resolution 2202 (2014), on 17 February.

Since then, some positive developments have taken
place, including the initial exchange of prisoners and a
significant reduction in the death toll. However, further
steps are urgently needed. All illegally detained persons
must be released, including the Ukrainian pilot Nadiya
Savchenko, who spent more than 80 days on a hunger
strike and whose health is close to a point of no return.

Serious concerns remain regarding the verification
of the withdrawal of heavy weaponry and continuing
instances of ceasefire violations, including near
Mariupol and Donetsk airport.

We note the assessment by the Special Monitoring
Mission that attacks on Government-controlled towns
east of Mariupol may indicate an attempt to test the
eastern defences of the city. We stress that any attempts
by the Russia-backed militants to seek to gain control of
additional territory will be a clear breach of the Minsk
agreements and will seriously undermine all efforts to
promote a sustainable political solution.

Monitors of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) continue to face severe
restrictions. Russia-backed armed groups continue to
deny access, including to Shyrokyne and Kruzhylivka;
they also continue to harass and threaten the personnel
of the Special Monitoring Mission. That is clearly
unacceptable and a violation of the Minsk agreements
and their implementation measures.

The OSCE Mission has not been provided with the
requested detailed information, including the inventory
of weapons, withdrawal routes and concentrations
points, as per the Minsk agreements. Valid questions
therefore remain regarding whether the illegal militants
are withdrawing their weaponry or merely regrouping
under the guise of doing so.

The situation is further aggravated by the fact that
OSCE border-monitoring activities remain restricted to
40 metres out of some 400 kilometres. As we know,
Russia has repeatedly blocked efforts to expand border
monitoring.

It is paramount that Russia stop destabilizing the
situation in eastern Ukraine and stop supporting illegal
armed groups operating there. Its soldiers must be
withdrawn from the territory of Ukraine. It must put an
end to the movement of mercenaries across its borders
into Ukrainian territory and stop support to the illegal
militants. Russia should also use its influence with the
illegal armed groups to ensure that the ceasefire is fully
and unconditionally respected and that the withdrawal
of the heavy weapons can be duly monitored.

The OSCE Monitoring Mission should be provided
full and unhindered access to all areas. It must be
able to exercise its mandate independently, without
obstruction or interference. We look forward to the
early extension of the Mission's mandate for a 12-month
period. Adequate financing and resourcing must be
ensured for the Mission to carry out its mandate.

Civilians have borne the brunt of this conflict,
which started a year ago with the illegal annexation of
Crimea in blatant breach of the Charter of the United
Nations. The false pretext of defending the rights
of Russian speakers was used to invade Crimea and
promote separatism in eastern Ukraine. While fighting
imagined human rights violations, Russia and the illegal
militants it supports have caused a real humanitarian
crisis and real and dramatic human rights violations in
the regions affected by the illegal actions.

Normal life in those regions has been disrupted,
leading to displacement, destruction and deaths. The
numbers were given by John Ging of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). At
least 1 million have resettled within the country, placing
a heavy burden on the authorities as well as on local
communities. Assistant Secretary-General Simonovie
has spoken about that. The humanitarian crisis is most
acute, aggravated by the cold winter. Russia and the
illegal armed groups it supports bear full responsibility
for the devastation that has befallen Ukraine.

We welcome the efforts of OCHA, United Nations
agencies and other international organizations aimed
at alleviating the suffering of the people in eastern
Ukraine. It is imperative that all humanitarian
actors should be provided unfettered access to all
affected areas for a prompt and unimpeded delivery
of humanitarian assistance. Humanitarian assistance
should be provided in line with international law and in
full respect okaraine's sovereignty. Russia's so-called
humanitarian convoys remain a cause of concern, as
they are operating in violation of the accepted norms
of humanitarian assistance and in breach of Ukraine's
borders and sovereignty.

Reports of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights have repeatedly
documented the catastrophic breakdown of the rule of
law and ongoing massive human-rights violations in
the militant-held areas, including abductions, arbitrary
detentions, beatings, torture and summary executions.
There are also numerous instances of serious violations
of international humanitarian law, to which Assistant
Secretary-General Simonovie just referred. The
capture and parading of Ukrainian prisoners of war
by the militants constitute a possible war crime. The
capture of Donetsk airport revealed bodies of executed
Ukrainian servicemen with their hands tied behind
their backs, as documented in the latest reports.

Attacks against journalists and media outlets
continue. At least 60 cases of attacks against the media
offices were recorded, and 78 journalists have been held
by armed groups since March last year, according to the
report. The whereabouts of some remain unknown.

The latest human rights monitoring mission report
speaks eloquently of the disturbing human rights
situation in occupied Crimea. The Tatar community,
those who opposed the sham referendum a year ago,
religious communities and minorities are facing
threats, harassment, intimidation, abductions and
forced disappearances.

Since the annexation by the Russian Federation,
the public space in Crimea has been shrinking. The
fundamental freedoms of expression and assembly
have been severely curtailed. All those holding
Ukrainian passports are facing restrictions in
exercising their political and civil rights, limited access
to social services, tight quotas for residence permits
and loss of jobs and homes. Out of 600 schools that
offered instruction fully in Ukrainian, not a single
one remains. Only 20 schools on the peninsula have
separate Ukrainian classes - violating the rights ofthe
Ukrainian community in Crimea.

Religious communities have also been affected.
Priests, imams and representatives of other religious
communities are being threatened with prosecution,
detained and harassed, with their prayer houses and
monuments desecrated. People are forced to adopt
Russian citizenship or lose their property, rights and
income.

Crimean Tatars are in an especially serious
condition, as they have no other home but Crimea.
Their leaders are evicted from the Mejlis, threatened,
prosecuted and deported. Major figures, such as
Mustafa J emilev and Refat Chubarov, have been barred
from re-entering Crimea. The Deputy Chairman Ahtem
Ciygoz is being detained along with a number of other
activists. A number of activists are still missing after
being abducted as early as May last year. The son the
Crimean Tatar leader Jemilev remains in detention in
the Russian Federation under trumped up charges.

Media freedom is under siege in Crimea. The
broadcasting of the Ukrainian television channels and
Ukrainian Internet have been discontinued. Journalists
have been threatened, assaulted and attacked.
Investigations have been invoked against the Crimean
Tatar newspapers.

In spite of Russia's allegations to the contrary and
in spite of the extremely difficult circumstances, the
Ukrainian authorities are continuing the necessary
reform processes. We welcome the Ukrainian President's
decree on setting up a constitutional commission,
establishing a national council for reform, creating an
anti-corruption agency and drafting a national human-
rights strategy, which speaks to the Government's
commitment to human rights for all. Those efforts must
be wholeheartedly encouraged and supported. The
Ukrainian people deserve to have reforms put in place
expeditiously and effectively. The Maidan events were
not about extremism, as some continue to allege. It was
about the passionate desire of the Ukrainian people
for reform and for a clear break with a past marked by
abuses, corruption, cronyism and graft.

It is also imperative to address the issue ofimpunity
for serious crimes and human-rights violations,
including in Crimea and the militant-held areas, which
have seen pervasive lawlessness and a total breakdown
of accountability. All perpetrators of the most serious
crimes, including the downing of Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17, must be held to account. We call on the
Ukrainian authorities to do their utmost in that regard.
We also urge Ukraine to complete its accession to the
Rome Statute. I would like to take this opportunity
to reiterate that no amnesty should be granted for
international crimes, including gross violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law.

My delegation would like to express its appreciation
for the engagement in Ukraine of the United Nations
and its agencies, and of the OSCE. We look forward
to continued reporting, including the spot reports of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, on human rights in Ukraine,
including Crimea. The United Nations, the OSCE and
their missions should be given full and unhindered
access to all areas in Ukraine, including Crimea. The
international community, United Nations agencies and
humanitarian actors must step up their efforts to help
Ukraine cope with the enormous challenges posed by
this year-long foreign-sponsored conflict.

The key to the stabilization of the situation in
eastern Ukraine lies in the full implementation of
the September 2014 Minsk agreements, as reaffirmed
on 12 February. The people of Ukraine have heard
enough talk from the international community. The
time has come to walk the walk. Russia has caused and
sponsored this war, and it remains in Russia's hands to
put an end to it by fully and unconditionally abiding
by the Minsk agreements, and using its influence on
the illegal militants to do the same. Ukraine's political
independence, unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity are non-negotiable, and must be respected by
all members of the international community without
exception.

