The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Argentina.

I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for presenting the report ofthe
Secretary-General (S/2013/444) on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We also welcome the participation of Mr. Ivan Mrkie,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Mr. Enver
Hoxhaj.

I wish, first of all, to highlight the fundamental
role that the United Nations plays in Kosovo through
UNMIK, which is to promote security, stability and
respect for human rights and to cooperate with the
Kosovo Force and the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), while maintaining a
neutral position vis-a-vis the status of the territory and
operating under the auspices of the United Nations.

Argentina voted in favour of resolution 1244 (1999)
when it was a member of the Security Council previously.
We believe that it continues to be the international
legal basis applicable in Kosovo for achieving a
comprehensive solution through a cooperative political
process and effective negotiations on the basis of
good faith. Once again, we are pleased at the signing
of the first agreement on principles governing the
normalization of relations in the context of the process
of the high-level dialogue under the auspices of the
European Union. We trust that the agreement will
contribute to the stabilization of the situation through
compromise, confidence and dialogue. We hope that
meetings will continue to be held between the parties
in order to make progress in the implementation of
the agreement and accelerate the political resolution
of pending issues. In that framework, Serbia's efforts
towards the normalization of relations deserve our
special recognition.

We encourage the parties to continue along the path
of progress in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999),
and we also encourage them to implement the letter of
the agreement by overcoming the wounds of the past in
a peaceful manner in a relationship of trust.

While we are encouraged by the fact that the
overall security situation in Kosovo was peaceful
during the reporting period, we should not fail to note
the security situation in northern Mitrovica, which
calls for coordinated action so that the problems there
can be appropriately resolved in order to prevent
future tensions. The important work of UNMIK is
particularly prominent when it comes to providing full
support to political processes, giving special attention
to issues related to the agreement of 19 April. Once
again, we encourage the finding of specific practical
solutions aimed at preventing tensions and ensuring
that UNMIK continues to play its indispensable role
in the field to prevent conflicts and conduct mediation
and facilitation, as noted by the Secretary-General in
his report.

We are very pleased with the progress made in
the reconstruction and protection of cultural and
religious heritage, which is one of UNMIK's priorities,
aimed at ensuring the continuity of ongoing activities
that contribute to genuine reconciliation between
communities. Argentina believes that it is extremely
important for there to be full respect for the human
rights of displaced persons returning to their places of
origin, so that they can have access to their substantive
rights and not be the subject of discrimination. It is
fundamental to continue working on ensuring the
return and permanent reintegration of internally
displaced persons, particularly by facilitating their
access to housing, basic services and jobs, as well as
through the issuance of documents on their civil status
and the avoidance of incidents heightening insecurity.

UNMIK's technical assistance is of great
importance, as is continuing to give priority to efforts
aimed at erasing the traces of the legacy of conflict,
which include ongoing cases of disappeared persons, as
well as efforts to promote and protect all human rights.
Impunity must not be allowed to be a response to major
violations of human rights. We highlight UNMIK's
work in its support of the rule of law, especially
cooperation with all interested parties when it comes to
the major problems in the field. As appropriately noted
by the Secretary-General in his report, it is also key
for the international presence in Kosovo to continue
strengthening mutual cooperation with a common
end of assisting in the establishment of appropriate
conditions for the next stages of application of the
19 April agreement.

Finally, we wish to highlight the work done by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Farid Zarif, to promote security, stability and
respect for human rights in Kosovo in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999).

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.45 pm.
