Mr. Bhattarai (Nepal): I wish to begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and your proud
country, Mauritius, on assuming the presidency of the
Council for this very first month of the year 2002.

I would also like to congratulate and wish all
success to Bulgaria, Cameroon, Guinea, Mexico and
Syria as new members of the Council and to express
sincere appreciation to the Council's outgoing
members, Bangladesh, Jamaica, Mali, Tunisia and
Ukraine, for their contributions during their term in the
Council.

Mr. President, let me also thank you for your
initiative to hold during your presidency this important
public meeting on threats to international peace and
security caused by terrorist acts. I wonder what other
topic could be more timely than this subject of
paramount relevance and significance for us all,
especially in the aftermath of the horrendous terrorist
attacks of 11 September.

It has been the principled position of Nepal to
condemn terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
We believe there is no justification whatsoever to
condone any terrorist activity. With this firm
conviction in heart and mind, Nepal has categorically
supported the actions taken by the Security Council to
deal with terrorism, particularly its resolution 1373
(2001). In this spirit, my delegation fully endorses the
work the Counter-Terrorism Committee has
accomplished to date. Our sincere thanks are due to Sir
Jeremy Greenstock and other members of the
Committee's bureau, as well as to the members of the
technical team, for the professionalism and efficiency
with which the Committee is moving forward in an
exemplary fashion. We particularly appreciate the
efforts the Committee has made so far in ensuring that
transparency is maintained at the highest level, and we
sincerely hope it will continue as a distinct feature
throughout the Committee's work in future. I believe
the regular briefings play a crucial role also in building
a sense of ownership of the membership in the work of
the Committee, which is so crucial if we are striving to
achieve global success in tackling this menace of
terrorism.

I would like to emphasize that our support to the
work of the Security Council and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee is consistent with the firm
commitment of Nepal to fighting terrorism in all its
forms and at all levels and constitutes an important step
in our pursuit to realize that commitment.

At the national level, my country has become
prey to serious terrorist activities of the so-called
Maoist outfits for over five years now, which have
caused an irreparable loss of over 2,000 lives and
property and delayed the process of the country's
overall development. Left with no alternative,
particularly in the face of the Maoists' breach of good
faith in negotiations, a state of emergency has been
declared in accordance with the provisions of the
Nepalese Constitution. His Majesty's Government has
been fighting this domestic terrorism with the
promulgation of a Terrorism and Disruptive Activities
Control and Punishment Ordinance.

Thanks to our strong determination to support the
implementation of the provisions of resolution 1373
(2001) to the maximum extent possible, despite our
multiple difficulties, including those relating to
financial and technical aspects of compiling the actions
taken by various agencies of His Majesty's
Government, Nepal has submitted its report on time
pursuant to operative paragraph 6 of the resolution. I
will not recount the contents of the report here but
would like to state that, while the report may not be
comprehensive in terms of encapsulating all measures
that Nepal has taken to date to fight and contain
terrorism both at home and abroad, we believe it does
provide a sense of the magnitude of terrorism the
country is facing and an adequate outline of the steps
we have taken. With the assistance of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, we believe a more
comprehensive picture may well be developed in due
course. The forms of such assistance could be wide-
ranging and need to be identified and attended to with
utmost care and seriousness.

At the global level, Nepal is already a party to six
of the 12 international anti-terrorism conventions and
signatory to a seventh - the Convention for the
Suppression of Terrorist Bombings. Measures are being
taken to strengthen existing legal provisions and also to
prepare for our accession to the remaining anti-
terrorism conventions.

Let me take a few moments to highlight the
initiatives taken at the level of the region to which
Nepal belongs. It is important to note that, despite the
great sensitivities and the fragile atmosphere in South
Asia, the South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation (SAARC) has provided a valuable forum
for all its seven members - Bangladesh, Bhutan,
India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka - to
fight terrorism together. We in Nepal believe that this
regional forum has significant potential that will enable
us to see the light at the end of the tunnel of
uncertainty in the region. Nepal is proud to have been
engaged in the South Asian regional process of dealing
with terrorism.

South Asia, struck by the hard blows of terrorism,
has become fully aware of the magnitude of, and
potential threat posed by, this scourge. Prompted by a
strong awareness of the need to take action to deal with
terrorism at the regional level, we adopted the SAARC
Regional Convention on Suppression of Terrorism in
1987 in Kathmandu. It is important to note that, of the
seven regional instruments concluded to date around
the world, the SAARC Convention was one of the first
three concluded in the 1970s and 1980s.

Nepal has always been an active member of the
Association in the context of its endeavours to free the
region from the scourge of terrorism, and I am happy to
state that, while the third SAARC Summit in
Kathmandu in 1987 adopted the SAARC Convention
on Suppression of Terrorism, the eleventh SAARC
Summit, held in Kathmandu from 4 to 6 January 2002,
has given a forceful impetus to efforts to develop and
promulgate enabling legislation in all member States.

I wish to refer to certain relevant portions of the
Declaration adopted by the heads of State or
Government of the seven member States at the eleventh
SAARC Summit, as this is directly relevant to the
subject of today's open meeting.

In the Declaration, convinced that terrorism, in all
its forms and manifestations, is a challenge to all States
and to all of humanity and cannot be justified on
ideological, political, religious or on any other
grounds, the heads of State or Government agreed that
terrorism violates the fundamental values of the United
Nations Charter and of the SAARC Charter and
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security in the twenty-first
century.

Regarding ways of dealing with the problem of
terrorism, the heads of State or Government
emphasized the need for the urgent conclusion of a
comprehensive convention on combating international
terrorism. They also emphasized that international
cooperation to combat terrorism should be conducted
in conformity with the United Nations Charter,
international law and relevant international
conventions.

The heads of State or Government also made
specific reference to Security Council resolution 1373
(2001). The leaders reiterated their support for the
resolution and affirmed their determination to redouble
their efforts collectively, as well as individually, to
prevent and suppress terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, including through increased
cooperation and full implementation of the relevant
international conventions relating to terrorism to which
they are party.

In this context, they called on all States to prevent
and suppress the financing of terrorist acts by
criminalizing the collection of funds for such acts and
refraining from organizing, instigating, assisting or
participating in terrorist acts in States or acquiescing to
organized activities within its territory directed towards
the commission of such acts. The leaders reaffirmed
that the fight against terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations has to be comprehensive and sustained.
All seven leaders of South Asia were unanimous
in recognizing the distant but ominous link between
terrorism, drug trafficking, money-laundering and other
transnational crimes, and emphasized the need to
coordinate efforts at the national and regional levels to
strengthen the global response to this serious challenge
and the threat to international security. They called
upon the international community to assist member
States of SAARC to deal effectively with the adverse
economic effects of terrorism in general and to meet
rising insurance and security-related costs in particular.

In the same vein, the heads of State or
Government reaffirmed their commitment to the
SAARC Regional Convention on Suppression of
Terrorism, which, among other things, recognizes the
seriousness of the problem of terrorism as it affects the
security, stability and development of the region. They
also reiterated their firm resolve to accelerate the
enactment of enabling legislation within a definite time
frame for the full implementation of the Convention,
together with strengthening of the SAARC Terrorist
Offence Monitoring Desk and the SAARC Drug
Offences Monitoring Desk, in an effective manner.

Nepal believes that the war on terror should be a
dual one, aiming to achieve both peace and
development, for it to succeed. Deprivation,
discrimination and disputes create an environment
which generates and fuels the majority of social
difficulties as well as evils such as terrorism. The
problem of borderlessness requires that an international
alliance devise and implement commensurate remedies.
It is only with sustained commitment and forthcoming
international cooperation that we can win this war. We
must win the war on dehumanizing poverty, the war on
ignorance and the war on exclusion. This is a basic
prerequisite for durable peace and development.

To conclude, over and above Nepal's efforts at
the national level to effectively deal with the problem,
Nepal is working within the framework of SAARC to
eradicate the scourge of terrorism from the face of
South Asia. We firmly believe that success will not be
far off if, as the SAARC heads of State or Government
have envisaged, a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism is concluded without delay.
Nepal is committed to moving ahead collectively in
pursuit of our common goal of making our homes,
societies and planet free, prosperous, secure and
peaceful.

