Mr. Scharia: Allow me to begin by thanking the
Ethiopian presidency and the Russian Federation for
supporting the inclusion of this topic on the Council's
agenda and for inviting the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) to address
the Council.

On behalf of CTED, I wish to congratulate Under-
Secretary-General Voronkov on his appointment as
head of the Office of Counter-Terrorism. CTED looks
forward to strengthening its partnership with him and
his Office.

Sixteen years have passed since the adoption of
resolution 1373 (2001), and terrorism today still affects
us all. No single country can claim to be invulnerable
to it.

As the Council is aware, since its establishment
CTED has been tasked with providing the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) with neutral and
independent expert assessments of Member States'
implementation of that resolution and subsequent
resolutions on counter-terrorism. One of the principal
tools it uses is the country visit, a highly collaborative
process that involves experts from many partner
organizations. The visits are designed to help Member
States develop an effective road map while also avoiding
duplication of effort.

Our assessments bring to the CTC and all our
partners in New York and in the field the most updated
assessment of Member States' counter-terrorism
situation. They also serve as a practical way to discuss
current trends with national experts and to advise
Member States on developing and implementing
national counter-terrorism strategies.

Since the beginning of the year, CTED has visited
16 States. The full list can be found in my written
remarks, which will be shared after this meeting. Seven
further visits are scheduled for the remainder of this
year, more than in any other equivalent period since the
Committee's creation.

CTED has now conducted 133 Visits covering
96 States, including 45 visits since its previous review.
Much has been accomplished through this process.
New national and regional laws have been enacted, new
institutions established and capacities strengthened.
This progress reflects not only the impact of resolution
1373 (2001), but also the determined efforts of Member
States to comply with their obligations.

And yet many States still do not have all
counter-terrorism measures in place. Many CTC
recommendations still await action.

As the Council is aware, the recommendations are
usually divided into two categories: those that require
technical assistance and those that do not. Over the years,
many of our partners have delivered technical assistance
on the basis of the Committee's recommendations and
integrated them into their work programmes. However,
the Committee's recommendations could be acted upon
much more rapidly and much more widely.

The establishment of the Office of Counter-
Terrorism, with a strong mandate on prevention of
violent extremism and capacity-building, provides
an opportunity to strengthen the links even further
and shorten the time period between our assessments
and the delivery of assistance. We look forward to
discussing ways to strengthen those links with Under-
Secretary-General Voronkov and his Office.

But let us make no mistake: as much as we invest in
capacity-building, we should avoid any perception that
technical assistance is a precondition for implementing
binding Council resolutions. The Council may wish to
consider ways to encourage States to implement CTC
recommendations, especially in cases where technical
assistance is not the reason for the lack ofimplementation
or when States are visited more than once.

These are not regular times. The Council has adopted
six new resolutions on terrorism in a short period oftime,
an unprecedented achievement and show of consensus.
CTED has contributed to their elaboration. One notable
example is CTED's development of the comprehensive
framework on counter-narratives, which served as the
foundation for resolution 2354 (2017). CTED, relying
on its thematic expertise and guided by resolution
2129 (2013), will continue to advice the CTC on the
implementation of these resolutions. CTED will also
promote them. It will also continue to integrate them
into its work streams and identify challenges as well as
practical ways to overcome them.

In this regard, I would note that CTED recently
updated its technical guide, which serves to strengthen
and deepen CTC assessments and helps Member States
prepare for them. It contains the most updated advice

on practical ways to implement all the new resolutions.
It is now available for download in English on the
CTC website.

The new resolutions also require CTED to prepare
analytical reports in a wide variety of areas that
require new and constantly developed expertise. New
areas for CTED include foreign terrorist fighters, the
use of digital evidence and battlefield evidence, new
border-control measures, including advance passenger
information and biometrics, the use of the Internet
by terrorists, the role of women and the human rights
aspects of all these issues.

All United Nations bodies can benefit from CTED
assessment and analysis. Let me stress that most CTED
work products, including in particular its thematic and
regional analysis, are not confidential. As demonstrated
in the multiple open briefings we held, including
meetings on Iraq, CTED can and does share its work.

Since its last review, CTED is also mandated to
identify emerging issues, trends and developments
related to resolution 1535 (2004). Our cooperation
with the Monitoring Team and the joint drafting of the
five reports of the Secretary-General required under
resolution 2253 (2015), as well as periodic exchanges
between the two expert bodies, have allowed us to make
a valuable analysis of the threat and Member States'
responses and to enrich our work on identifying trends
and developments. It also allows us better to understand
the challenges that Member States face. We are thankful
to the Monitoring Team and to the Committee for their
cooperation with us.

CTED continues to strengthen its capacity to
identify trends and developments, also through its global
research network. CTED is able to provide the CTC
with research-based policy advice on a range of issues,
from the prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration
of returnees and the protection of critical infrastructure
to the effectiveness of counter-messaging.

CTED also takes great care to ensure that identified
trends and developments and the threat assessments
provided by the Monitoring Team are thoroughly
and consistently integrated into its assessments. I
should note also that CTED's analysis of trends and
developments is free of confidentiality requirements.

We need to explore ways together to ensure
that the entire United Nations system benefits from
CTED's analysis, as it is probably the most updated
and comprehensive evidence-based analysis in the
United Nations system on counter-terrorism capacity,
challenges, trends and developments.

Over the past 12 months, CTED has organized
four open briefings and four special meetings. These
meetings serve at least three important purposes.

First, they bring transparency to the Committee's
work. On numerous occasions, Member States, notably
States not serving on the Council, have thanked us for
these meetings and expressed a strong wish that they
be continued.
Secondly, they enable the CTC to forge new
partnerships with international, regional and
subregional organizations, civil society and even with
private-sector actors.

The meeting held yesterday on aviation security
(see S/PV.8057) is one example of such partnership.
The establishment of the Global Internet Forum by
four major companies and its partnership with the CTC
is another.

Lastly, these meetings play an important role in
policy formulation. Resolution 2370 (2017), on small
arms and light weapons, is a good example of the
effectiveness of that practice and its role in supporting
policy formulation both at the CTC and at the Council.
CTED remains committed to our contribution by
assessing Member States' implementation, facilitating
technical assistance delivery, identifying trends and
good practices and advising and promoting the policy
decisions of the Committee and the resolutions of
the Council.

However, those tasks are also stretching our
capacity and resources to the maximum. It is therefore
CTED's hope that the Council will provide it with the
resources required to fulfil its significantly expanded
mandate. The CTED Executive Director Designate,
Ms. Michele Coninsx, intends to submit a report to the
CTC, setting out CTED's vision of how the CTC, the
Council and the entire United Nations can maximize
the impact of CTED and benefit from its work. The
debate today serves an important function and will
guide us in drafting that report.

Together, we have achieved a great deal since
the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001). However, the
terrorist threat continues to evolve at an alarming
pace. Terrorist organizations continue to demonstrate
flexibility and the capacity to quickly adapt their
methods. They are also particularly adept at exploiting
new technologies on the Internet - whether to spread
their messages, recruit new members, or finance, plan
and perpetrate attacks.

More than ever before, the Committee needs a
dynamic, agile and responsive body of experts to
support and promote its work. CTED will continue to
do its utmost to fulfil that role, and is honoured to serve
this cause.

