Mr. Amorim (Brazil): In the first months of this
year we witnessed some positive developments in the
peace process in Angola. The Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation legalized UNITA as a political
party, nominated provincial governors from UNITA and
began the process of appointing ambassadors from that
movement. The special status of Mr. Savimbi as the
leader of the largest opposition party was promulgated by
President Jose Eduardo dos Santos. The demilitarization
of the civilian population was intensifying.

At the beginning of June we were at another critical
juncture in the tortuous Angolan peace process. To our
disappointment, the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol was once again off track due to non-compliance
by the leadership of UNITA. The Security Council then
had no choice but to adopt resolution 1173 (1998) on 12
June, condemning the leadership of UNITA and holding
it responsible for its failure to implement fully its
obligations under the Lusaka Protocol. By the same
resolution the Council imposed financial sanctions upon
UNITA and adopted measures intended to curb official
contacts and trade benefiting its leadership, in the hope
that these would have an impact on UNITA's attitude.

The untimely accident which took the life of Maitre
Beye created a vacuum which affected the process
negatively. Thus, despite the strong action taken by the

 

Security Council, the situation in Angola has deteriorated
further, as stated in the report of the Secretary-General
contained in document S/ 1998/723.

UNITA continues to refuse to transfer localities in
Angola to Government control and has been busy trying to
retake by force those it has already transferred. These are
only two aspects of the multifaceted situation, which is
characterized by deterioration and which has been referred
to by the representative of Angola.

A few positive signs in the Angolan situation, albeit
modest ones, were noticed after the arrival in that country
on 31 July of Mr. Brahimi, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General. He met with the Government and with
the leadership of UNITA and is touring countries in the
region.

Hopefully, the Joint Commission will be able to
resume its work constructively and a systematic dialogue
will be re-established. But let me stress once again that if
UNITA does not fulfil its part of the peace agreement soon,
we will arrive at a situation in which the very presence of
a Security Council-mandated force in Angola may come
into question.

My delegation agrees with the proposed extension of
the mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Angola (MONUA) for 30 days. We will thus follow the
recommendation made by the Secretary-General in his
report. As to the draft resolution itself - in favour of
which my delegation will vote - let me highlight the fact
that it adequately stresses the main responsibility of UNITA
for the setbacks in the peace process. It also appropriately
calls upon the international community to observe fully the
provisions of resolutions 1173 (1998), 1127 (1997) and 864
(1993). We believe that only by taking such a firm stand
will the Council be able to influence positively the actual
course of events in Angola and contribute to the long-
sought peace in that country.

