Mr. Rapp: I thank participants for their
comments today and for their strong support of the
mission of the Special Court for Sierra Leone. It is
profoundly appreciated by those of us who are
involved in this effort, and we look forward to, in some
cases, visiting their capitals and discussing further the
work of the Special Court.

There was, I recall, one question, from the
representative of the Russian Federation. I think it is
appropriate that I make a response. The question drew
attention to the absence of Mr. Taylor from the opening
of the trial, this Monday, 4 June.

I have been involved in this field for several
years, previously at the Rwanda Tribunal. I will say
that it is not uncommon for individuals who are
accused to absent themselves from the proceedings. In
a few cases, individuals have elected to absent
themselves from entire trials. The practice of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone and that of international
tribunals - consistent with the practice in many
countries - is not to force such individuals to attend
but to make certain, by seeking to communicate with
the accused, that the decision to absent himself or
herself from the proceeding is voluntary and that it is
understood that, in the absence of the accused, the
proceeding will nonetheless continue.

The arrangements for representation by defence
counsel provide that defence counsel is assigned to
represent individuals for whom the counsel appears.
That assignment carries with it a solemn responsibility
to continue in the proceeding and to represent the
accused to the best of the counsel's ability, even if the
counsel is not as fully instructed as the counsel might
wish.

I should now like to refer to the events and the
particular issues raised by Mr. Taylor and his counsel.
They have previously raised issues regarding the need
for additional time and resources, to which the Court
and the Registry have responded in the past. The Court
has twice provided additional time for defence
preparation. The opening of the trial was delayed from
April to June. Additionally, by a recent decision, well
before 4 June, the judges of the Trial Chamber
provided an extra three weeks to work with his counsel
to prepare for the calling of the first witnesses.

There is, or course, the issue of the adequacy of
the representation and investigative assistance
available to Mr. Taylor. Those issues have been raised
with the Registry on numerous occasions. It is to be
noted here that - as I said in my remarks - the
accused has claimed indigence, and therefore his legal
services are being provided at the expense of the Court.
The Registry has entered into a contract with his chief
counsel that provides for substantial augmentation of
the resources available, exceeding those of other
accused before the Court. He has access to a counsel, a
co-counsel and several legal assistants to investigators,
both domestic and international - all paid for by the
Court from its funds. There is an office in The Hague,
an office in Freetown and, with the assistance of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia, now an office in
Monrovia. As the Registrar has commented, the legal
services available here exceed, or at least equal, those
provided at other tribunals.

I believe that there are now some practical issues
that the judges and the Registry are working through,
with regard to, perhaps, a new co-counsel coming into
the case to replace one who is departing. We believe
that those issues can be resolved in good faith and will
be resolved.

I think that the whole issue of legal representation
is very important as we look at the voluntary
contributions and the base of the Court. Clearly, our
Court's ability to provide legal assistance to indigent
accused cannot be constrained by the absence of
resources. It is critically important that the Court have
the resources necessary to provide an effective defence
for each of the accused individuals. That has been the
situation since the time of the establishment of the
Court, and it needs to be the situation until its very end.
That is why we continue to urge Member States to
support the Court and to provide the resources
necessary not just for investigation and prosecution,
but also for defence representation. At the end of the
day, what is most important is not only that a trial be
fair, but also that it be seen to be fair by the victims
and the whole world community.

I thank the members of the Security Council, as
well as the other representatives who have come
forward to make their representations and submissions.
We look forward to continuing our work at the Special
Court for Sierra Leone, following up on the resolutions
of the Council to establish justice and bring closure
with regard to the grave crimes committed on the
territory of Sierra Leone after November 1996.

