The Kingdom of the Netherlands congratulates Saint Vincent and the Grenadines on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of November. In addition, the Kingdom of the Netherlands expresses its gratitude to the presidency for convening today's timely and important meeting on peacebuilding and sustaining peace, with a focus on the contemporary drivers of conflict and insecurity. As we know, there are myriad of drivers for conflict and insecurity - and all of these drivers are exacerbated by the impact of the coronavirus. Besides a tragic loss of life, the pandemic heightens tensions in already fragile areas, puts additional pressures on human rights in certain societies, increases public discontent and puts gains made in the area of peacebuilding at risk. Now more than ever, we need an effective and strong United Nations. For the Kingdom of the Netherlands, three elements are of crucial importance for the discussion today: first, United Nations reform; secondly, financing for peacebuilding and, thirdly, mental health and psycho-social support. First, with regard to United Nations reforms, there is a clear need for increased cross-pillar cooperation, including on the humanitarian, development and peace nexus, to achieve sustainable peacebuilding goals. Operational coherence and parallel progress on development, security and human rights are essential to achieving sustainable peacebuilding goals. Along this line, United Nations actors in the field must pursue cooperation and partnership under the guidance of the Resident Coordinator. The effectiveness of joint coordination is illustrated by the Peacebuilding Fund, of which the Kingdom of the Netherlands is one of the largest donors. Secondly, regarding financing for peacebuilding, the Kingdom of the Netherlands appreciates that this is a key issue when it comes to peacebuilding efforts. Unfortunately, peacebuilding efforts remain greatly underfinanced, although needs continue to rise. We must come together and take action to ensure sustainable and robust financing in the area of peacebuilding. The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes the recommendations set out in the 2020 report of the Secretary-General on building and sustaining peace (S/2020/773), and specifically supports the importance of financing mechanisms that, when appropriate, ensure a smooth transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding. There is value in new funding initiatives such as an annual pledging conference, as well as further action-based discussions on financing and good peacebuilding donorship. Tangible follow-up to the Secretary-General's proposals could also be introduced in those discussions. Finally, and importantly, it is key to highlight the element of mental health and psychosocial support. As also becomes clear from the worldwide impact of the pandemic, mental and psychosocial distress at the individual and community levels make sustaining social cohesion and peace increasingly challenging. Structurally integrating mental health and psychosocial support into the building and sustaining of peace is of crucial importance in mitigating and avoiding cycles of conflict, countering disintegration and increasing the effectiveness of peacebuilding efforts. We cannot build peace on broken minds and broken communities. We look forward to continuing to work with Member States, actors of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture, civil society organizations and other partners to make progress on these important topics.
