Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Mladenov for his informative
briefing on the situation in the Middle East and the
occupied Palestinian territories, and on the state of
Palestinian-Israeli relations. The Special Coordinator
makes it very clear that negative trends have the upper
hand today with regard to a settlement in the Middle
East, in which we see a logic based on violence whose
victims are the civilian population. The latest events
confirm the fragility and volatility of the situation.
We firmly condemn the firing of rockets from Gaza
towards Israeli towns, which has killed civilians, and
any kind of terrorism or indiscriminate attacks. We call
on all the parties to refrain from using force or taking
unilateral steps, including illegal settlement activity
and provocative rhetoric.

Today, when the Middle East and North Africa
continue to be troubled by acute conflicts in Syria,
Yemen and Libya, the lack of progress in the resolution
of the central problem of Palestine is deeply alarming.
The current status quo is not viable. We have no right to
put up with this state of affairs. There is an alternative.
It involves ramping up our collective efforts to relaunch
the negotiation process aimed at realizing a two-State
solution based on two States, Palestine and Israel,
coexisting in peace and security, within internationally
recognized borders.

We have a difficult issue on our agenda, that
of reviving the channels for dialogue. We urge the
Palestinians and Israelis to focus on a negotiating
track based on a generally recognized international
legal framework that includes the relevant Security
Council resolutions, the Madrid principles, including
the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the road map of the Middle East Quartet of
international mediators. The Quartet's 2016 report is
still relevant, with its clear outline of the steps needed
to overcome the negative trends that are obstructing a
Middle East settlement. Any viable plans to achieve a
comprehensive solution in the Middle East must start
from those multilateral decisions and take into account
the opinion of the Arab world as reflected in the Arab
Peace Initiative, adopted at the Arab League summit in
2002. That is a precondition for any peace process to
have effective results.

Russia will continue to take steps to restore
positive momentum and a positive agenda to the
Palestinian-Israeli question. Our proposal for holding
a summit in Russia between the leaders of Palestine
and Israel remains on the table. We believe that
regional players, particularly Egypt and Jordan, have
an important role to play. In our view, the most recent
intra-Palestinian meeting in Moscow in February
represented a contribution to the efforts to overcome
the schism in the Palestinian ranks. We emphasize once
again that international and regional steps to achieve
an intra-Palestinian reconciliation will have effect
only if they are undertaken in coordination with the
legitimate Administration of the State of Palestine led
by President Abbas.

We believe that it is essential to ensure that the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) can function fully.
It is a critical mechanism for reducing the burdens on
the Palestinian refugees in the Middle East who have
been forced to leave their homes because of war and
conflicts. For its part, Russia will continue to help
Palestinians both through its contributions to UNRWA's
budget and bilaterally. We believe the Agency should
continue to be an important and effective mechanism
for helping Palestinian refugees until a lasting solution
to the refugee problem is found. We see no other way of
alleviating the situation of the refugees themselves or
of the countries hosting them.

History has shown that only a negotiated settlement
can guarantee that any resulting agreement will
last, which is why all our efforts must be focused
on relaunching a political dialogue between the
Palestinians and Israelis. In the framework of that
dialogue, we will have to work to resolve the complex
final-status issues that include the status of Jerusalem,
refugees and borders, as well as fundamental aspects
of security. The principle of multilateralism, mutually
respectful dialogue based on compromise and the quest
for negotiated solutions must define the paradigm for
solving the problems in relations between Israel and the
Arab world.

Unilateral steps, such as the recognition of Israeli
sovereignty over the Golan Heights, do not change the
status of those territories, which is determined by the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council. The status
of those territories is the subject of direct dialogue
between Syria and Israel, which was under way
until very recently. Such an approach is determined
and clearly set out by Secretary-General and the
overwhelming majority of States, and fully corresponds
to the resolutions that have been adopted by consensus
in this very Chamber.

There is no doubt that no one party alone will be
able to solve the complex of problems in the Middle
East. Individual efforts need to be pooled; only a
broad and inclusive international coalition will be
able to overcome the threat of terrorism. Only active
international cooperation, based on common rules, will
allow us to resolve the many regional conflicts we face,
including that between Palestine and Israel. We call on
everyone to engage in that interaction and cooperation.

