Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): Firstly, my delegation would like to thank
the Secretary-General for the Eleventh Progress Report on
the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia
(UNOMIL) (S/l995/473).

After considering this report, my delegation would
like to express its regret that no significant progress has
been achieved in Liberia and that the parties have as yet
not reached a final agreement to install a Council of State
and re-establish the cease-fire, measures essential to the
implementation of the Accra Agreement.

The summit meeting of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) held in Abuja, Nigeria,
in May demonstrates that some progress has been made
on installing the Council of State and that a meeting of
the parties to prepare an agreement in this regard is
expected. We are not underrating this progress. However,
questions remain unsolved which are relevant to ending
the crisis in Liberia. The parties must agree to an
effective cease-fire, a separation of forces and a timetable
and schedule for the peace process. Until hostilities in

 

Liberia cease, the number of refugees and displaced persons
will increase, violations of human rights will continue and
the humanitarian situation will further deteriorate.

In his report, the Secretary-General recommends that
a new opportunity be given to the parties to take concrete
steps demonstrating their political will to end the crisis. In
principle, and in View of the progress made in Abuja, my
delegation agrees with this recommendation provided,
however, that the parties fully cooperate in achieving peace
by the end of the three-month period proposed. If the
parties do not avail themselves of this opportunity, the
presence of the United Nations in Liberia can no longer be
justified and, as indicated in the report, it might be
envisaged that UNOMIL become a good offices mission
with a small military cell which would maintain liaison
with ECOMOG.

My delegation, which participated in the preparation
of the draft resolution now before the Council, is of the
view that it contains a clear and concise message for the
parties: if, within the period for which UNOMIL's mandate
in Liberia is to be extended, they do not comply with four
essential requirements, namely, the installation of the
Council of State, the re-establishment of the cease-fire, the
disengagement of all forces and the creation of an agreed
timetable and schedule for the implementation of all other
aspects of the agreements, in particular the disarmament
process, the Council, following the submission of a report
by the Secretary-General, will convert UNOMIL into a
good offices mission.

Finally, in our view the Liberian factions bear direct
responsibility for the existing crisis and, therefore, only
they can decide the fate of the Liberian people. My
delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution in the
hope that it will make a decisive contribution to the
promotion of peace, reconciliation and stability in Liberia.

