The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of December 2008, I
should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on
behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Jorge
Urbina, Permanent Representative of Costa Rica to the
United Nations, for his service as President of the
Security Council for the month of November 2008. I
am sure I speak for all members of the Security
Council in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador
Urbina to the great diplomatic skill with which he
conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Somalia

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Canada, Denmark, Greece,
Japan, Malaysia, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal,
the Republic of Korea, Singapore, Somalia, Spain and
Ukraine, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Duale
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side ofthe Council Chamber.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2008/748, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Australia, Belgium,
Canada, Croatia, Denmark, France, Greece, Italy,
2

Japan, Malaysia, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal,
the Republic of Korea, Singapore, Spain, Ukraine, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America.

Members of the Council also have before them
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Somalia, document S/2008/709.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Belgium, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Indonesia, Italy, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Panama, Russian Federation, South
Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Viet Nam


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1846 (2008).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.


