Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kuwait, and warmly congratulate him on his
country's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and for taking the initiative to convene today's

important meeting. Like my German colleague, I
congratulate the Permanent Representative of Kuwait
and his entire team. It is to that country's credit, marked
as it has been by a conflict that left thousands offamilies
without news of their loved ones, that it has convened
the Council to address the issue of missing persons in
armed conflict for the first time. I would also like to
thank Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), and Ms. Reena
Ghelani, Director of Operations and Advocacy of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
for their briefings and commitment.

The issue of missing persons is inherent to all
armed conflicts, but it has been particularly acute in
recent years. That is why France welcomes resolution
2474 (2019), which the Council has just adopted and
which powerfully reaffirms the obligations that flow
from the international humanitarian law and human
rights law on the subject. In that regard, I want to
highlight two main points. The first is the need for
the parties to a conflict to prevent and respond to this
issue, which relates to the protection of those who have
not participated or are no longer participating in the
hostilities in an armed conflict, while the second is the
crucial importance of protecting people from enforced
disappearances, including in times of armed conflict.

The starting point for our efforts in the Council
is as much about the need to ensure respect for the
obligations under international humanitarian law on
the parties to an armed conflict as it is about a moral
imperative. The suffering of the relatives of missing
persons demands that of us. The pain of not knowing
what has happened to a loved one is unbearable and
inconsolable. Has that son or husband who was a
member of the Syrian opposition been detained in the
regime's prisons or killed under torture, like thousands
of detainees? From Sri Lanka and Kosovo to Colombia,
on every continent, conflicts have left thousands of
missing persons in their wake. That is why it is essential
for the Security Council to call on the parties to prevent
disappearances, help the families of the disappeared
reunite and enable the exchange of information about
them and support for their families. They must also
guarantee people's right to the truth.

In order to do that, it is crucial to cooperate with the
ICRC, whose excellent work I want to commend once
again, especially the Central Tracing Agency, which
runs the Family Links Network. State action has to be
deployed in complementarity with all the dedicated
mechanisms and humanitarian organizations on the
ground. That is what France does in its areas ofoperation.
French forces inform the ICRC systematically and as
soon as possible about the people involved in hostilities
whom they have detained, after they have been given
a medical examination, and ensures the ICRC's access
to them, in accordance with international humanitarian
law. They also report their transfer to host countries
and ensure that they have adequate guarantees from
the authorities of the States concerned so that those
who are being returned to them do not run the risk of
enforced disappearance. After fighting has occurred,
they report to the ICRC the location of the graves of
the deceased, who are buried with dignity and in
accordance with the rules of international humanitarian
law. France contributes to efforts to identify and search
for missing persons, whether civilians or combatants,
keeping in mind the concerns ofrelatives. Those are the
same obligations for parties involved in conflicts that
France itself respects with regard to soldiers of its own
who are missing in combat.

At the United Nations, France supports recognizing
disappeared-person status for Blue Helmets and
developing a policy that takes that status fully into
account. Respect for the families of the disappeared
and the principles of responsibility, prevention and
reparation are at stake.

My second point is about the issue of enforced
disappearances. No war or exceptional circumstances
can justify them. The disappearance of a person is
an extremely serious crime when it is the result of
deliberate action by a State that is followed by a denial
of that disappearance or by concealing the truth about
the person's fate and whereabouts. Widespread or
systematic enforced disappearance is a crime against
humanity, and in that connection I want to emphasize
the role of the International Criminal Court and the
investigative mechanisms whose job it is to collect the
evidence of such crimes. Those crimes are certainly
not a thing of the past or of a particular region. In
that regard, I would like to remind the Council of the
November 2018 report of the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic,
Death Notifications in the Syrian Arab Republic, which
describes the fact that tens of thousands of people
are missing in Syria after being in the hands of pro-
Government forces.

Death certificates, when they exist, are a charade.
They do not provide the credible response that is
expected by families, who are left, sometimes for
years, in uncertainty about the real circumstances of
the disappearance and the fate of their relatives, or who
cannot give them a burial once they have learned of their
death. Those certificates issued by the regime cannot
absolve it of crimes for which it still has to answer. In
that context, France, which was a sponsor of resolution
2474 (2019), regrets that the text does not explicitly
mention the International Convention for the Protection
of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, which is
a crucial instrument for combating disappearances in
times of peace as well as of war, and to guarantee the
right to the truth. That is why France calls on all States
to ratify it and cooperate with the Working Group
on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances and the
Committee on Enforced Disappearances.

In conclusion, my country solemnly reaffirms
the importance of upholding respect for international
humanitarian law as we celebrate the seventieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions. It is important
that States take concrete steps to strengthen their
implementation, which is why, together with Germany,
France will launch a humanitarian call to action to which
our Foreign Minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, committed on
1 April, alongside his German counterpart, Heiko Maas.
The universal ratification of the relevant conventions,
such as the International Convention for the Protection
of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and the
Rome Statute, are part of that.

