Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
flames of war which have been raging for 79 days on the
soil of Yugoslavia have finally died out.

More than two months ago, without authorization from
the Security Council, the United States-led North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) blatantly launched military
strikes against the sovereign State of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia. In taking this action, NATO seriously
violated the Charter of the United Nations and norms of
international law, and undermined the authority of the
Security Council, thus setting an extremely dangerous
precedent in the history of international relations.

For over two months, the United States-led NATO
has waged an unprecedented and indiscriminate bombing
campaign against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
killing over 1,000 civilians, injuring thousands and
leaving nearly one million displaced persons and refugees.
Civilian facilities such as factories, bridges, schools and
hospitals have been wantonly destroyed. What is more
flagrant is that even the embassy of the People's Republic
of China in Yugoslavia, which is under the protection of
international conventions, became one of NATO's
bombing targets. This war, waged in the name of
humanitarianism, has in fact produced the greatest
humanitarian catastrophe in post-Second-World-War
Europe and has seriously undermined peace and stability
in the Balkans. Naturally, it has met with strong
international condemnation.

From the very beginning, the Chinese Government
and people have made their principled stance clear. We
firmly oppose the NATO military action against
Yugoslavia and demand that NATO immediately stop all
its bombing operations. We stand for peaceful settlement
of the question of Kosovo on the basis of respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and guarantees of the legitimate
rights and interests of all ethnic groups in the Kosovo
region. We are of the view that any proposed solution
should take full account of the views of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.

Although NATO' s bombing has stopped, the damage
it has inflicted on the Balkans and the suffering it has
brought to the people there cannot possibly disappear
soon. Meanwhile, it will give us a lot to ponder for a long
time to come.

There are nearly 200 countries and over 2,500 ethnic
groups all over the world. The majority of countries are
home to multiple ethnic groups, and many countries have
ethnic problems; NATO countries are no exception. We
have always held that in multiethnic countries there
should be equality, unity, harmony and common
prosperity among the various ethnic groups. We are not
in favour of discrimination against or the oppression of
any ethnic group. At the same time, we are also opposed
to any act that would create division between different
ethnic groups and undermine national unity.
Fundamentally speaking, ethnic problems within a State

 

should be settled in a proper manner by its own
Government and people, through the adoption of sound
policies. They must not be used as an excuse for external
intervention, much less used by foreign States as an excuse
for the use of force. Otherwise, there will be no genuine
security for States and no normal order for the world.

Fifty-four years ago, on 26 June, the Charter of the
United Nations was signed in San Francisco. The birth of
the United Nations and its Charter reflected the lofty
aspirations of peoples that had suffered enormously from
two catastrophic world wars, waged for peace, cooperation
and development. Over the ensuing years, the purposes and
principles of the Charter have withstood the test of time
and have become universally recognized basic norms
governing contemporary international relations.

History has proved that only by upholding the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and
by seeking peaceful solutions to regional and international
conflicts and disputes through talks and negotiations,
without resorting to force, can all States live in harmony
and achieve common development; only thus can world
peace be maintained and promoted; and only thus can the
United Nations play a role in international affairs. Any
deviation from or violation of these purposes and principles
will lead to rampant power politics, will make it impossible
to effectively safeguard regional and international peace,
and will damage the sovereignty and independence of
countries, especially the small and weak ones, weakening
the role of the United Nations and leaving the world with
no peace.

Respect for sovereignty and non-interference in each
other's internal affairs are basic principles of the United
Nations Charter. Since the end of the cold war, the
international situation has undergone major changes, but
those principles are by no means outdated. On the contrary,
they have acquired even greater relevance. At the threshold
of the new century, it is even more imperative for us to
reaffirm those principles. In essence, the "human rights
over sovereignty" theory serves to infringe upon the
sovereignty of other States and to promote hegemonism
under the pretext of human rights. This totally runs counter
to the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter. The international community should maintain
vigilance against it.

The draft resolution before us has failed to fully
reflect China's principled stand and justified concerns. In
particular, it makes no mention of the disaster caused by
NATO bombing in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
it has failed to impose necessary restrictions on the
invoking of Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter.
Therefore, we have great difficulty with the draft
resolution. However, in view of the fact that the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia has already accepted the peace
plan, that NATO has suspended its bombing in the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and that the draft
resolution has reaffirmed the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter, the primary responsibility of
the Security Council for the maintenance of international
peace and security and the commitment of all Member
States to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the Chinese delegation
will not block the adoption of this draft resolution.

