The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Permanent Representative of Namibia for the questions
he asked.

Speaking in my national capacity, allow me to
say, Mr. President, how delighted we are to welcome
you here during the French presidency of the Security
Council. You preside over a Tribunal that certainly
deserves praise rather than criticism.

The month of June is marked in many ways by
the theme of international justice. We know that the
preparatory commission for the International Criminal
Court is to adopt some important texts before 30 June,
including the Court's rules of procedure. As far as
France is concerned, on 9 June it was my honour to
deposit France's instrument of ratification to the Rome
Statute. The Security Council held its first public
meeting of the month of 2 June to hear the Prosecutor
of the two International Tribunals, Mrs. Carla del
Ponte. Furthermore, in recent days the Council has
received several proposals to strengthen the capacity of
the two International Tribunals to do their jobs. These
were proposals prepared by the judges of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) that you have explained to us, Mr.
President. We have also received proposals prepared by
the judges of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR). Lastly, the Secretary-General has also
given us an important report of the Group of Experts to
evaluate the effectiveness of the activities and the
operation of the two International Tribunals, requested
by the General Assembly, as well as comments on it
made by the Tribunals.

This, indeed, is a wealth of material for our
discussions. The delegation of France is determined to
contribute to a rigorous examination of all of these
ideas and recommendations. This is why we have
suggested to Council members that an informal
working group be established to carry out this
examination and submit its conclusions to the Council
in the near future. We are confident that this group will
be able to get to work very soon.

For now, I wish to describe to you the spirit in
which the French delegation tackles this debate. When
it established the International Tribunals, the Security
Council demonstrated its conviction that it was
possible to reconcile the needs of independent justice
with the needs of a penal policy reflective of the
parameters of peace, democracy and international
reconciliation. In order to merge these needs, it is
essential constantly to work towards greater
effectiveness in the procedures of the Tribunals.

The time-frame of international justice cannot be
compared to that of domestic judicial systems. Delays
and prolonged procedures which are accepted at the
domestic level do more harm to international trials. We
already know that public opinion and the States
concerned in the former Yugoslavia, as in Rwanda,
have sometimes challenged the legitimacy of the
international Tribunals. The impact of their work for
States, for the public and for the victims depends
largely on the speed of the procedures.
We have no illusions here. The question of how
long it takes for justice to be done is not merely a
question of legal technique. It is truly a political issue.
Ifjustice is delayed, peace is also delayed. How can we
hope for a speedy return to peace in the regions
concerned if the procedures of the International
Tribunals drag on for 15 years or more? To find an
answer to this question, several areas deserve our
attention, and I merely wish to mention three of them.

First is the number of judges. This number was
already increased through the creation of a third
chamber for each of the two Tribunals two years ago.
We know that this number cannot be increased
indefinitely. By way of comparison, we must be
mindful of the fact that there will be only 18 judges in
the International Criminal Court, whereas for the ICTY
there are 14 judges, who have a limited area of
geographical competence. There are nine judges for the
Rwanda Tribunal.

The creation of ad [item judges, proposed by the
judges of the ICTY, is one avenue that should be
explored. It does give rise to some questions relating to
the status of these judges, their number and the method
of electing them. We are prepared to discuss these
questions in an open spirit.

The judges for the ICTR believe that expanding
the staff in the Appeals Chamber should be a priority.
This is where the main bottlenecks seem to lie. The
proposal that you supported seeks to create two
additional posts for judges within the ICTR in order to
replace those that will be required to serve in the single
Appeals Chamber of the two Tribunals. This solution
would have the advantage of being easily quantifiable,
and it would mean that the two Tribunals would enjoy
equal status.

The second area that we deem to be important
relates to the powers of the judges and to the
strengthening of the pre-trial phase. It is important that
judges have the necessary authority to conduct the
debates, and the experts put forward by the Secretary-
General have stressed this very point. They recommend
better oversight by judges of procedures, in particular
an expansion of the functions of pre-trial judges. This
idea, we believe, deserves consideration.

I would recall, by the way, that the Statute of the
International Criminal Court grants important
prerogatives to judges, both during the pre-trial phase
and during the actual trial. That Statute also creates a
pre-trial Chamber which is an outstanding example of a
synthesis of legal traditions. The negotiators have
clearly tried to remedy the main procedural defects in
the International Tribunals. This reflects the way the
Rules of Procedure and Evidence have evolved in the
two Tribunals, and these have been repeatedly amended
to give the judges better oversight over trials and to
prevent these from lasting too long.

The third area relates to participation by the
victims. The Statutes of the Tribunals contain only
articles on the protection of victims and on the return
of their property. The Statute of the International
Criminal Court, on the other hand, contains specific
provisions that give victims the right to participate in
the proceedings, set up a system for the protection of
threatened or traumatized witnesses, and, above all,
create machinery to compensate them. Victims can
transmit information to the Prosecutor in order to open
proceedings, and also are entitled to be informed of
how a trial is going and to speak in an autonomous
capacity during a trial.

It is probably not possible to guarantee perfect
conformity between the provisions of the International
Criminal Court on victims, which are very well
developed, and the Statutes of the Tribunals. The
Prosecutor of the Tribunals has, however, drawn our
attention to this subject, and we must revisit it.

In conclusion, we must bear in mind the fact that
States have the primary responsibility for combating
the most serious crimes. Our objective is not to deprive
States, even those that are just emerging from a
conflict, of the possibility of doing the work ofjustice
and recollection which is necessary for national
reconciliation. Here I am thinking of Cambodia and
perhaps also of Sierra Leone.

The Security Council took a decision to create ad
hoc courts in cases where the States concerned were
either unable or unwilling to prosecute criminals. We
have the responsibility to help guarantee the effective
functioning of this international system of justice that
we have created. We must also keep in mind the idea of
the reform and strengthening of national judicial
systems, which one day will have to take over.

Finally, we must never consider that the existence
of the International Criminal Tribunals makes it
possible for the Security Council to abdicate its
primary responsibilities for the maintenance of peace.
Criminal justice is a powerful instrument for the
punishment and the prevention of atrocities. But it is
up to us primarily, right here in this very Chamber, to
promote political solutions to current conflicts, which
increasingly are complex ones whose internal aspects
are dominant. Justice is a necessary dimension, but it is
only one dimension of the complex comprehensive
settlements that we need to work out.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I call on Judge Jorda to respond to the many
comments made and questions raised.

