Mr. Bangura (Sierra Leone): Mr. President, my
delegation is happy to see you, a worthy son of fraternal
Argentina, directing the Security Council's deliberations

 

during this first month of 1995. We are confident that the
Council's work will benefit immensely from your proven
diplomatic skill and ability.

May I also extend, through you, our appreciation to
your predecessor, Ambassador Bakuramutsa, Permanent
Representative of Rwanda, for the efficient manner in
which he conducted the Council's business last month. In
a similar vein, my delegation takes this opportunity to
welcome the new members of the Security Council while
expressing our confidence in the contribution they will
make to the work of the Council, to the benefit of this
Organization's membership.

It is my sad duty to convey, through you,
Mr. President, the deepest condolences of the Government
and people of the Republic of Sierra Leone to the
Government and people of Japan on the untold destruction
and human suffering brought upon them by the catastrophic
earthquake that struck their country last Tuesday. We
express our wishes for their speedy healing and recovery.

My delegation appreciates this opportunity to share its
thoughts with members of the Security Council on the
position paper submitted by the Secretary-General as a
supplement to "An Agenda for Peace". Suffice it to say that
we are in agreement with the views so eloquently expressed
by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia, speaking on
behalf of the members of the Non-Aligned Movement.

This paper, as would be expected, raises a range of
interesting issues, some of which, given their complexity,
will require from Member States a careful and detailed
study from which a consensus approach could be forged.
This being the case, my remarks today will be of a
preliminary nature and confined to three areas explored by
the Secretary-General: sanctions, preventive diplomacy and
peacemaking, and post-conflict peace-building.

Few of us would question the efficacy of sanctions
imposed by the Security Council under Chapter VII of the
Charter as a means of dealing with situations that pose a
threat to international peace and security. Similarly, there is
no disagreement that the provisions of Article 41 impose an
obligation on Member States to comply with such a
sanctions regime. However, the unintended consequences of
sanctions, as demonstrated by recent experience, call for an
in-depth examination of their application. We believe that
the overall objective of any sanctions regime should not be
one that would be compromised by the emergence of long-
term factors that were not planned for. Of importance is the
need to guard against creating in the target State conditions
that lead to a hostile attitude being fomented and
exploited in the general population against the
international community.

This can easily set in when vulnerable groups are
exposed to unrelenting hardship for which no remedy has
been put in place. The Secretary-General's observation on
this issue is quite pertinent: that a systemic approach
should be considered in place of the current ad hoc
arrangement. My delegation understands from this that
what the Security Council would be called upon to take
into account would be much more thorough planning, into
which would go such elements as the objectives of the
particular sanctions regime; a way of determining when
these had been achieved; making provisions for
humanitarian assistance to cushion the impact on
vulnerable groups within the target State; and bringing the
sanctions to an end when the original conditions requiring
their imposition had been met.

A corollary, and no less important, is the need for
the Security Council to now give serious thought to
putting in place a mechanism to alleviate the adverse
economic consequences of sanctions on third States. My
delegation has consistently maintained that the provisions
of Article 50 carry with them an expectation that goes
beyond mere consultation with the Council - namely,
that of a remedy. It stands to reason that measures
designed to restore international peace and security,
which, by their nature, are a collective responsibility of
the United Nations, should be formulated within a
dynamic framework whereby the commitment of
individual Member States would not be undercut by the
jeopardizing, in the long run, of their own economic well-
being.

We note with satisfaction, therefore, the Secretary-
General's suggestion for the establishment of a
mechanism that would take a comprehensive View of the
impact on the target State, the potential effects on third
States, and how best the objective of the sanctions could
be achieved to the maximum advantage of the
international community. We are hopeful that, given the
overwhelming opinion in favour of such a mechanism, the
Security Council will give timely consideration to the
modalities for its establishment.

On the issue of preventive diplomacy and
peacemaking, we recognize the difficulties inherent in
encouraging greater involvement by the Secretary-General
through the use of good offices in conflict situations, thus
creating a climate of good will in which possible

 

solutions can be found. We could not agree more that a
new ethos needs to be developed within the international
community that would lead to a gradual shedding of the
reluctance that Member States now have to acquiesce to the
offer of preventive and peacemaking services by the United
Nations, be it in inter-State or internal conflict situations.

My delegation believes that making such an ethos a
reality requires of each of us the realization that we stand
to expend fewer resources, both human and material, in
accepting United Nations efforts than in securing costly
military victories. Indeed, this truism underlies my
delegation's proposal already before the Special Committee
on the Charter of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organization. But, beyond
this, caught as my country is in the throes of an internal
situation which, as the international community knows, has
its origins in the Liberian civil war, we, as a nation, have
taken the step of requesting the assistance of the
Organization, through the good offices of the Secretary-
General, to bring peace to our country.

Our love of peace and our concern for the security and
prosperity of our nation are greater than the false
perceptions which an inviolable State sovereignty may
dictate. It is in this context also that my Government is
actively considering the various options open to it, not the
least of which is the presence of a small field mission of
the type referred to in paragraph 31 of the Secretary-
General's position paper. We will continue to work closely
with the Secretary-General on this matter so that in due
course we can draw upon the accumulated experience and
expertise of the Organization to bring peace to our country.

Let me now turn to the issue of post-conflict peace-
building, which is of particular concern to us also, in the
light of our own present situation. Undoubtedly, the
restoration of peace can be greatly enhanced by the
rebuilding of structures and institutions devastated by
conflict. Building trust among the different factions,
pursuing aggressive disarmament timetables, reintegrating
former combatants into the civilian sector and crafting long-
term political and socio-economic programmes are all
activities that will guarantee durable peace at both the
national and regional levels.

Bringing this about should therefore be seen as a
common venture and a responsibility to be shared by the
State or States concerned and the United Nations, in the
interest of safeguarding international peace and security.
This should be seen as an investment that the concerned
parties and the international community must make to
forestall a relapse and encourage prospects for long-term
peace and stability. Even in this, prudence and
opportunity-cost can dictate no other choice.

What I have attempted to show is that the problems
that the Organization and its Members have had to
confront since the end of the cold war are not isolated
elements in our world picture. They are interconnected in
ways some of us may be unwilling to admit. They are as
much a legacy of a past era as they are an opportunity to
forge new linkages for the future.

Thus, as we move forward in the coming months to
consider these issues that the Secretary-General has
raised, we should not forget that the pillars for peace and
security which we must construct in this period of
transition must rest equally on political and economic
foundations. I can only conclude by echoing the
Secretary-General's statement that the face of conflict in
our time requires of us a deeper commitment to
cooperation and genuine multilateralism than we have
achieved before. It is therefore auspicious that we have
recently embarked on fashioning "An Agenda for
Development", which, it goes without saying, could
establish a new ethos of multilateralism leading to global
peace and security. We are convinced that, together, the
Agenda for Peace and the Agenda for Development
provide us with the keys to reaching that goal.

