Mr. Corr (Ireland): I would like, first, to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this public meeting
on Somalia today.

My delegation joins others in warmly welcoming
Minister Yusuf Hassan Ibrahim, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Somalia, with whom the Council
had a very constructive meeting in private session
earlier this morning.

Placing Council attention on the situation in
Somalia has been a priority for Ireland since coming
into the Security Council. We are therefore very
pleased to see the Council and the wider United
Nations membership focus on the issue today in this
open meeting.

The Permanent Representative of Spain will
speak shortly on behalf of the European Union, and
Ireland of course fully associates itself with his
statement.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report, which we have before us today. I want to
pay warm tribute to the former Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. David Stephen, for his
commitment to the people of Somalia and his untiring
efforts in what must be one of the most challenging
posts in the United Nations system. I would also like to
wish Mr. Winston Tubman, the new Representative of
the Secretary-General, every success as he takes on the
mantle.

We heard in October from the former
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Stephen,
that the people of Somalia were ready for peace. We
see today in the report of the Secretary-General that the
heads of State of the lntergovernmental Authority on
Development (lGAD) have concluded that Somalis are
tired of conflict and division. It has always been the
case that the momentum for peace must come from the
Somali people themselves. It is now clear that the
people of Somalia have begun what will not be an easy
process to move towards peaceful reconciliation. It is
equally clear that the wider international community
must support their efforts, building on the first,
tentative steps taken at Arta. My delegation welcomes,
for that reason, the proposal by the Secretary-General
to establish the Committee of Friends on Somalia in
New York and in Nairobi.

We are particularly encouraged that there is now
agreement on a unified regional approach, which offers
strong beginnings of new hope for Somalia. Ireland
strongly supports the IGAD initiatives agreed at the
level of heads of State and Government and foreign
ministers since the beginning of the year. While it is
true that only Somalia's leaders can end the suffering
of their people, it is also fair to say that it will not be
possible without a coordinated, constructive approach
on the part of its neighbours. We encourage all States,
in particular those in the region, to continue to
contribute in this positive spirit to national
reconciliation in Somalia. The gain will be not only for
the people of Somalia but for wider regional stability
and development.

The National Reconciliation Conference on
Somalia, to be held in Nairobi in a few weeks' time,
will be an historic opportunity for the Somali parties -
all Somali parties - to begin at last to put the interests
of the Somali people - innocent victims of years of
mindless power feuding and divisions - ahead of all
power struggles and partisan motives. We strongly
encourage all Somali parties to participate in the
conference, and to participate without preconditions, in
a spirit of compromise and cooperation, so as to
complete the process begun at Arta.

At the same time, we encourage all parties to
continue to focus on achieving reconciliation at the
local level as well. My delegation especially welcomes
the commitment of the Secretary-General and his
Special Adviser Mohamed Sahnoun to assist lGAD
countries in implementing the decision taken at the 9th
lGAD Summit. Ireland will strongly support an active
United Nations role in this area.

As the report of the Secretary-General clearly
illustrates, various United Nations agencies, including
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
are actively engaged in promoting peace and
reconciliation through various programmes in Somalia,
which, as the Secretary-General says, contribute to
overall United Nations peace-building objectives. We
are encouraged by the briefing that the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) gave in
Geneva in February when introducing the Consolidated
Appeal, reporting that there are approximately 150
United Nations staff working on the ground in Somalia
on any given day.

The results of the recent inter-agency security
assessment mission in Somalia are clear, and we of
course accept that, for the moment, the United Nations
should not repatriate United Nations Political Office
for Somalia. We also hope, and we are confident, that
this question will be kept under review. In the
meantime, we must see what the international
community can do within these constraints to assist the
people of Somalia, who for over a decade now have
struggled, to a large extent isolated from the support
available to the populations of other countries
struggling with crisis.

The international community has a clear and
unambiguous responsibility to the people of Somalia,
which obliges us to look beyond the limitations that the
current security situation imposes and to reflect and
come up with ideas as to what is possible within the
constraints to help create the circumstances in which
the United Nations can become more fully engaged in
Somalia. We in the Council, in short, also have that
responsibility. Silence and lack of action is not an
option.

We have the presidential statement that we
adopted in October, which calls for proposals on how
the United Nations may further assist in the
demobilization of militia members and the training of
police personnel from the Transitional National
Government. We believe it would be appropriate to
look at such proposals and at any other means by which
we could help create more favourable circumstances on
the ground.

We should also now consider how to give greater
effect to the arms embargo on Somalia. The reports of
preparations for a major offensive, as contained in
paragraph 33 of the Secretary-General's report, are
extremely worrying, as such reported developments
would clearly be in breach of Security Council
resolution 733 (1992). In the presidential statement of
October last year, the Council insisted

"that all States, in particular those of the region,
should not interfere in the internal affairs of
Somalia. Such interference could jeopardize the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, political
independence and unity of Somalia."
(S/PRST/2001/30, p. 2)

The Council furthermore insisted that "the territory of
Somalia should not be used to undermine stability in
the subregion" (ibid.). We believe that if these
principles were respected, the security situation in
Somalia would be enhanced.

We strongly support strengthening enforcement of
the sanctions regime. One option might be the
establishment of an appropriate mechanism to do so, as
it is clear that the regime that has been in place now for
10 years has not been enforced.

Ireland welcomes the establishment of an anti-
terrorism task force by the Transitional National
Government, and we urge that it be seen to be effective
and urgent in its work.

The report of the Secretary-General points to a
perilous humanitarian situation in the country. The
United Nations humanitarian and development
agencies continue to carry out important, life-saving
work in the face of often serious obstacles. Such
obstacles include a certain ennui on the part of the
international donor community, and we strongly urge
donors to respond generously to the Inter-Agency
Appeal.

My delegation notes the comments of the
Minister this morning on the impact of the freezing of
the Al-Barakaat accounts. We are also hopeful that a
satisfactory solution will be found quickly, which
would help ease unnecessary suffering.

There is no such thing as a failed society. There
may be failed State institutions, there may be weakness
of governance, but society and the needs of people
transcend more narrow, legalistic definitions. The
people of Somalia need the help of the international
community. The IGAD partners need our support. The
peoples of the region need our engagement. We on the
Council have a duty to offer this support.

