Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would naturally like to comment on some
of the remarks that we have heard here today. I am not
going to get into a direct argument with my Ukrainian
colleague, but will merely point out that he went to a
great deal of trouble to substitute the Russian military
for one of the parties to the conflict, the separatists
in Donbas. It is a disingenuous but effective approach
because talking about how the Russian military
participated in the conflict is a way of tying Russia
to the non-implementation of the Minsk agreements. I
could see what he was doing there, and we will come
back to it again. However, Ukraine's representative said
nothing about Kyiv's failure to implement point after
point of the Minsk agreements, and I will come back to
that as well.

Unfortunately, we heard nothing new today, just the
same tired mantras that we have been hearing for years
now. That is sad, because we have spent the greater part
of our statement on it. Despite that, the Council is still
willing to do anything to cover for its proteges whatever
they do. Russia, Russia, Russia, Russia, Russia - that
is practically all we have heard today. Even Ukraine has
barely been mentioned - and in the context of the Minsk
agreements - and virtually no one has mentioned the
4 million residents of Donbas, who also have a voice.
And live in that region. Or perhaps the Council does not
count them as people, so as to avoid asking about their
opinion of what is happening in south-eastern Ukraine.
And overall, in fact, today we heard more discussions
of the Sea of Azov and Crimea - which we will also
come back to - neither of which is mentioned in the
Minsk agreements. The representative of France said
that we had an aggressor country and a country that
is a victim of that aggression sitting at the table today,
and then spoke of his support for the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). But there
is no provision in the OSCE's mandate that says that
the OSCE should be working to disengage Russia and
Ukraine in this conflict. And, incidentally, that is not in
the Minsk agreements either.

A new chapter has recently emerged in our Council
meetings in the form of our dialogues with our friend
Christoph Heusgen, the Permanent Representative
of Germany, who devoted a significant part of his
statement to conversing with me. I am delighted with
his initiative and would like to comment on some of his
remarks. To start with, thanks to his own admission,
we learned today that he is one of the authors of the
Minsk agreements. Now at least we know whom to
hold accountable. My friend Christoph said, probably
in a Freudian slip, that in 2015 Russia took Minsk. I do
know that Russia took Berlin, but that was a long time
ago, and before that we liberated Minsk. But in 2015
we were not in Minsk and had no intention of being
there. It is where our friends, brothers and allies live.
We certainly have no plans to take anything or invade
anywhere. That is not how we do things. Interference is
how our Western colleagues do things, something we
are seeing a clear example of today in one country in
Latin America.

Whether intentionally or not - I incline to the
former - my friend Christoph tried very hard to insert
Russia into his statement, both to the point and not.
Even when he was talking about repairing a bridge it
came out as if it was something that Ukraine should
agree on with Russia. My friend Christoph said that our
proposal for a Security Council resolution was ajoke. I
would like to remind him that it is a joke that President
Putin discussed with Chancellor Merkel, and it was at
her request that we added to the proposed mandate of
the mission described in the resolution the function
of protecting the OSCE Monitoring Mission not only
at the line of contact but also in travelling throughout
the region.

A great deal has been said today about Russia's
occupation of Donbas and the presence there of the
Russian military. Today the Permanent Representative
of Ukraine showered us with statistics in that regard.
I would like to take advantage of the presence
here - well, not here, but with us - of Mr. Apakan
and Mr. Sajdik to ask them if they have seen many
Russian forces in Donbas, if they are familiar with the
figures that the Permanent Representative of Ukraine
shared with us today, and ifthey can confirm them. We
have also heard a lot today about the disengagement
of heavy weaponry. At one point an agreement was
reached through the mediation of the OSCE that
disengagement would take place after the first seven
days of quiet on the line of contact. There have been
dozens of days of quiet on the line of contact, as the
OSCE Mission has confirmed. So go on, then, they
would say to the two sides, disengage. At which point
our Ukrainian colleagues would say, "No, our numbers
are different. There have been violations". And so it has
gone on to this day. We could have questioned many
other aspects, including Ukraine's role in the Trilateral
Contact Group and its sub-groups. And we could have
talked about how it is sabotaging the processes on the
political, economic and humanitarian and other fronts,
but then I fear we would be here all night.

Someone today mentioned the Budapest
Memorandum, which was related to the agreements
having to do with Ukraine's renunciation of the nuclear
weapons that remained in its territory after the collapse
of the former Soviet Union. It outlines the obligations
of all the countries party to the Memorandum to
refrain from using nuclear weapons against Ukraine
and to abide by all the OSCE principles. We are fully
committed to those obligations. But the Budapest
Memorandum contains no obligations or agreement
to support unconstitutional coups d'etat or violent
power grabs, which are directly included in the OSCE
principles. Incidentally, we recognize Ukraine's
territorial integrity and independence, something that
was implicitly cast into question today. Ukraine has
only itself to blame for the fact that Crimea escaped
it in March 2014. The situation there would be much
worse than it is in the Donbas region today if it had
not done so. In general I find it laughable to listen
to the stories about what is going on in Crimea from
people who have never been there and their sententious
pronouncements about the dire situation and suffering
of its inhabitants, which my British colleague spoke
about earlier. I think he cannot even guess how far he
is from the truth. We invite him to visit. They will be
pleased to see him. He also asserted that we do not
allow monitoring missions to enter Crimea. That is not
true either. We have frequently invited United Nations
missions to Crimea and declared our willingness to
welcome any such missions as long as the necessary
legal conditions are met.

What I would like to know is where many
Council members have seen Ukraine's commitment
to implementing the Minsk agreements. Under what
microscope orjeweller's loupe? It is a mystery. And of
course this is the real joke. They do not want to hear
or listen to what is being said. What commitments and
which provisions of the Minsk agreements is Russia
supposed to implement? I urge Council members once
again to re-read the Minsk agreements. If they can free
themselves from the notion that it is Russian military
forces rather than the residents of Donetsk and Luhansk
who live there, if they can delete that, they will then
clearly see that those who are not implementing the
Minsk agreements are the very people who are directly
party to them.

We are ready to celebrate every date that we are
asked to observe, and we too have something to say
about that. I hope that we will have the opportunity
to talk about this again. As I said at the beginning of
the meeting, we are happy to take advantage of any
opportunity to discuss the situation in Ukraine, and I
think that life will present us with those opportunities.

