Mrs. Gueguen (France): I would first like to
congratulate you, Sir, on the start of Germany's
presidency, following that of France and linked to it in a
twin relationship that illustrates the special partnership
between our two countries, which have put together
a shared programme and spirit for these two months
aimed at improving not just our customs and methods
but also our results on the ground. France will be at
your side throughout this month. I would also like to
join previous speakers in expressing my pleasure at
the opportunity to hear from the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, and I hope we will be
having regular interactions with her in the future. And
I welcome the presence here today of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Haiti.

We are all agreed that this is a pivotal moment
of transition in the relationship between the United
Nations and Haiti, as we near the end of the term of the
United Nations Mission in Support of Justice in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH). As the briefers emphasized, Haiti
still faces many challenges, to which I will return,
that require not only the ongoing commitment of the
Haitian authorities but also the robust support of Haiti's
international partners, beginning with the Security
Council. It is in that context that France fully supports
the Secretary-General's recommendation for a special
political mission. That transition, which has now
been in preparation for two years, will turn the page
on peacekeeping operations and open a new chapter
in the cooperation between the United Nations and
Haiti. In that context, we should focus on two points
in particular in order to enable the United Nations to
continue helping to make a positive difference in Haiti.

First, the country's political and economic
instability continues to be central to our concerns.
More than a quarter of the population is currently food
insecure. Economic and social hardships continue.
Haitians are being hit hard by the deteriorating
economic situation and are demanding better access to
basic services. The resurgence of violence produced by
those problems is worrying. We have seen unacceptable
acts of violence, particularly on the fringes of the
February demonstrations, which paralysed the country
yet again and had a disastrous impact on Haitians' daily
lives. Violence can only aggravate the problems, and
we call on all Haitian political stakeholders to firmly
condemn the use of violence and take a constructive
approach, including within the framework of the good-
offices mission led by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.

There is still much to be done to build the solid
institutions and legislative framework that are essential
to establishing the rule of law. France urges the
Haitian authorities to carry out the reforms that will
ensure a justice system for Haitian society that is more
accessible, efficient and representative. We also deplore
the fact that only one of the 12 seats on the Supreme
Court is held by a woman. The fight against corruption
and impunity, which is at the heart of the protesters'
demands, must also be given top priority. It is leading
that fight that will enable Haitian politicians to rebuild
a relationship of trust with the population. While
some programmes have been implemented, primarily
by MINUJUSTH, especially those aimed at reducing
community violence against women, human rights
violations persist, as Ms. Bachelet pointed out. We are
particularly concerned about the links mentioned in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2019/198) between
political actors and criminal organizations. There must
be credible investigations and prosecutions of this
problem where appropriate.

Secondly, considering these challenges, France
urges that we stay on the path established by the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti and
MINUJUSTH and supports a transition to a special
political mission. The special political mission that
will succeed MINUJUSTH will provide an opportunity
to focus United Nations efforts on the three areas
where the added value of the United Nations has been
proven - first, the Council of the Haitian National
Police, which is already autonomous in most Haitian
regions; next, building the rule of law, including the
prison system; and lastly, monitoring the human rights
situation and reducing Violence within communities.
The High Commissioner's recommendations on
that will be valuable. As the Secretary-General has
suggested, the provision of good offices should also be
a focus of the future mission's mandate.

Besides the special political mission, it is the United
Nations system as a whole, particularly the country
team, that will have to adapt to meet Haiti's needs.
In that regard, we welcome the Haitian Government's
decision to call on the Peacebuilding Fund. The
projects it finances will provide the Haitian population
with valuable assistance. The fight against the cholera
epidemic, which is on the verge of being eradicated,
will not stop.

Finally, France encourages Haiti's political
leaders to do everything possible to create the
conditions for the country's sustainable and stable
development. Among the projects for which the Haitian
authorities are responsible, I would like to mention the
interministerial action plan on human rights, which
must now be finalized. As Ms. Viaud's briefing showed
us, civil society is already overflowing with initiatives
and talents and deserves our full and complete support.
Ms. Viaud's compelling appeal for the protection
of women and the promotion of their rights and
participation must be fully heard.
In conclusion, I simply want to point to the motto
on Haiti's coat of arms, "Unity is Strength", which
reminds us how vital national unity is if Haiti is to
be able to build its future, particularly in view of the
upcoming elections.

