Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank Assistant
Secretary-General Bintou Keita for her briefing.

By mere coincidence, as the Assistant Secretary-
General said, even as we are discussing South Sudan,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) Council of Ministers is also meeting in
Abidjan and discussing the same matter, focusing on
the progress made in the implementation of the high-
level revitalization forum.

The overall situation in South Sudan continues to
be of serious concern. The security situation remains
fragile, and the conflict continues unabated. The
economic and financial problems in the country are
worrying. The humanitarian situation has not been
mitigated and continues to cause concern. That is what
makes the cessation of all hostilities an absolute priority.

As stated in the latest report of the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission,

"Unless hostilities cease, the economic and
humanitarian situation will continue to worsen.
More lives will be lost and responses will be
further complicated."

We welcome President Salva Kiir's decree ordering
the free, unimpeded and unhindered movement of
humanitarian organizations in the country, and in
particular his pledge to hold accountable those who
intentionally obstruct the delivery of humanitarian aid
and services or impose taxes on humanitarian convoys.
We believe that the effective implementation of the
decree will facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to people in need.

We really appreciate the visit by Ambassador
Nikki Haley to the region, including South Sudan.
We have no doubt that her visit has made a significant
difference, and we thank her for her commitment. We
must stress that the 2015 Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan remains
the only viable way to bring an end to the conflict and
restore peace and stability in South Sudan.

Although the Council of Ministers of South Sudan
recently approved the Transitional Constitution of
the Republic of South Sudan amendment deal, which
is a step in the right direction, a lot remains to be
done in order to ensure meaningful progress in the
implementation of the 2015 peace agreement. IGAD
has presented the parties with an opportunity in the
form of the high-level revitalization forum to restore
the permanent ceasefire and fully implement the
peace agreement.

My Prime Minister met with President Kiir
yesterday in Nairobi and reaffirmed Ethiopia's
commitment to supporting those efforts, both as a
neighbouring country of South Sudan and as Chair
of IGAD. We remain hopeful that President Kiir will
continue his cooperation with IGAD. We would have
liked to have received a briefing from Special Envoy
Ismail Wais himself on the substantive progress that
IGAD has made towards the convening of the high-
level forum. Unfortunately, he had to attend the IGAD
meeting in Abidjan on the same matter and could not
make it to this meeting.

In any case, Ethiopia understands that we all have
access, one way or another, to the information on the
extensive consultations that the IGAD Council of
Ministers and the Special Envoy held with the South
Sudanese stakeholders and the tireless efforts made
to consolidate the views and positions expressed in
those consultations and the upcoming IGAD Council
of Ministers meeting. We also all expect that the
meeting will provide guidance with regard to the
actual convening of the forum and the way forward.
That is indeed very meaningful progress and, exactly
because of that, we believe that the stage has now been
more or less set for the actual convening of the forum.
However, we have to realize that the process is bound
to be complex and, given the nature of our region, one
would not be surprised if developments were to occur
occasionally that might complicate matters even more,
rather than helping lessen existing complications.

As I said at an earlier meeting (see S/PV.8071),
IGAD does not have a magic wand to create miracles
in South Sudan. The support of the international
community, particularly that of the Security Council,
is absolutely critical. We are extremely grateful for the
support provided by the United Nations and the African
Union (AU) in the process leading to the convening of
the IGAD forum, as part of maintaining the unity of
purpose among the United Nations, the AU and IGAD
in the search for lasting peace, security and stability in
South Sudan.

Once again, we encourage the United Nations,
the AU and IGAD to redouble their efforts and
further strengthen that positive trend. No doubt, more
and frequent consultations are imperative, as the

preparations for the forum are approaching the final
phase. Once again, no matter what we in the region and
the rest of the international community might do, we
understand that the success ofthe revitalization process,
as well as success in addressing the enormous challenge
that South Sudan is facing, will depend greatly upon the
willingness of all parties. We still remain hopeful that
all parties will seize the opportunity provided to them
and work towards the achievement of the purposes of
the revitalization agenda.

Finally, as the Assistant Secretary-General already
stressed, we recognize the progress made with regard
to the deployment of the Regional Protection Force
(RPF). We are pleased to witness improved cooperation
from the Government in that regard. The successful
deployment of the Ethiopian battalion advance party
and the recruited contingent to South Sudan was
possible because of that improved cooperation. We
reiterate our commitment to the deployment, as well
as the rationale of the RPF. In that regard, we would
like to inform the Council that the main body of the
Ethiopian battalion has concluded its preparations and
remains ready to be deployed in South Sudan as early
as 18 December.

