Mr. Motoc (Romania): I, too, would like to
welcome the presence before the Council the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jessen-
Petersen, and to wish him every success in his
challenging task. I must say that we were impressed by
the briefing he gave the Council. Once again, I would
like to assure him of Romania's full support.

Let me also thank the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative and the staff of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) for the comprehensive report (S/2004/907)
and the equally ample technical assessment of
standards implementation annexed to it. We wish to
recognize the presence in the Council of Mr. Nebojsa
Covie, President of the Coordination Centre of Serbia
and Montenegro and of the Republic of Serbia for
Kosovo and Metohija.

Romania fully associates itself with the statement
that Ambassador Van den Berg of the Netherlands will
be making soon on behalf of the European Union.

As we mentioned a few weeks ago in addressing
the issue of Bosnia and Herzegovina, lasting stability is
a long-sought goal in the western Balkans. We trust
that it can be achieved through patience and
willingness, keeping the broader picture in mind
against the background of European integration
processes.

We would therefore warmly welcome a gradually
increased role on the part of the European Union in
Kosovo, starting with the setting up of an economic
development strategy for Kosovo and ensuring a
regional perspective for its economic development, as
called for by the Secretary-General.

At the same time, Romania firmly believes that a
European and Euro-Atlantic outreach to Serbia and
Montenegro would be relevant to its further democratic
development and would facilitate status discussions.

We congratulate the people of Kosovo and the
Provisional Institutions on the professional, correct and
calm manner in which the elections were held. At the
same time, we regret the very low turnout of Kosovo
Serb voters. Yet another opportunity for engaging in a
meaningful social and political dialogue on problems
related to Kosovo's future has thus been wasted.
Nevertheless, the problems remain, and the future
Government has a tremendous challenge ahead - that
is, to ensure that all inhabitants of Kosovo, as well as
those willing to return, have the same freedoms and
rights and level of security.

We take note of the very uneven progress made in
the implementation of standards. In our view, the
implementation of the eight standards, with a view to
helping to overcome the consequences of the March
violence, reaching out to minorities and encouraging
dialogue at all levels, remains key to initiating
discussions on Kosovo's status. The new
government - which needs to be stable and politically
committed - will have to devote its undivided
attention to achieving tangible progress on all
standards during the course of the year ahead.

Romania wholeheartedly supports the elaboration
of a comprehensive and integrated strategy to take us
further towards a stable, multi-ethnic and prosperous
society in Kosovo, in line with resolution 1244 (1999).
The strategy, to be completed in its concept and then
implemented by the Special Representative, should
benefit from all the energy and support of the
international community. In that context, we deeply
appreciate the recommendations included in the report
of Ambassador Kai Eide, which charts the main lines
of such a comprehensive and integrated strategy.

We also commend the Secretary-General for the
initiative to enhance the strategy through consultations
with key Member States and regional organizations.
We believe that, in preparing the platform for
approaching the status issue, the solid and rational
integration of all possible contributions is crucial. For
its part, Romania will continue to stimulate such
integration of efforts in various regional and
subregional formats, notably in the South-East
European Cooperation Process - an inclusive and
regionally owned framework, which Romania currently
chairs.

Recent developments in the region indicate the
need to accelerate and deepen consultations at the
regional level in order to identify formulas that reflect
security concerns in South-East Europe.

The Romanian Minister for Foreign Affairs
recently organized in Bucharest a debate on the
Kosovo situation, in cooperation with the Project on
Ethnic Relations. We deem it important that the debate
was attended by all the main actors from Pristina and
Belgrade and provided a good framework for direct
contact between them. It is worth mentioning that on
that occasion, representatives of Belgrade indicated
their willingness to start a dialogue with Pristina
"anytime, anywhere, on any issue".

At the same time, we have pursued consultations
with the Foreign Ministers in the region in the
framework of the South-East European Cooperation
Process. As this kind of process of reflection at the
regional level has proved to be very helpful in terms of
the interaction between the main actors, we intend to
continue such exercises.

Romania supports the current efforts of the
Special Representative to develop, through dialogue
with all parties concerned, comprehensive
recommendations on the reform of local government
and decentralization, as well as on transferring further
competences to the Provisional Institutions and
increasing their accountability and responsibilities.
These are essential issues for Kosovo, and the Special
Representative is right to make them top priorities for
UNMIK and the Provisional Institutions.

Finally, we believe that, since 2005 appears to be
very important for peace efforts regarding Kosovo, the
time is ripe to send a mission of the Security Council
to the region, perhaps early next year. In addition to
enabling the Council to acquire firsthand information
on standards implementation, its action could do a
great deal to support the comprehensive and integrated
strategy mentioned earlier.

