Mr. Mitri: In recent days, armed confrontations,
which are both the cause and the result of the deep
divisions among Libyan political factions, have been
unprecedented in their gravity and, to be sure, very
alarming. The bone of representatives has resolved that
groups fighting under the name of Fajr Libya - Libya's
Dawn ~ and Ansar Al-Sharia are terrorists and
outlaws. The Fajr Libya coalition charged that the
transitional Government and the newly elected house of
representatives violated the constitutional declaration
and lost legitimacy, considering their call for foreign
intervention an act of treason. They asked the former
General National Congress to convene. The General
National Congress, the tenure of which expired at the
election of the new house of representatives, designated
Omar Al-Hasi as Prime Minister and asked him to form
a "national salvation" Government.

Since my last briefing to the Council, on 17 July,
(see S/PV.7218) armed battles, inflamed by air strikes,
continued almost uninterrupted in Tripoli, Benghazi
and other parts of the country. In Tripoli, we have
seen an unprecedented movement of population in an
attempt to escape the fighting. Conservative figures
of those displaced are estimated at over 100,000, with
at least another 150,000, including many migrant
workers, having fled the country to seek refuge abroad.
There is a general deterioration in living conditions.
Food, fuel, water and electricity are in short supply.
The departure of foreign medical staff and shortages in
medical supplies have rendered the plight of civilians
more critical. A rise in criminality has contributed to
a further worsening of the situation. It is also likely
that the fighting will result in the disperal of explosive
remnants of war and unexploded ordnance, posing a
further threat to civilians.

The use by all sides of heavy weapons in densely
populated areas has spread terror and contributed to
a growing number of innocent lives lost, including
those of children. In addition, there have been many
cases of kidnapping, the burning of houses, looting
and other acts of revenge. The damage inflicted on
public infrastructure in Tripoli's southern and western
sections - including the airport, the main oil depot and
roads and bridges - is nothing less than tragic.

In the east, fighting continues between two
coalitions of forces comprised of Libya Shield units,
armed brigades and the Ansar Al-Sharia extremist
group, on the one hand, and forces allied to general
Khalifa Haftar and the Army Special Forces, on the
other. The violence has resulted in a significant number
of civilian casualties.

When I last briefed the Council, I reported on the
evacuation of international staff members of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) as a result
ofthe escalating conflict and the fighting in and around
the Janzour area, where our premises are located. We
continue to stress that this is a temporary measure and
that staff will be redeployed once security conditions
permit.

Notwithstanding that measure, the Mission has
remained closely engaged with developments in Libya.
On 7 August, a small team led by my deputy travelled
to Tripoli to explore options for an unconditional
ceasefire. The visit to Libya was facilitated by the
Italian Embassy, and I would like to thank Italy for its
generosity. During 12 days, the delegation met with a
wide range of political and military actors. While all
engaged constructively with regard to our proposals, it
is very clear that much more work is needed to overcome
mistrust among the parties to the conflict.

While the Mission intends to build on those talks,
we believe that a clear message needs to be sent to the
warring parties to remind them of their obligations under
international humanitarian law. I believe resolution
2174 (2014) has just done that, while also underlining
the need for constructive engagement on their part with
a United Nations-facilitated political dialogue.

On 4 August, we attended the inaugural session of
the newly elected house of representatives in Tobruk.
Regrettably, many efforts, including ours, to arrive
at an agreement over procedural and related issues
failed to ensure the full participation of all elected
members. A number of representatives decided to
boycott the sessions. While underlining the importance
of safeguarding Libya's fragile transition, with the
house of representatives as the only legitimately elected
legislature, we also affirmed that every effort must be
exerted to enable parliamentarians who are boycotting
the house of representatives to join their colleagues.

Developments on the battlefield in Libya over
the past few weeks are a source of grave concern. In
particular, we strongly condemn the indiscriminate
shelling. Those responsible for the loss of civilian
lives and for the destruction of private property and
public infrastructure, as well as those responsible for
any ill-treatment and torture of prisoners, must be held
accountable. Of particular concern are reports from
Derna that an extremist group has conducted summary
trials and executions outside the judicial system.

In that regard, I welcome the declaration, on
17 August, by the Libyan General Prosecutor of his
intention to investigate crimes committed during the
recent fighting in Tripoli. I urge his office to initiate
impartial investigations, even in the absence of formal
complaints. I welcome also the recent statements by the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court and by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights reminding all parties to the conflict
that perpetrators of crimes against civilians, as well
as those who order or fail to stop them, are liable for
prosecution, as are those who incite violence.

The threat from the spread of terrorist groups has
become real. Their presence and activities in a number
of Libyan cities are known to all. At present, the chaotic
security situation and the very limited capacity of
the Government to counter that threat may well have
created fertile ground for mounting danger in Libya
and beyond.

In my previous briefing I qualified the aborted
18 and 19 June political dialogue meeting, which I had
intended to convene, as a missed opportunity. Every
unsuccessful dialogue initiative is a lost opportunity in
Libya. We need to remind Libyan political leaders and
brigade commanders that dialogue remains the only
alternative to a protracted armed confrontation. No
military solution is possible, and the present impasse
will be deepened further by the use of force. Although
the horizon for a political agreement seems distant,
the United Nations needs to spare no effort to bring
various actors to the dialogue table. Intimidation and
defamation should not distract us from the obligation of
being an impartial mediator.

With the exception of a minority suspicious of, or
hostile to, the role of the United Nations in Libya, there
is broad-based acceptance of UNSMIL's presence,
as well as high expectations. The main and recurrent
demand is to see the United Nations contribute more
effectively to the protection of the civilian population.
There may be broad support in Libya for an enhanced
United Nations presence, but clarity on the modalities
and type of support that is to be realistically expected
is still lacking. Moreover, there is a great need to
seriously address Libyan misperceptions as a condition
for greater United Nations engagement in Libya.

Once again, we have been asked to play a greater
role in institution-building. An adequate response
would necessitate further developing UNSMIL's
capacities. But that is not in itself a guarantee of the
achievement desired. Previous experience tells us that,
without collective Libyan political will and clearly
defined national priorities, UNSMIL is likely to face
difficulties in implementation. National ownership is
not only about ensuring that United Nations actions
accord with Libyan strategies; it also requires Libya's
continued and lasting receptivity to subsequent advice
and technical assistance. In addition, Libyan national
ownership involves making a consistent effort to ensure
the effective coordination of international support. In
its mandate for UNSMIL the Council asks the Mission
to play a leading role in that regard, but its success has
been limited. It is important that we see Libya playing
a coherent role in enabling concerted efforts. No less
important is the willingness of all friends of Libya to
allow their activities to be better coordinated.

As elsewhere in the region, radical transformations
have opened up new opportunities and raised hopes.
The Libyan experience illustrates the fact that transition
is fraught with great risks, some of which are owed to
perceived conflicting interests and mutual fears - the
legacy of more than four decades of despotic rule - as
well as to reactivated enmities and reinvented hatreds
in the struggle for power. Those risks also include
the possibility of Libya's future being affected by
regional polarization and proxy rivalries. The threat
of the changes that the revolution initiated being
derailed is most likely growing. The descent into more
instability and greater uncertainty cannot be reversed
unless various actors in Libya's public life commit,
in words and deeds, to a democratic political process.
That process cannot be reduced to the ballot box and
the emergence of numerical majorities and minorities.
Its progress is conditional on the upholding of the
principles of pluralism, inclusivity, the separation of
powers and adherence to agreed democratic values and
norms.

Many Libyans continue to be sceptical about the
political process in their country, and frustrated with
their political elites. Low participation in the two most
recent elections is an indication of the erosion of such
credibility. Disappointment, aggravated by the suffering
and fear provoked by armed confrontations, increases
the risk ofa major setback for Libya. A large number of
Libyans, distressed or disillusioned, are contacting and
writing to us. But many others refuse to be discouraged.
We cannot shy away from supporting all of them - both
the disappointed and the determined - in this difficult
period of their country's history.

Finally, I would like to thank the Council for its
support during the two years of my tenure, which
will end very soon. I would also like to express warm
words of appreciation to all the UNSMIL and United
Nations staff in Libya, national and international, for
the indefatigable spirit they have shown in spite of the
enormous problems they have encountered and the
risks to their personal safety and security in carrying
out their work.

