Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month, during which the Council is considering the
periodic report (S/2015/439) of the Secretary-General
on the situation in Abyei, submitted following the
strategic review of the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA). Also this
month, deliberations were held regarding resolution
2230 (2015), which was just adopted, on the renewal
of the UNISFA mandate. I should like to take this
opportunity to express our appreciation to our brotherly
neighbour Ethiopia for its valuable efforts for the sake
of strengthening peace and stability in the Sudan,
especially in Abyei through the role played by UNISFA.

In several of its paragraphs, today's resolution
clearly underscores the importance of commitment to
the full implementation of the agreements signed by
the Sudan and South Sudan with regard to resolving
the final status of Abyei. Furthermore, the resolution
emphasizes that dialogue and negotiation between the
two sides are the only way to determine that status. We
therefore welcome the references made in the resolution
in that regard.

We would like to emphasize the importance of
commitment to the implementation of those agreements,
in particular the 20 June 2011 Agreement on Temporary
Arrangements for the Administration and Security
of the Abyei Area, the 29 June 2011 Agreement on
Border Security and the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism, the 30 July 2011 Agreement on the Border
Monitoring Support Mission and the 27 September 2012
Agreement on Security Arrangements. It goes without
saying that all those agreements are complementary,
as they address the border area, and must therefore be
implemented equally as a whole because they affect each
other. Furthermore in that regard, we underscore that
the Security Council has referred to those agreements
in connection with the implementation matrix agreed
upon and signed on 12 March 2013, which is now a
document of the Council that must also be followed to
the letter.

While we reiterate our commitment to the
implementation of those agreements, we also
emphasize that the shortest path to resolving the final
status of Abyei in line with the agreements begins with
establishing the temporary administration and security
mechanisms, namely, the Abyei legislative council, the
Abyei administration and the Abyei police. Establishing
those agreed upon mechanisms would serve to fill any
administrative or security vacuums and help to pave
the way towards stability and peaceful coexistence
among local communities, including the Misseriya and
the Ngok Dinka. That should be followed by efforts to
resolve the final status of the region in order to ensure
security, stability and lasting coexistence among the
local populations, in particular the two main tribes.

The resolution just adopted clearly states that there
is no alternative to dialogue to resolve the final status of
Abyei, and it also warns against any unilateral measures
by any side in that regard. We also welcome the fact
that resolution 2230 (2015) reiterates the Security
Council's rejection of any such measures, as well as its
clear reference to the fact that the African Union Peace
and Security Council and the Security Council have in
previous resolutions both expressed profound concern
about the unilateral measure by the Ngok Dinka to hold
a referendum.

In that context, we also remind the Council of the
Sudan's decision to withdraw its armed forces from the
Abyei Area, pursuant to the agreements I mentioned.
The Sudanese armed forces did not invade Abyei, they
were already present there. They withdrew pursuant to
resolution 2046 (2012) and the road map drafted and
adopted by the African Union. We have previously
expressed our position on this point here in the Council,
which reflects our full commitment to implementing
the agreements signed with South Sudan, in particular
those pertaining to the Abyei Area and border security
arrangements, and especially on the establishment
of the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone and the
operationalization of the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism. Reports of the Secretary-
General on Abyei clearly indicate that the Government
of the Sudan has lived up to its commitments in
terms of establishing those mechanisms and their
operationalization.

In conclusion, the Government of the Sudan has
clearly demonstrated the extent of its commitment
to implementing all of those agreements. The Sudan
has always sent representatives to participate in those
agreed upon security and administrative mechanisms.
While representatives of the Sudanese Government
have always participated in the mechanisms, the other
party has been absent. The Council is aware ofthat fact,
which is also documented in the report ofthe Secretary-
General before the Council today. That is why we would
like to reiterate the need to operationalize the joint
monitoring commission for Abyei. It is very important
that it begin its work in order to fill the current vacuum.
The Sudanese Government has effectively participated
in that mechanism. I think the Council is aware of
the fact that the work of the commission has been
postponed simply because one of the parties has not
sent its representatives for so long.

We would like to reiterate our concerns about the
delays in setting up the mechanism. We look forward
to its establishment sooner rather than later so that it
can play its role in filling any possible administrative
or security vacuums in Abyei. That would help to
establish an appropriate political environment to make it
impossible for the two main tribes to coexist peacefully
and, on that basis, resolve the issue of the final status of
Abyei and its future pursuant to the relevant agreements
signed by the parties. We have consistently renewed our
commitment to implementing these agreements so as to
achieve a resolution to the final status of Abyei in a way
that guarantees lasting peace, security and stability.

The meeting rose at 10.30 am
