Mr. Aboulwafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing.
We would like to reiterate Egypt's complete support for
his efforts. I would also like to welcome Mr. Ivica Dacie,
First Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora
Citaku and to thank them for their statements.

Egypt wishes to reaffirm the importance ofbuilding
on the absolute commitment voiced by the leaders
of both communities to implement the agreements
reached between them. There is also a need to spare
no effort to achieve a peaceful, complete settlement
of all pending issues between Belgrade and Pristina
through dialogue and serious negotiations, based on
the principle of goodwill and mutual respect shown
by both sides within the framework of the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, as
well as all the relevant Council resolutions, especially
resolution 1244 (1999). That outcome can be achieved
only by establishing a conducive environment in the
region and the resumption of the political dialogue
under the auspices of the European Union.

We also underscore the importance of making
progress in the implementation of the August 2015
Agreement, including all its provisions, and of seizing
the opportunity to achieve a lasting settlement, which
would open the door to future economic and political
development and prosperity for all peoples in the region.
We also welcome the ratification a few months ago of
the headquarters agreement with the Netherlands to
host the Specialist Chambers to investigate war crimes.
We hope that this will lay the foundations for the rule
of law, justice and full reconciliation in Kosovo. We
should provide all the necessary support to ensure that
the Chambers are successful in its work, and we hope
to see it establish its premises and begin to function as
soon as possible.

We would also like to highlight the following
efforts undertaken by the authorities of Kosovo:
the voluntary repatriation of displaced persons, the
protection of the religious and cultural heritage, efforts
towards reconciliation and non-discrimination at all
levels of society, the protection of minority rights and,
of course, the strengthening of the rule of law. We
must also provide support to the authorities to address
the challenges posed by immigration and the spread
of extremism and violence. We support the five-year
strategy announced by the authorities to combat
extremism. We hold out the hope that the most recent
presidential elections will serve as a starting point for a
successful internal political process.

We support the efforts by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and the Special
Representative. We would also like to underscore the
importance of strengthening coordination between the
Mission and the European Union and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe in order to fully
implement the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999).

Mr. Mendez Graterol (Venezuela) (spoke in 
Spanish): I would like to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing. I also welcome the statement by Mr. Ivica
Dacic', First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign of Serbia. And I welcome the presence of
Ms. Vlora Citaku.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reiterates that
strict adherence to international law - non-intervention
and respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
unity and political independence of States and the
peaceful settlement of disputes - is an essential
element for the maintenance of international peace and
security. In advocating for a peaceful settlement of
the Kosovo issue, my country believes that resolution
1244 (1999) continues to be the applicable international
legal basis for the achievement of a successful political
solution in the interest of peace. In that regard, we call
for ensuring the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Serbia.

We also reiterate our support for the implementation
of the First Agreement on Principles Governing the
Normalization of Relations, signed of 19 April 2013.
In that context, the support of the United Nations
remains crucial in Kosovo, particularly through the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), so as to promote security, stability
and respect for human rights. That work has been
complemented by the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX). We express once again that UNMIK, KFOR
and EULEX, based on their respective mandates,
should continue to play a proactive, balanced, neutral
and complementary role to direct dialogue, with a View
to promoting a lasting and mutually acceptable solution
on the Kosovo issue.

Our country believes that dialogue and negotiations
between Serbia and the local authorities in the province
of Kosovo must be maintained so that the parties can
reach a mutually acceptable solution on the issue. We
regret that to date there has not been significant progress
in that process, and we therefore encourage all the
parties to intensify their efforts to reverse the situation.
Of particular importance is the establishment of the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
in northern Kosovo, among other aspects. We therefore
urge the authorities of the province to work decisively
to achieve that goal, as was agreed at the highest level in
Brussels. Similarly, we consider it important to support

the process of the voluntary return of Serbs displaced
from their homes in Kosovo, in strict compliance with
the 2013 Brussels agreements.

We consider it necessary to foster full respect for the
human rights of minorities persons displaced from their
places of origin, so that they can fully enjoy those rights
free of discrimination. However, we are concerned by
the ongoing incidents against Serbian Kosovar citizens
in certain areas. In that regard, we once again urge
that the appropriate measures be taken to rectify that
situation and to prevent persecution and harassment
based on ethnic or religious grounds. Furthermore, the
reconciliation process requires ongoing efforts by the
Joint Working Group on Missing Persons with a view to
clarifying the fates ofthose who disappeared during the
conflict. We welcome the results ofthe Working Group's
meeting in June, whereby the parties committed to
stepping up exchanges of information on specific cases
and to organizing ad hoc operational meetings more
frequently. In terms of cultural and religious heritage,
we reiterate the need for the parties to work together in
order to ensure their effective protection.

In the context of the fight against impunity, we
encourage all parties to make efforts and take concrete
steps that can lead to increased trust in the judiciary
and the courts. We therefore urge them to intensify their
efforts so that the Specialist Chambers can come into
effect, which would be responsible for investigating the
allegations of war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed in the armed conflict in Kosovo, as one
more step towards the reconciliation process between
the parties.

In conclusion, we once again encourage the parties
to redouble their efforts to find a political solution that
is peaceful, just and lasting within the framework of
international law, and in full compliance with resolution
1244 (1999) and the Brussels agreements of 2013.

