I too want to welcome Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons to the Security Council. We congratulate her on taking up her post; she can count on our full support. We also thank Ms. Waly and Ms. Akbar for their informative briefings. We welcome the political agreement in Kabul. This needs to pave the way, without delay, to the formation of a fully-fledged Government and to intra-Afghan negotiations. Confidence-building measures, such as prisoner releases, are useful tools for building trust between parties. However, the Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan was, and is not, party to the United States-Taliban agreement. Ideally, a permanent and comprehensive ceasefire accompanies the start of negotiations. At the very least, it should be the outcome of those talks. I reiterate the importance of the full and meaningful participation of women of diverse backgrounds in peace talks. Current female participation should be scaled up, and any future agreement must guarantee the rights of women and girls. While the Eid Al-Fitr ceasefire was a welcome development, the civilian toll of the conflict remains staggering. We call on all sides to immediately address this unacceptable suffering. I stress the importance of accountability and for bringing those responsible to justice. We take note of the opening of an investigation by the International Criminal Court. Moreover, resolution 2513 (2020) clearly stipulates the start of intra-Afghan negotiations and violence reduction by the Taliban as conditions for any review of listings under the sanctions regime established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011). We sincerely regret the continued deliberate attacks on health-care personnel and facilities, particularly during the coronavirus disease crisis, as reported by the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. These attacks violate international humanitarian law and constitute war crimes. On 12 May, it became tragically clear that in Afghanistan even newborns are not spared the horrors of war. We call upon the Government to conduct a thorough investigation into the attack on the Kabul maternity hospital and to hold the perpetrators to account. Sadly, Doctors Without Borders/Medecins Sans Frontieres suspended its operations there out of fear of further violence. The conflict in Afghanistan is the world's deadliest for children, who are nevertheless granted special protection under international humanitarian law. We are deeply concerned at the scale and severity of grave violations of children's rights in the country and thank all delegations for unanimously adopting conclusions on children and armed conflict. We urge all parties to swiftly implement the recommendations of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. Belgium reaffirms its steadfast commitment to the Afghan people. We are contributing through bilateral and multilateral channels to the implementation of the national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000), the Afghan National Army Trust Fund and NATO's Resolute Support Mission. I want to emphasize that, in line with the conclusions of the Council of the European Union adopted last month, future support will be determined by the level of commitment of the Afghan authorities to good governance and human rights. A just peace must be inclusive of all Afghans, including women, youth and minorities.
