Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank today's briefers, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mr. David
Shearer and the Ambassador of Poland, Ms. Wronecka,
for theirinformation. I also want to thank the Ambassador
for her confident and professional stewardship of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan for the past two years.

The people ofSouth Sudan are indeed living through
a watershed moment in their history, and our task is to
help them deal with the challenges facing their young
nation. Like all ofour colleagues, we are unquestionably
disappointed that it has not been possible to form the
Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity
by the previously agreed deadline of 12 November.
However, we urge against overdramatizing the
situation or writing off the efforts that have been made
in that regard. We have observed some progress in the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, and it is important that the parties demonstrate
their willingness to engage in dialogue and overcome
differences by seeking compromise solutions. In that
connection, we have noted the meetings between Salva
Kiir and Rick Machar, which we have consistently
called for and which have now become regular. We are
sure that such contact is indispensable and can help
generate the necessary momentum for South Sudan's
reconciliation process. We would especially like to draw
attention to the fact that just a few hours ago President
Kiir announced that an agreement in principle had
been reached on forming the Cabinet. We await further
details and hope the agreement will be implemented as
soon as possible.

We feel compelled to point to a number of things
that give us grounds for a certain degree of optimism.
The Secretary-General's report (S/2019/936) notes a
drop in the level of armed violence and in the number
of intercommunal clashes. In tandem with the improved
security situation, humanitarian access has improved
as well, and the number of human rights violations
has noticeably decreased. All of that is creating a
positive trend in the return of South Sudanese refugees
and internally displaced persons to their homes,
which we believe is linked to the implementation of
confidence-building measures and to contacts among
the warring parties on the ground. But of course the
main achievement - and here we concur with the
Secretary-General's opinion - is that the parties
are complying with the provisions of the ceasefire.
We call on the South Sudanese to adhere strictly to
those agreements.

We understand that the decision to extend the
pre-transition period is through force of circumstance
and certainly not a reflection of the aspirations of the
South Sudanese and their neighbours. We have taken
note of the position of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD), which welcomed the measure.
We hope that the South Sudanese parties will take the
necessary steps to resolve the outstanding issues on the
agenda. As far as the non-signatories to the Revitalized
Agreement are concerned, we urge them to join the
concerted process of building the State without delay.

We believe it is important that regional players
take the lead in supporting the South Sudanese peace
process, and in that connection we welcome the efforts
of the African Union, IGAD, the Sudan, South Africa
and Uganda. They must maintain a united approach that
will enable them to act in the spirit of the principle of
African solutions to African problems. In our view, only
the full and comprehensive compliance of all the parties
with the obligations they have undertaken can improve
their mutual trust and ensure that the mistakes of the
past are not repeated. We were pleased with the news
that the South Sudanese authorities have earmarked
$40 million for the continued implementation of projects
under the Revitalized Agreement, in particular for the
establishment of a united armed force, which again
emphasizes that the parties want to reach an agreement.

In the context of advancing a settlement in South
Sudan, we urge against going overboard on pressuring
the country with sanctions, and especially unilateral
restrictions. The encouraging indicators we are seeing
now have been made possible largely thanks to the
contribution of regional mediators. Not to mention
that at one stage it was arms-embargo activity that was
preventing regional security initiatives in support of
the settlement process from being implemented. We
believe that once the people of South Sudan have been
able to reach agreement on the whole gamut of issues,
we will need to review the sanctions regime with the
aim of adapting it to the realities on the ground.

