Mr. Buffin (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
would like to thank the Jordanian presidency for having
organized this debate on a major challenge at the
beginning of this new century. My statement is meant
to complement the one delivered by the European Union
(EU), which we, of course, endorse.

We cannot deny that in recent years we have seen
an alarming increase in radicalization and Violent
extremism involving a great many young people from
around the world. The Middle East is probably the
region that suffers most from that trend, but many
other regions of the world are also affected to varying
degrees. Europe is no exception, and neither is Belgium.
My country was directly affected by the deadly attack
almost a year ago, on 24 May 2014, against the Jewish
Museum in Brussels, which was likely perpetrated by a
young fighter returning from the Middle East.

We must of course ensure the safety of our citizens
against the risks posed by this phenomenon, but we
must also ask ourselves what the causes and remedies
are, and ensure that the latter are consistent with the
values that we defend. Why do some young people
choose to kill innocent people rather than go to school
and acquire the tools necessary to become responsible
adults who are useful to the society and community to
which they belong? While the elements of the analysis
of the causes of the phenomenon are well known, the
remedies are complex and multifaceted, and need to
be fine-tuned. Time is also required for them to take
effect. In that regard, I would like to highlight three
courses of action that I consider crucial in the fight
against this phenomenon.

First, there is a need to link the actions at the
various levels of power, from the global to the most
local, while taking into account the value added and the
competencies of each of those levels. Although we must
define the major political outlines and acquire the means
at the international, regional and national levels to fight
this scourge, concrete implementation will primarily
take place in cities and neighbourhoods. It is an illusion
to think that we can reach the young people concerned,
who have often withdrawn from both school and society,
without reaching out to them where they live, where
their frustrations and failures have taken root and which
is the breeding ground for their potential radicalization.
That requires human and financial resources, as well as
genuine political will. Schools, neighbourhood leaders,
social services, families - where women often play a
major role i local religious leaders and civil-society
associations will be among our best allies. We need to
strengthen their ability to act, including by training
them to produce a counter-discourse that can really be
heard. Ultimately, such policies should have the result
of enabling young people to become the main vectors
for solutions and to defend themselves and the values of
tolerance and respect for others.

Secondly, we need to provide our youth with a
future. Socio-professional insertion, particularly for
the most disadvantaged, should be a priority of all our
Governments. According to the International Labour
Organization, 73 million young people worldwide are
currently unemployed. The lack of employment and
income prevents them from projecting themselves
into their future and building a decent adult life. That
lack of prospects makes them easy prey for all types
of extremists. That issue should be at the core of
negotiations on the post-2015 development agenda.

Thirdly and finally, we need to better understand
how the channels of communication used by violent
extremists function. Social media and the Internet are
undeniably vectors for radicalization. As was pointed
out last February during the White House summit on
countering violent extremism, in Washington, D.C., it
is necessary to strengthen cooperation between actors
from all key sectors, including the private sector, while
respecting the fundamental principle of the freedom of
expression. The Internet has a powerful grip; however,
it is not in itself sufficient to radicalize youth in a
lasting way. Contact between these young people and
local extremist and jihadist networks and cells is the
second stage, which draws them more lastingly into
those destructive movements. We must fight against
them with strength and determination.

Allow me to conclude my statement by shedding
light on what Belgium has or intends to do in order to
combat Violent extremism. Our actions could serve as
experience to be shared within the framework of the
necessary exercise of the exchange of good practices
between all the relevant stakeholders. The Belgian
federal authorities have adopted a programme to prevent
Violent radicalization, with the goal, in particular, of
better identifying the processes of radicalization through
research projects and incorporating that information
into new initiatives that have been or will be further
developed in terms of prevention. A pilot project was
launched in 2014 in nearly a dozen of the cities most
affected by this phenomenon so as to provide better
support to local authorities and enable them to combat
the phenomenon of violent radicalization. Concerning
prisons, the Minister of Justice has just launched an
action plan against radicalization, which aims, first,
to prevent inmates from becoming radicalized while
in prison, and, secondly, to develop a specialized
coaching programme for those radicalized during their
detention. Other levels of Government in Belgium have
also launched their own projects, and all of them pay
particular attention to the training of those on the front
line, including teachers, educators and social workers.
Tools have also been developed to train young people
themselves and their parents so as to better anchor the
moral and civic values of our societies in education
and better equip young people against the dangers of
ideological indoctrination.

At the request of EU member States and in
cooperation with the United Kingdom, Belgium has
taken the lead of the Syria Strategic Communications
Advisory Team programme, which aims to develop a
media strategy to counter the message of hatred sent
out by jihadist preachers.

I also wish to recall that Belgium, as part of its
chairmanship of the Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe, will organize on 8 May a conference
on the theme "Tolerance is stronger than hatred,"
thereby showing the extent to which the diversity of
our societies is an asset, rather than a risk. It aims to
identify concrete recommendations, with particular
attention to three areas that may play an important role
in promoting our ability to live together: formal and
informal education, the media, and the worlds of work
and social relationships. At the ministerial meeting of
19 May, during which the Belgian chairmanship will end,
member States will adopt a new protocol to the Council
of Europe Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism,
focused on the fight against the phenomenon of foreign
fighters. An action plan against the radicalization
and extremism that may lead to terrorism will also be
adopted on that occasion.

Based on our previous initiatives, including the
Washington, D.C., Summit organized by President
Obama last February, we encourage Member States
to strengthen their cooperation so as to address the
phenomenon of foreign fighters, ensure the safety of
our citizens, address the root causes allowing terrorism
to thrive, and deal with recruitment. In that regard,
we welcome the high-level meeting scheduled for
September, which will give us an opportunity to take
stock of the implementation of the action plan against
extremism developed during the recent Summit in
Washington, DC.

