Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President, you have expressed all of our
feelings for Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad with such
eloquence, that I can only support what you said. I
wish Ambassador Khalilzad every success in the
future.

With regard to the adoption of resolution 1863
(2009), on Somalia, this is an important step forward
for the restoration of peace and stability to this country
which has suffered through more than two decades of
war. We believe that the resolution we have just
adopted provides a basis for practical efforts by the
Council to restore real peace to Somalia.

For many months now, we have been calling for
support for the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and for the establishment of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation to follow on from
AMISOM. in the future. We are delighted to see that the
Council is now convinced of the validity of that
proposal. The resolution we have just adopted is a
practical step forward in that direction.
The present absence of stability in Somalia
should not prevent certain members of the Council
from supporting a resolution with regard, inter alia, to
the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Somalia. We need to remember that the
United Nations has deployed peacekeeping operations
to other regions of the world that were not stable, and
that those operations did a great job and made it
possible to restore peace to those regions.

We believe that the Council should not stop at the
adoption of resolution 1863 (2009). The
implementation of the resolution has to be followed up
in a timely manner. We need to move forward on that
basis to advance the political process in Somalia
through a comprehensive dialogue that includes Somali
parties without exception with the aim of establishing a
national unity Government and creating a unified
national army. We must seize the opportunity we now
have and begin without further ado to implement the
resolution. We must also support Mr. Ould-Abdallah,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, to
ensure that the political process in Somalia continues
to move forward on the basis of the Djibouti
agreement.

