Mr. Duval (Canada) (spoke in French): I should like
to begin by expressing our gratitude to Deputy Secretary-
General Louise Frechette for her statement to the Council
this morning. The Secretary-General's interest in this issue
is invaluable, and the statement from the Secretariat shows
what deep consideration has been given to the subject under
debate.

For Canada, the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants in a peacekeeping
environment is a key component of the human security
dimension of peacekeeping operations. Since it launched a
truly global peacekeeping operation in Namibia 10 years
ago, the United Nations has gained extensive experience
in the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants. We welcome the fact that Namibia is
present at the Council table today to share its experience
with us. The challenge for the Council today is to
translate this experience into clear, concise and
comprehensive guidelines which can be applied, as
appropriate, to all new peacekeeping missions mandated
by it.

We are sure that our debate today will contribute to
the achievement of that goal because of the thought and
the concerted effort of bodies, agencies and Members of
the United Nations - both recipients and contributors -
that have gone into it. It is a concerted effort without
which words will not be transformed into action.

An effective disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme should aim to turn all ex-
combatants - men, women and, all too often, child
soldiers - into productive members of society. That is
central to beginning any overall process of reconciliation.
But clearly, the conditions favourable for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration do not simply happen:
they must be created. Failure in disarmament and
demobilization in the short term can result in an
immediate relapse into war, just as incomplete
reintegration in the medium term often leads to civil
unrest, especially armed crimes committed by ex-
combatants. A properly planned and implemented
programme of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration is an important and effective instrument for
the general reconstruction of post-conflict society.

For such a programme to be successful, Canada
believes that all three of its components - the
disarmament, the demobilization and the reintegration -
must be in place at the beginning of a mission, continue
throughout the peacekeeping mandate and remain even
after the peacekeepers have left.

The success of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes depend upon, among other
things, an adequate supply of financial resources at every
stage, the political determination of all the parties to the
dispute to succeed, and, finally, close coordination
between the military, police and civilian components.

Conflict affects all elements of society, and each of
these elements must therefore be involved in the return to
security. Canada is convinced that effective disarmament,

 

demobilization and reintegration are dependent on the
participation of those parts of the population most affected
by the conflict. It should also be emphasized that one of the
main guiding principles for any disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration mechanism is the
enhancement of local, national and even regional capacities
through consultation, engagement and active participation
in all aspects of the programme. Any political or technical
advice provided by the United Nations must respect this
principle. We recall the effective cooperation between the
United Nations, the Organization of American States and
the parties to the conflict in Central America, which
allowed the ex-combatants to effect a successful transition.
(spoke in English)

I would like to say a few words in conclusion about
the role and responsibilities of the Security Council. It is in
the creation of a new peacekeeping mission that the
Security Council plays the critical role in ensuring that the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration task is clear.
It must be clear to all parties to the conflict, to all
peacekeepers - military, police and civilian alike - and
to the civilian population. Nothing will dissipate public
confidence faster, embolden hardliners on all sides more
quickly, or undermine the effectiveness of peacekeepers
than if United Nations contingents appear confused or are
in disarray as to the rules of the road.

The spread of small arms is a major destabilizing
element in a post-conflict situation. Canada firmly believes
that, where appropriate, the Council must mandate missions
which include provision for the immediate implementation
of a comprehensive programme combining both voluntary
elements and mandatory measures for short-term
disarmament and longer-term weapons management.
Likewise, the Council's role cannot stop with mandating
disarmament. Demobilization begins where disarmament
stops. The Council must recognize that in these situations
demobilization can proceed only if the conditions exist for
all ex-combatants to feel secure. And, if necessary, the
mission must include civilian police monitors, human rights
observers and military observers and forces, in order to
guarantee that demobilization is undertaken in a safe
environment.

Finally, the Council must recognize that reintegration
must be addressed if the first phases are to be ultimately
successful. Disarmament needs to be tied to the broader
process of post-conflict reconciliation and reconstruction.
Here, respect for the rule of law, for democratic principles
and for human rights must underscore the creation of a
secure environment and the promotion of reconciliation.
These are the necessary foundations for longer term
reconstruction and development if we want them to
succeed.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration will
not end with the completion of a peacekeeping mandate.
The deployment of a follow-on political mission,
mandated by the Security Council, will ensure
coordination and continuity. Close liaison with the
humanitarian and development communities will be
important. Of particular concern to Canada is the large
number of child soldiers who are voluntarily or
involuntarily involved in many conflicts. Consideration
must be given to developing appropriate disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration mechanisms to address
their especially complex situation.

The experience of the United Nations and other
organizations with disarmament, demobilization and the
reintegration of ex-combatants in a peacekeeping
environment has been reviewed and analyzed. There is
now an emerging consensus on both general principles
and practical guidelines for effective disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration planning and
implementation in a coherent and comprehensive fashion.
It is imperative that the Security Council take advantage
of this information when authorizing new peacekeeping
missions. To this end, therefore, Canada would suggest
that the Secretary-General be requested to submit his
recommendations to the Security Council concerning
ways and means to promote the full implementation of
best practices for the effective planning, implementation
and monitoring of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration in a peacekeeping environment.

In concluding, I would be remiss if I did not take
this opportunity to express the sincere thanks of the
Canadian delegation for the initiative taken by Malaysia
in bringing this very important issue before the Security
Council. The issue of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants in a peacekeeping
environment is a topical one that is likely to be relevant
to the deliberations of the Council in the next few
months. We commend and thank you, Mr. President, for
your efforts in undertaking this most timely debate, and
we wholeheartedly support the draft presidential
statement.

