Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, for his
very informative briefing, as well as for his report
on developments in Afghanistan. Special words of
gratitude should also be forwarded to the courageous
and dedicated team of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), which supports
governance, development and reconciliation in
Afghanistan. I also welcome the presentation made by
Ambassador Saikal.

We greatly appreciate the strong motivation and
passion demonstrated by Mr. Ramiz Bakhtiar in his
briefing. The young generation of Afghans embodies
hope for the peaceful and sustainable development
of the country. The international community should
encourage and provide them with effective assistance
on their way to a brighter future, without suffering
or innocent casualties of violence. When we consider
the profound role of the young generation in the
reconstruction and development process taking place
in Afghanistan, we cannot forget how important it is to
allow broad access to education.

Poland reiterates the significance of the peace
process, which should be continued through
constructive dialogue. In that regard, we recognize
President Ghani's numerous efforts aimed at peaceful
conflict resolution as an important step forward. We
count on the representatives of Taliban groups to
respond positively to the offer of peace talks and to take
part in an inclusive, Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
peace process.

Having said that, we cannot turn a blind eye to
the unspoken suffering of the civilian population,
especially the women and children of Ghazni in recent
weeks. We call for unrestricted access for humanitarian
assistance, which is critically needed. We believe that
all parties involved should allow aid workers to ease
the pain and tragedy of innocent people affected by
military operations. Good governance and successful
institution-building require adherence to the rules and
the procedures that enable all citizens to participate
in the democratic process. Poland welcomes the
commitment demonstrated by the Afghan Government
to conducting transparent, inclusive and credible
parliamentary and district council elections. We note
that the initiated process faces such challenges as the
low number of candidate nominations. That needs to be
overcome by the authorities.

The high priority for us remains the wide
participation ofwomen, both as candidates and as voters.
We see it as a fundamental condition for enhancing
peace and security. Poland calls on the Government of
Afghanistan to put a particular focus on challenges to
women's participation in the forthcoming parliamentary
and district council elections. Efforts need to be
undertaken urgently by international partners in order
to provide concrete support for women's groups so as to
ensure women's full participation in every aspect of the
electoral process.

The continued violent acts of hostile insurgent
groups reminds us of the fundamental importance of
maintaining Afghanistan's institutions, specifically
those that have the task of ensuring the security and
defence of the country and its people. Poland supports
and encourages the Afghan Government to continue its
efforts to improve the capability of the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces. Those undertakings
require determination and engagement, which we will
continue to support through training and advisory
activities in the framework of the NATO-led Resolute
Support Mission.

Finally, Poland is concerned over the continued
grave violations against children in conflict. Children
comprised more than half of civilian casualties
documented by UNAMA in aerial strikes and 25 per
cent of all civilian casualties during the reporting
period. Attacks on schools and mosques accounted
for 75 per cent of election-related security incidents.
We call on all parties to cease attacks on and military
use of schools, and to end attacks on medical facilities
and personnel.

