We thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Ms. Qaddour for their comprehensive briefings. As a long-time member of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Donor Support Group, Estonia appreciates the Office's work in mobilizing humanitarian assistance to all people in need. This work is even more important in the light of rising number of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) cases in Syria. Testing remains low, which means that actual infections are probably much higher. Most vulnerable to the virus are those people in overcrowded internally displaced persons camps across the country. Unimpeded humanitarian access to these areas is crucial for an effective response to the COVID-19 outbreak and people's needs. In the light of recent Council's meetings, I want to use this opportunity to take a closer look at the socioeconomic situation inside Syria. We note that, mistakenly, the issue of sanctions is also sometimes raised in this context. However, there is no evidence that European Union sanctions in any way hinder Syria's socioeconomic situation or the humanitarian response in the country. Instead, we must look at the ongoing conflict and the root causes of instability in Syria. First, the war has destroyed Syria's physical infrastructure. The Syrian regime's deliberate bombing of civilian facilities over the course of nine years has led to substantial damages in various sectors, including health and education. Furthermore, trust in Governmental institutions remains low. In the international Corruption Perceptions Index, Syria ranks 178 out of all countries observed. Elites in and around the Syrian regime have continued to enrich themselves. At the same time, 6 million people endure displacement within the country. The final issue is lawlessness resulting from warlordism. Rogue military commanders, Shabiha networks, as well as Iranian-linked militias - the presence of all these adds to the insecurity. We see this clearly in southern Syria, where Syrian Government has controls but communal violence, forced disappearances and kidnappings remain widespread to this day In conclusion, the damage to Syria's social fabric and the collapse of its economy are nothing more than the net result of these factors. International sanctions have nothing to do with it.
