Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): We would like to
congratulate you, Madam President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of April, and to wish you every success. We are
confident that under your leadership the Council will
be able to make a breakthrough on many of the issues
on its agenda.

We would like to express our heartfelt condolences
to the delegation of the Russian Federation in the wake
of yesterday's terrorist attack in Saint Petersburg.
We want to convey our sympathy and sorrow to the
relatives of the victims and wish those who were injured
a speedy recovery.

We welcome the Joint Special Representative for
Darfur and Head of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), Mr. Mamabolo,
and we are very grateful to him for his briefing today
in his new capacity. My delegation would like to make
the following observations in support of the mission's
commendable work.

With the Secretary-General's report (S/2017/250)
reflecting the real situation on the ground and showing
that there has been considerable improvement in the
security and humanitarian situation in Darfur, we
are pleased to see that the number of armed conflicts
between Government forces and insurgents has
fallen, with fewer incidents of intercommunal clashes
compared to last year. In that regard, we commend the
Government's declaration on 15 January extending the
unilateral ceasefire for another six months. Kazakhstan
supports the inclusive political process being organized
under the leadership of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel and encourages every effort
by all of the parties to fully implement the road-
map agreement.

The decision to create a Government of National
Reconciliation and a post of Prime Minister, as well
as to reconstitute the composition of the National
Assembly to make it more representative, is a step
in the right direction. Respecting the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the Sudan
and the Government's ownership and leadership of the
political process are crucial elements for establishing
long-term peace and reconciliation in Darfur. We also
commend the efforts of President Museveni of Uganda
and President Deby Itno of Chad to resolve the crisis
in Darfur, and we hope that the parties, including the
United Nations, will benefit from their good offices.

Kazakhstan underscores the importance of the
work of the tripartite group on the gradual drawdown
of UNAMID and the transfer of its relevant functions
to the United Nations country team. We welcome the
general consensus that has been reached on the issue and
hope that the so-called pending issues will be resolved
by the next meeting. We have seen the important work
being carried out by the joint strategic review mission,
which Visited Darfur from 15 to 17 March, to develop
proposals for implementing UNAMID's exit strategy.
Similarly, UNAMID'S gradual reduction in personnel,
based on the capability of the Government and the armed
groups, should be conducted so as to ensure continued
progress towards peace, and will require more effective
and discerning spending of United Nations resources
during the current period of economic stagnation. The
report of the strategic review mission, which is expected
in May, should give us more directives and reflect the
relevant recommendations.

We also believe that the right-sizing of UNAMID
should be implemented in parallel with the provision
of development assistance to the country, especially
assistance in addressing the problems of internally
displaced persons. We encourage donors to make
good on their commitment to helping the vulnerable
population through support to the development-
peace nexus.

