Mr. Ruzieka (Slovakia): Slovakia welcomes and
highly appreciates the dedication and tireless effort of
Luxembourg in mobilizing efforts to end the abuse of
children in war. We salute the presidency for placing
this important topic on the Council's agenda. Allow
me also to congratulate all organizers and participants
for launching the "Children, not soldiers" campaign
yesterday.

At the outset, I would like to align myself with
the statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union, and also to make a few remarks on
behalf of Slovakia.

I would like to thank today's briefers for their
presentations. In particular, I wish to accentuate the
tireless efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, to work for
the benefit of children in conflict-affected areas. We
fully support the initiative launched by the Office of
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict towards ending the recruitment of children in
Government forces by 2016.

Slovakia has noted with satisfaction an increase in
the attention directed to child protection issues when
setting up or renewing certain mandates of United
Nations missions. Nevertheless, it is only a first step.
The prerequisites of improved child protection, as stated
in mission mandates, have to be fully implemented in
the field. We commend Luxembourg, as Chair of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, for
being proactive in ensuring that language on children
and armed conflict has been retained and expanded
wherever possible in country-specific resolutions.
Slovakia sponsored resolution 2143 (2014). At the
same time, without the additional effort of all Member
States, the Working Group risks losing its momentum,
credibility and maybe its relevance.

Just a few weeks ago, the Security Council held
an open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (see S/PV.7109). During the debate, I stated
that the protection of peace and the prevention of
war comprise one of the most important missions of
the United Nations, and that in cases where we fail
to prevent war or conflict, we must combine efforts,
abilities, means and resources to protect those most
vulnerable: women, children, elderly persons and
persons with disabilities.

A stolen childhood cannot be restored in a lifetime.
Armed conflict and violence pose considerable and
serious risks to the well-being and welfare of children.
Abuse suffered in time of war is the worst form of
violation of children's rights. Not only do children
suffer from the direct consequences of war and armed
violence; they are also affected by displacement, loss
of relatives and the trauma associated with witnessing
acts of violence. Recovery after having experienced a
particularly difficult or challenging situation is always
long-term, with a possibility of failure. It requires
adequate health care, the involvement of parents and
society, education and complex attention in dealing
with physical and mainly mental trauma.

Slovakia remains gravely concerned about the
continuing practice of child soldier recruitment.
The number of child soldiers remains alarming and
their personal stories are utterly disturbing. The
international community must step up efforts both in
rescuing children already recruited as soldiers and
in developing solid preventive measures to help to
discourage, suppress and, ultimately, totally eliminate
that distressing phenomenon. There are two key areas
in particular to address: poverty and education.

We call on all States that have not yet done so to
ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict and to adopt all necessary domestic
measures towards its full and effective implementation.

As I stated earlier, access to education both during
and after conflict is a key factor in terms of preventing
violations of children's rights. Slovakia urges all States,
the international community and United Nations
institutions to address the matter of education as a
priority when adopting policies and programmes with
an impact on children and their rights. By providing
children with adequate education, we can reduce the
risk of their being subjected to abuse.

Slovakia condemns the use of schools for military
purposes. The study Education under attack 2014,
published in February, identifies 70 countries where
attacks occurred between 2009 and 2013. In 30 cases,
there was a pattern of deliberate attacks. Armed
non-State groups and national military and security
forces alike have attacked education to advance their
own interests. In 24 out of the 30 countries profiled in
the study, warring parties took over schools in whole or
in part, using them as bases, barracks, firing positions
and weapons caches. Buildings that should have
provided safe spaces for learning became battlefields
when their use for military purposes made them targets
for attack. Those figures are extremely alarming.

Early focus on restoring functioning schools and
returning young people to classes can represent peace
dividends and foster support for peace. Education
systems need to collaborate on health, education, safety
and security in the schools. Landmine awareness,
psycho-social support and reconstruction of education
institutions must be aligned with social and economic
development planning and public sector and labour
market reform.

Slovakia recognizes its share of responsibility
in helping children to gain access to education and
health care in conflict and post-conflict areas. That is
reflected in our development assistance programmes.
More than €6 million have been allocated to date for
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and Slovak
research and education institutions in the field of health
care and education.

As far as prevention is concerned, those efforts
will not be entirely successful without addressing the
root causes of conflict, as well as its enabling and
facilitating factors. Credible and in-depth security
sector reform has been shown to play a crucial and
decisive role in reducing or even eliminating conditions
that can facilitate the outbreak of conflict, as well as
the sustainability of peace in the longer term.

In that context, we reiterate the need to implement
vetting mechanisms to ensure that those who have
committed crimes against children are not included in
army ranks, that the necessary attention is paid to the
training of military personnel, including peacekeepers,
and that mechanisms to prevent underage recruitment
are put in place. If security sector reform could create
conditions that would help reintegrate or save even one
single child from the horrors of conflict and war, it must
become an imperative for each one of us to undertake.

Children need pens and books, not guns and boots.
In concluding, I want to stress that the protection of
children and their rights, well-being and welfare in
any place on the Earth is the moral obligation of each
and every citizen of each and every State. We must not
abandon those who are the most vulnerable, innocent
and defenceless. The international community, States,
civil society, humanitarian agencies and NGOs all
have the duty and the responsibility to use all means
necessary to protect children from suffering.

