Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to commend you, Mr. President, for
organizing this meeting on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We have listened with great interest to
the very comprehensive briefing by Mr. Miyet, and we
thank him for the information he has provided the
Council on the situation.

We share the View that significant progress has
been made in the implementation of the mandate of the
United Nations in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We also
believe, however, that its pace is too slow. Indeed,
efforts should be consolidated and made speedier so as
to ensure that the peace process can proceed of its own
momentum.

We believe that the efforts of the international
community and the sacrifices made by the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina will succeed in bringing about
a lasting peace, in particular following the commitment
made by the Joint Presidency in the New York
Declaration.

The participation of all parties in the
establishment of a multi-ethnic society on the basis of
democratic institutions will ensure the success of this
undertaking. That is why we deem it necessary to work
to reduce the continued resistance to change, which is
hampering the full implementation of the Dayton
Agreement.

We believe that the State should address the
activities of the extremist nationalist groups, inter alia
by promoting a culture of peace and tolerance and by
engaging in a common political process in which all
Bosnian citizens can participate fully, without
discrimination.

We commend the continuing reform, restructuring
and change in the mono-ethnic character of the police
forces, which should ultimately lead to the appropriate
representation of minorities within the police system in
the Federation. It is up to the police at this crucial stage
to promote social peace and to prohibit any actions
based on ethnic considerations alone.
The judicial system assessment programme must
be translated into concrete actions emphasizing reform
so as to ensure the independence, impartiality and
effectiveness ofthe system.

As concerns the return of refugees and displaced
persons, we welcome the return of a large number of
refugees. It is of paramount importance to continue
efforts to ensure the full implementation of this
process. Conditions conducive to their return must be
created, in particular as concerns the minorities, so as
to help build a multi-ethnic society in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute once
again to the members of the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and of the Stabilization Force
for their commendable and dedicated work in
implementing the mandate entrusted to them.

