Fiji congratulates France on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of June. I thank France for inviting Member States to participate in the Security Council's debate on this important topic of children and armed conflict. Forty years have passed since the adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, which placed the crucial obligation on States to protect children in conflict. The Convention has been further reinforced by over 20 Security Council resolutions since 1999 relating to the protection of children in armed conflict. Despite these, the Secretary-General reports today that the United Nations has documented over 25,000 grave violations against children in 19 situations around the world. Secretary-General Guterres's report to the Security Council (S/2020/525) further states that half of these grave violations were committed by non-State actors and a third by Governments and international forces. The Secretary-General's other recent reports on the protection of civilians (S/2020/366) and conflict-related sexual violence (S/2020/487) highlight an alarming trend overall. They build a picture of increasing violations and deaths in conflict. These reports combined called for the Security Council to seriously step up. Protecting children in armed conflict is a legal obligation first, and a moral obligation second. Fiji welcomes and fully supports the continuous efforts by the United Nations to protect and assist children in armed conflict. The Secretary- General's report on children and armed conflict reflects the effort taken by all agencies to investigate and document grave violations against children in armed conflicts. The annual reports continue to highlight the same challenges over and over. Children need to be protected, perpetrators need to be held accountable and impunity needs to end. The Security Council has an important role to play in preventing conflicts through early intervention. It has the powers to ensure accountability and to end impunity. It has been 15 years since the establishment of its Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. The Working Group's recommendations should continue to be the Council's main guidance for matters related to children in armed conflict. The country task force on monitoring and reporting still faces the challenge of access in order to investigate violations. Member States should continue to allow access to the task force and work together with it towards fulfilling their international obligations. As the report highlights, non-State actors are a growing challenge to the protection of children in armed conflicts. All stakeholders should continue to engage withnon-State actors to build awareness of their responsibilities in protecting children. Fiji respects its international obligations with regard to the protection of children in armed conflicts. Fiji is a party to the Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, the Safe Schools Declaration and the Vancouver Principles. Fiji believes that schools and other educational facilities must be designated prohibited areas for all parties involved in armed conflicts. Keeping armed parties away from schools is a step in achieving a secure learning environment for children and in protecting children from activities that can be a danger to them. But trying to do all that when local communities have suffered and are dispersed and when State institutions have been weakened or destroyed can be a huge challenge for States. Children are always the most vulnerable and will continue to be the first victims of armed conflicts. The most effective way to protect children in armed conflicts is preventive intervention and, when conflicts do break out, then protection requires the strongest possible oversight, reporting and investigation. In all those areas, the Security Council needs to do a lot more. It needs to step up monitoring: oversight is pressing as conflicts are becoming even more complicated. Furthermore, new technologies make it easier to spread hate speech easier and for non-State actors to influence and radicalize young people. Similarly, climate change in many conflict zones is destroying livelihoods and making children more vulnerable to manipulation by armed groups. Fiji supports the recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's report and requests the Security Council to give this challenge urgent and most serious attention in its deliberations.
