Mr. Pressman (United States of America): This
morning many of us in New York woke up to the news
of yet another terrorist attack, in yet another city,
targeting yet another group of innocents. On behalf of
the United States, I extend our condolences for those
whose lives have been taken and offer our prayers for
those whose lives still hang in the balance. We stand
with the Government and the people of Mali and the
nations and peoples of the world that are unwilling to
bend to fear and will not flinch in the face of cowardly
acts of terrorism. It does not scare us, it will not deter
us, it only unites us.

In Mali, the Security Council has deployed
a peacekeeping mission, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), mandated with carrying out critical
tasks that are essential to advancing peace. Today's
tragic attack serves to further illustrate the dangerous
environment in which MINUSMA is deployed. While
the nature of the threats they confront may be different,
operating in dangerous environments is not new to
United Nations peacekeeping.

United Nations missions around the world are
carrying out robust mandates designed to advance
peace and protect peoples. Peacekeepers are operating
in environments where terrorists operate freely, where
host Government hostility is so pitched that it sometimes
resort to tactics like denying United Nations troops food
and rations, and where armed groups control territory
and terrorize civilians each and every day. Those
challenges are real and require us to ensure that United
Nations peacekeeping and peacekeepers have the right
equipment, the right training and the right support to
perform their mission safely and effectively.

Peacekeepers operating in such environments
require active engagement from the Security Council,
even when it means that we, as the Council, must stand
up to those who are willing to play politics with food
and access and cooperation. Those tactics endanger
civilians' lives, imperil the peacekeepers that we have
deployed and frustrate the cause of peace. It requires
leadership and commitment on the part of this body and
Governments around the world. It requires clarity on
how better to support the peacekeeping endeavour.

It has been 15 years since the Brahimi report (see S/2000/809) was issued. The world has changed, and
so, too, has what the world needs of peacekeepers.
That is why the Secretary-General's proposal on
the implementation of the recommendations of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(S/2015/682) is so important. All the more critical
is our response to it. If, after receiving the report
(see S/2015/446) of the High-level Panel, we end up
repeating the same words and doing the same thing
as we did before receiving it, then we will have not
progressed very far. We need to make progress, we
need to take decisions, we need to pony up resources
and we need to engage. That is why I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and for
his commitment to undertaking reforms of the United
Nations peace operations that should significantly
enhance the accountability, transparency, performance
and responsiveness of those life-saving operations
around the world. Reforms are needed because we need
United Nations peacekeeping to succeed.

This is not a challenge for the Secretariat in New
York alone, it is a challenge for each of our Governments.
That is why President Obama co-hosted a leaders"
summit here in September on the issue on peacekeeping,

to help muster new contributions, new capabilities and
new tools, to allow peacekeepers to do their job more
effectively and safely. In connection with the summit,
President Obama issued a policy to all agencies of my
Government, the first policy of its kind in over 20
years, in which he directed us to do more in three areas:
building partner capacity to support United Nations
peace operations, including contributing United States
diplomatic support; providing enabling capabilities
and personnel to peace operations; and supporting the
Council's efforts to achieve peacekeeping reforms. I
would like to make just a few brief points about the
third area, namely, peacekeeping reform.

First, the United States welcomes efforts to improve
the analysis and planning of peacekeeping operations,
including through the Strategic Force Generation
and Capabilities Planning Cell. Our analysis and
planning must not only take into account, but also be
guided by, protecting human rights and countering
threats to civilians, including responding to the most
extreme forms of atrocity. Analysis and planning
must be followed by action. Where peacekeepers fail
to act, the Security Council must be engaged early
and often. Only in that way can the Security Council
ensure that civilians who are relying on United Nations
peacekeeping for protection are in fact protected.

In addition to more robust reporting and
strengthened analysis, we welcome the Secretary-
General's call on the Security Council to re-energize
its efforts to prioritize and sequence peacekeeping
mandates so that capabilities are matched with the
situation at hand, and ultimately lead to operations
that are effective and efficient from mission start-up to
mission exit.

Secondly, when peacekeeping operations are
deployed in environments with asymmetric threats
that pose a risk to United Nations personnel or
civilians, we must redouble our efforts to maintain
sustained cooperation and dialogue with troop- and
police-contributing countries. We owe it to the women
and men who wear blue helmets to ensure that they
arrive in theatre fully trained and fully equipped
to confront the threats. When the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations tells us that advanced
technologies are needed to keep troops safe and able to
perform their mandates, the Council should support the
use of advanced technologies, not allow parties to play
politics with them.

We are pleased that the leaders' summit on
peacekeeping, which drew together more than 50
countries, including some of the largest contributors of
troops and police, helped to generate new capabilities
for peacekeeping operations such as MINUSMA, where
42 peacekeepers have been killed and 168 injured. But
to better enable them to operate both effectively and
safely, we encourage Member States that have pledged
support to follow through on those commitments
rapidly.

Thirdly, we need to recognize that when the
Security Council establishes a new peacekeeping
mission, the Security Council's work has only just
begun. We have a responsibility to monitor the
performance of our missions, including our personnel
and uniformed presence. When underperformance
results from a lack of training and equipment, we
have a responsibility to work with the Secretariat and
troop- and police- contributing countries to build those
capabilities. When peacekeepers opt not to carry out
mandates because of caveats from capitals, the people
whom they are there to serve suffer. Civilians relying
on United Nations peacekeeping for protection do
not appreciate the distinction among commitments
negotiated between New York and a troop-contributor's
capital. They see a blue helmet, and they appropriately
expect help. It is incumbent on us to deliver. We must
take steps to ensure clarity and accountability when
there is a question of conduct and discipline, refusal
to follow command and control or failure to implement
mandated tasks, especially when they call for the robust
use of force to protect civilians.

Every week, we are learning of more cases
of sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeeping
personnel. That demands a swift and urgent response
from the international community and the United
Nations leadership. When peacekeepers victimize the
very individuals and communities they are deployed to
protect, it is nothing short of horrific and undermines
the credibility and legitimacy of the United Nations. The
Security Council must do more, and the United States
remains committed to working with the Secretary-
General to ensure that we are fully able to implement
the United Nations zero-tolerance policy on all forms of
sexual exploitation and abuse. We welcome the call on
the Security Council to include issues of misconduct,
including sexual exploitation and abuse on its agenda
so that the Council can review follow-up action on all
reported allegations. Leadership is, of course, essential.
The success or failure of our peacekeeping missions
hinges on the experience and qualifications of their
senior leaders and the support they receive from United

Nations Headquarters. We support the Secretary-
General's efforts to improve and enhance the selection
of senior leadership for peacekeeping missions globally.

Fourthly, the United States recognizes the
importance of developing new and deeper relationships
among the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations. With nearly 63 per cent of United
Nations peace operations and 87 per cent of all
uniformed peacekeepers serving in Africa, we view our
partnerships with regional organizations - in particular
with the African Union - as critical to ensuring that
we are structuring missions with the requisite support
and oversight to be effective.
Fifthly and finally, we welcome the emphasis of
the Panel on the need to redouble efforts to achieve
political solutions. We agree with the Secretary-
General that political settlements that promote peaceful
and inclusive societies and help advance human rights
are key to preventing conflict and interrupting cycles
of violence. We have a vested interest in ensuring that,
in those places where we have deployed peacekeeping
missions, we are equally engaged in advancing the
political process.

The challenges before us are serious, but so
too are the opportunities. We need United Nations
peacekeeping to succeed, and together, by pursuing the
reforms that we have discussed today, we can do much
to advance the ability of the United Nations and the
community of nations to advance peace and security.

