Mr. Seck(Senegal) (spoke in French): The delegation
of Senegal would like to warmly thank and commend
the Italian and French delegations for once again
inviting us, as they did eight months ago on 24 March
(see S/PV.7907), to contemplate and take action based
on the maxim of the German thinker Heinrich Heine
that "where they burn books, they will also ultimately
burn people". The bloody actions of armed groups and
terrorists on the international stage have unfortunately
confirmed that tragic universal reality.

I would also like to thank and commend today's
briefers, Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-
General of the United Nations Office of Counter-
Terrorism; Ms. Audrey Azoulay, Director-General of
UNESCO, whom we are very pleased to see appointed
to lead that body and wish every success in her work;
Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; Mr. Jiirgen Stock,
Secretary-General of INTERPOL; and Mr. Alessandro
Bianchi, Project Leader of Cultural Heritage Protection
for Italy's Ministry of Culture. Their admirable
presentations call for determined and coordinated
action on the part of the international community to
prevent and put an end to the destruction and illicit
trafficking of cultural heritage and, where possible, to
restore or return them to their rightful owners.

Nothing has been left unsaid regarding the role
of cultural heritage in preserving peace and security,
as both tangible and intangible cultural heritage form
part of the identities of whole communities, societies,
peoples and nations for whom such heritage is a point
of reference for shared values. It is a source of cohesion
and togetherness - as a former President of Senegal,
Leopold Sedar Senghor, has said, a common will to live
together. With the adoption of its historic resolution
2347 (2017), the Security Council has fully recognized
this essential dimension of cultural heritage.

The proliferation of armed conflicts throughout
the world, coupled with the spread of international
terrorism and violent extremism, owing to the criminal
actions of terrorist groups whose trademark is the
destruction, looting and trafficking of property, is one
of the factors that is putting the world's cultural heritage
in increasing danger. Organized looting and the illicit
trafficking of cultural property have become a tactic of
war for terrorist groups, which then use the proceeds
to finance their criminal activities. Senegal has been
shocked by the mass destruction and brutal sacking by
these criminal groups of sites in Afghanistan, Syria,
Iraq and Libya, not to mention the destruction in 2012
of the mausoleums in Timbuktu, city of 333 saints. As
a result, we contributed actively to the launching in
June 2012 of the Saint Petersburg Declaration, which
condemned their destruction.

It is therefore clear that the protection of world
cultural heritage in conflict situations is a major
challenge to which the international community must
respond rapidly and appropriately. The international
Conference on Safeguarding Endangered Cultural
Heritage, held in Abu Dhabi on 2 and 3 December 2016,
laid a good foundation for that response. Given the
persistence of this threat, we believe that it is essential
to take an inclusive approach in the international efforts
to adopt new strategies to tackle the destructive fury
of these terrorist groups. Within the framework of that
dynamic, as set out in paragraph 17 (j) of resolution
2347 (2017), it is important to take steps to make as
precise an inventory as possible of cultural properties
and other objects of archeological, historical, cultural
and religious importance that have been illegally
displaced, removed or transferred from conflict areas,
so as to ensure coordination with the relevant United
Nations entities and international actors for their
speedy repatriation.

We also welcome the relevance of paragraph 4 of
resolution 2347 (2017), which affirms that

"[D]irecting unlawful attacks against buildings
dedicated to religion, education, art, science or
charitable purposes, or historic monuments may
constitute, under certain circumstances a war
crime and that perpetrators of such attacks must be
brought to justice."

The Senegalese delegation therefore once again
commends the decision of the International Criminal
Court of 27 September 2016, which for the first time in
the history of humankind identified the destruction of
religious and cultural heritage as a war crime and, as a
consequence of that decision, sentenced a perpetrator
of such acts, Ahmad Al Faqi Al Mahdi, to nine years
in prison, setting an important legal precedent that
we hope will serve as a deterrent in future. Senegal
encourages including support for safeguarding
cultural heritage in peacekeeping missions' mandates
so as to maintain the example set by resolution 2100
(2015) - which established the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) - and subsequent related
resolutions, the latest of which is resolution 2364
(2017), which, in paragraph 22 (c), entitled "Support for
cultural preservation", authorizes MINUSMA

"[T]o assist the Malian transitional authorities, as
appropriate and if possible, protect the cultural and
historical sites of the country against all attacks, in
collaboration with UNESCO."

Because the protection of cultural heritage is first
and foremost the responsibility of the State where
it is located, the United Nations and other relevant
bodies must provide Governments that request it with
all the support and assistance they need to establish
national protection mechanisms. In that regard, we
welcome the establishment of an international fund
to protect endangered cultural heritage. It is equally
important to strengthen cooperation - bilateral,
subregional or regional - through joint initiatives
Within the framework of the appropriate UNESCO
programmes. Similarly, enhanced cooperation among
other international organizations, such as UNESCO,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
INTERPOL and the World Customs Organization,
would also help to further mobilize the international
community in better coordinating the activities and
initiatives of all stakeholders.

In conclusion, based on the connection between
trafficking in cultural property and funding terrorism, I
join the Secretary-General, as he outlines in paragraph
111 of his report (S/2017/969), in calling on Member
States to consider the relevant provisions of resolutions
2199 (2015), 2253 (2015) and 2368 (2017), which
complement the implementation of resolution 2347
(2017). Lastly, the French-Italian initiative that has
brought us together today is part of the dialogue among
cultures and civilizations, which is very important to
my country and crucial to maintaining international
peace and security.

