Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): First and
foremost, we express our condolences to the people of
France, Russia and Lebanon. We in Iraq are also affected
by the continuing and multiform terrorist operations.
We see martyrs die every day. We want to express
our thanks to you and your country, Mr. President, for
preparing and organizing this open debate on a subject
that is of growing importance, given the close link
between security challenges and the implementation of
the Sustainable Development Goals.

The best way to guarantee sustainable peace
and tolerance and to prevent conflicts is to reinforce
sustainable development and to guarantee equal
opportunities for all. We also need to establish justice
in the distribution of national wealth, without excluding
anyone on the basis of race, ethnic origin or belief. The
objective of creating secure and inclusive societies,
based on a solid foundation, is defined in Goal 16 of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1). Creating such societies
requires respect for the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, as well as for international law, which
prohibits interference in the internal affairs of States.
Such interference exacerbates divisions, including
divisions based on religion and belief, and creates
insecurity at the domestic level. It unleashes conflict,
which leads to destruction and massacres within local
societies. It also undermines the development gains that
States have achieved over previous decades - gains
that are being lost in the wars we are seeing at the
moment.

Fair and equal participation and access to resources
between neighbouring States along a river, for example,
prevent conflict between the countries on that river.
The absence ofjustice and equality in regard to water
quotas impedes the sustainable development of the area
through which that water flows, which contravenes the
right to water. Furthermore, mutual investment in the
water of an international river contributes to sustainable
development among the countries along that river, and
that closes the door on conflict.

The spread of Takfiri thinking or apostasy
throughout the modern world demonstrates the lack of
global security, as well as the failure of the international
community to face up to the Takfiri thinking of schools
whose teaching deviates from regular education. Such
thinking permits massacres, hostage-taking, sexual
enslavement, immolation and the other crimes that
are being committed against those who hold different
religious or other beliefs. The failure to address such
delinquent thinking and to eliminate it is a strategic
failure of the mechanisms that have been established to
eradicate terrorism, namely the programmes within the
United Nations or outside it.

We must not forget that the pressure on the
environment, the scarcity of natural resources and
climate change itself are all factors that contribute to the
outbreak of wars and conflict. Given that reality, Iraq
has made its contribution to the document on climate
change whose adoption we expect to see in Paris.
Women can contribute to the prevention of conflicts
and peacebuilding. Women's rights must be guaranteed
by societies and women must not be excluded or
deprived of their rights, especially since they often
suffer the most in situations of armed conflict. In
Iraq, we are making progress towards the completion
of a national plan to apply resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security, including with respect
to decision-making in those areas.

