Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I wish to thank you, Sir,
for convening this open debate on the impact of
transnational organized crime on peace, security and
stability in West Africa and the Sahel region. I also
thank the Secretary-General and the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) for the messages they delivered.

Today's open debate confirms the Security
Council's ongoing attention to the growing threat of
drug trafficking and transnational organized crime to
regional peace and stability. Transnational organized
crime and illicit trafficking are not only a security
issue; they are a multifaceted threat that demands an
integrated response. While it is very important to stop
criminals and drug-traffickers, this should not be the
sole driver of our policies. We have to address the root
causes of these problems and implement a
comprehensive strategy that fosters security and long-
term socio-economic development.

Italy supports the Secretary-General's five-year
action agenda aimed at mobilizing collective action
and comprehensive regional and global strategies
against organized crime, integrating rule of law, public
health, development and human rights responses. In
this regard, West Africa and the Sahel are test cases for
the international community.

Let me offer some concrete examples of Italy's
comprehensive approach to these phenomena and of
the strategic coordination we have forged between
international cooperation and regional and national
policies.

In West Africa and the Sahel, Italy is actively
involved in a complete set of programmes in the fields
of the rule of law, institution-building, and training.
Italy has financed $1.6 million in international
cooperation through the Economic Community of West
African States and the West Africa Coast Initiative,
which brings together UNODC, the Department of
12-23696

Political Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and INTERPOL. In the framework of the
EU Frontex agency, Italy has provided a coastguard
unit and an aircraft for border controls in Senegal. Two
teams of Italian police officers participated recently in
a UNODC project to build the capacity of law
enforcement agencies in Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Sierra
Leone and Senegal to fight drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime. These efforts helped
establish transnational organized crime units in Sierra
Leone and Guinea-Bissau.

The broad approach to security that Italy
advocates is exemplified by our cooperation programs
with Nigeria. In addition to the training of police
officers, we also promote intercultural dialogue at the
bilateral, regional and international levels. Programmes
of this type have also been developed in Mali.

Italy recently hosted 20 Nigerian police-officers
for a three-week training course in financial
investigation techniques. We are also administering
customized police-training programmes on border
control techniques, and we have trained Nigerian
officials at border postings in Italy. Over the past four
years, the Centre of Excellence for Stability Police
Unit has trained approximately 300 African officers.
With regard to initiatives to break up the partnership of
convenience between criminal networks and terrorist
organizations, in December 2010 the Italian Anti-Mafia
Bureau signed a memorandum of understanding with
its Nigerian partner, NAPTIP, on countering trafficking
in human beings and the related illegal financial
incomes.

All these technical assistance programmes are
encompassed in the broader framework of development
cooperation activities that Italy continues to carry on in
several countries of West Africa and the Sahel region,
notably Benin, Burkina Faso, Mali, Niger, Nigeria,
Senegal and Sierra Leone.

Three key elements should be emphasized. First,
political will is a long-term decisive factor in fighting
transnational organized crime. We need to ground this
issue in the broader framework of the United Nations
agenda. Italy is traditionally committed to building
consensus on United Nations policies and common
actions on drugs and crime. This was attested to by the
General Assembly's high-level meeting on
transnational organized crime, promoted by Mexico
and Italy in 2010, and the annual General Assembly
3
resolution on the United Nations crime prevention and
criminal justice programme, introduced by Italy and
sponsored this year by 140 member States.

Secondly, drug trafficking still represents the
single most profitable criminal industry worldwide. It
spreads corruption to every level of affected States.
Our strongest weapon is the legal framework provided
by the United Nations Conventions on drug control,
transnational organized crime, and against corruption.
The protection of the integrity of these instruments and
the promotion of their full implementation are an
important feature of our common and shared
responsibility.

Thirdly, the distinction between producer, transit
and consumer countries is becoming blurred. Producer
and transit countries are facing consumption problems
in West Africa and the Sahel region as well, while
consumer countries are starting to produce and export
drugs. Supply reduction measures must go hand in
hand with efforts to reduce demand and promote the
rehabilitation and reintegration of drug users.

Last but not least, transnational organized crime
operates as a global business that seeks to reap big
profits. Curbing its financial power would affect its
raison d'etre. We can and must make the attack on the
huge illegal assets accumulated by criminals around
the world the cutting-edge of international security
cooperation.

