Ms. Gunnarsdottir (Iceland): Iceland firmly
supports a peaceful resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and the two-State solution. Since the Oslo
process was launched, almost two decades ago, we
have been betting on the peace process to lead to such
a result, which would make a comprehensive peace
achievable in the region as a whole, as foreseen in the
Arab Peace Initiative.

Now, however, the peace process is at a complete
standstill. While Iceland urges the parties to return to
the negotiating table, we feel that the time has come
for the international community to become more
directly involved. The United Nations had a historic
role in the creation of the State of Israel and the time
might be approaching when it would be appropriate for
the General Assembly and the Security Council to
re-engage themselves for the purposes of solving the
Palestinian question.

If the Palestinians decide to bring the issue
directly to the General Assembly, Iceland stands ready
to support them. This was clearly stated by the
Icelandic Minister for Foreign Affairs when he met
with President Abbas and Foreign Minister Al-Malki
during his to trip to Ramallah earlier this month. At
that time, our Minister stated that Iceland would
support a resolution on Palestinian statehood, based on
the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, as
well as a resolution on the full membership of Palestine
in the United Nations, should the Palestinians decide to
seek such resolutions in the autumn.

Iceland's position is that the pursuit of
recognition of a Palestinian State does not contradict
the wish for a negotiated settlement of the conflict. It
might, quite to the contrary, be seen as the means to
stimulate serious negotiations. There is a need to
address the asymmetry of power between the two
parties. That can only be done through a more forceful
participation by the international community, including
through emphasizing the international law applicable
to the occupation.

In the absence of a political solution the situation
on the ground needs to be improved. First of all, we
echo those worldwide who urge the Israeli Government
to lift the blockade of Gaza immediately. Enough of the
currently closed legitimate crossings and established
channels for goods in and out of Gaza should be
opened to be able to reach the pre-blockade capacity
for imports and exports. The markets in steel bars and
cement should especially be liberalized by the Israeli
authorities.

The decision of the Israeli Government to
continue with its settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including in East Jerusalem, is
incompatible not only with its obligations under
international law but also with the Road Map. We note
that this illegal activity continues and that the use of
violence, house demolitions and forceful evictions in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including in East
Jerusalem, remains a serious concern. The international
community should be careful not to send messages that
can be perceived as accommodating existing illegal
settlement activities. Creating facts on the ground that
are contrary to international law and constitute an
obstacle to achieving a two-State solution should not
be rewarded. The settlements are reversible.

Iceland would also like to voice concern over
increased settler violence against the Palestinians,
including their so-called price-tag policy. This is a very
worrying development, and Israel is under the
obligation to do its utmost to prevent such violence
and, when it does occur, to ensure that those involved
are held accountable.

Finally, Iceland welcomes the reconciliation
agreement between Fatah and Hamas and their
intention to form an interim Government in preparation
for presidential and parliamentary elections in
Palestine. We urge the Palestinian parties to heed the
calls of their own people to work towards realization of
the agreement and to become united in their pursuit of
a peaceful resolution to the conflict.

