Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): I would like first of all to
express the condolences of the Brazilian delegation at the
passing away of King Hassan II of Morocco. My delegation
would also like to say a word of admiration for his
achievements as a great statesman and as a beloved leader
of his people.

I wish to extend a warm welcome to the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
Mrs. Sadako Ogata, and to congratulate you, Mr. President,
for having convened this public meeting. It is indeed a very
useful exchange of ideas that we are carrying out today.

Let my first words be to commend Mrs. Ogata's work
as High Commissioner. Her work is being performed with
such dedication and professional skill that it deserves the
admiration of all of us. This is the kind of job in the United
Nations that deserves, intrinsically, the support and the
respect of all Member States, for the assistance to refugees
deals with coping with the suffering of human beings who
have lost all their daily points of reference, sometimes
becoming even indifferent to life, as someone remarked
after Visiting a refugee camp in Angola.

As was clear from what we heard in Mrs. Ogata's
presentation, the refugee problem in Africa is a dramatic
question. The situations described involve many different
countries and a large number of displaced persons. There
are signs of hope, but these are still few. Unfortunately,
the complexity of war and the fragility of peace in
Africa - as Mrs. Ogata stated last November - continue
to lead to new flows of refugees.

Brazil echoes the appeal made by Mrs. Ogata last
May, when she briefed the Council on the plight of
refugees in the Balkans. On that occasion, she reminded
the Security Council not to overlook other refugee crises
around the world. As a developing country whose
population and culture have deep roots in Africa, Brazil
is sympathetic to the calls for the international
community, represented in this Organization better than
anywhere else, to ShOW for the African crisis the same
level of interest and political involvement displayed in
other parts of the globe.

As a member of the Security Council, we are very
concerned at the impact of refugee flows on the stability
of Africa, as well as at the infiltration of armed elements
into the refugee settlements.

The work of UNHCR is of paramount importance in
both contexts. Difficult as they may be to achieve, the
main goals remain the same: the return and reintegration
of refugees, the promotion of tolerance among different
ethnic and religious groups, and support for confidence-
building measures.

Because of the magnitude of the African refugee
problem, which I have already touched on, the tasks faced
by Mrs. Ogata probably go beyond the means and the
possibilities of UNHCR alone. Building a culture of peace
in order to tackle these problems in the long run may
require sharing complex responsibilities with different institutions.

The Council has the fundamental goal of creating
conditions for peace to prevail, and there can be no peace
without strong foundations. In this connection, I would
like to pose only one question to Mrs. Ogata.

Mrs. Ogata, there has been a Visible increase in the
demand for humanitarian services, especially from your
Office. That increase has taken place not only because of
the reality on the ground and the difficulty involved in
tackling one of the roots of the problem, which is
poverty, but also because the level of awareness of public
opinion nowadays is higher than before. I would like you

 

to comment on the other side of this question. What can
you tell us about the supply of humanitarian services in
Africa, especially with respect to donors' responses to these
new challenges? More specifically, what do you think the
Council could do, in concrete terms, to help you resolve
this problem - which is real and which you presented so
clearly - of the supply of humanitarian services in Africa?

Furthermore, in regard to the question of coordinating
efforts to resolve the refugee problem, what is your
assessment of the coordination between your organization
and the Organization of African Unity in the area of
humanitarian and refugee matters?

