Mrs. Galindo (Colombia) (interpretation from Spanish): Let me begin by expressing our satisfaction at
seeing you, Sir, preside over the Security Council's
deliberations this month.

My delegation wishes to stress the importance of this
debate on the question of the situation in the occupied Arab
territories, to which it attaches special significance. We
believe that this debate is particularly relevant in view of
recent events associated with the matter under
consideration.

 

The question of Jerusalem has been given constant
attention by the international community, and in particular
by the Non-Aligned Movement, which has referred to it
on many occasions. At the Ministerial Meeting held last
year in New Delhi, the Foreign Ministers of States
members of the Movement reaffirmed all the resolutions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly on
Jerusalem as an integral part of the occupied Palestinian
territories, and demanded the implementation, in
particular, of Security Council resolutions 252 (1968), 465
(1980), 478 (1980), 1073 (1996) and General Assembly
resolution 51/223. They deemed that the measures aimed
at altering the legal, geographical and demographic status
of Jerusalem, along with other actions in violation of
these resolutions, are null and void.

In the Final Communique adopted at the Ministerial
Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau, held in Cartagena,
Colombia, from 18 to 20 May this year, the Foreign
Ministers and heads of delegation of the Non-Aligned
Movement reiterated their support for the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people, including its right to its
own homeland and independent State, with Jerusalem as
its capital. At that time, they once again repeated their
demand that Israel withdraw from the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem, and the other
Arab territories occupied since 1967.

The Ministers and heads of delegation of the States
members of the Non-Aligned Movement also reaffirmed
their position on occupied East Jerusalem, the illegal
settlements and the applicability of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949 to all occupied Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem. In this connection, they demanded
strict compliance with the Security Council's resolutions
on this matter.

The Ministers of the States members of the
Movement reiterated in Cartagena their support for the
recommendations contained in the resolutions adopted at
the tenth emergency special session of the General
Assembly - resolutions ES-10/2, ES-10/3, ES-10/4 and
ES-10/5 - including, inter alia, the recommendation to
convene a conference of the High Contracting Parties to
the Fourth Geneva Convention to discuss how to enforce
compliance with the Convention in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem, and to ensure
respect by Israel of the Convention by assuming their
collective responsibility in accordance with its article 1.

