The Secretary-General: The Mouvement du 23
Mars (M-23) mutiny that began in April 2012 brought
yet another wave of misery to the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Hundreds of
thousands ofpeople were displaced. Countless innocent
men, women and children suffered horrendous acts
of violence, rape and other forms of sexual violence,
abduction and summary execution. The fighting has
stopped, but insecurity prevails - and it is growing in
other areas of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Perhaps some would dismiss the recent unrest in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo as
yet another cycle of violence in a long-plagued region
of the world. But we have it within our grasp to break
that cycle and shape something different. Longer-term
stability in the entire region is possible, but it requires
us to collectively commit to addressing the root causes
of the violence.

That is why I have reached out to regional leaders
and joined with them to find a durable solution. We
came together at the margins of the General Assembly
last September and at the African Union Summit in
January. We agreed that military action alone would
not deliver for the people of the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. A lasting solution
requires at least four ingredients.

First, it must be anchored in the political will of
the leaders of all the countries of the region. Secondly,
it must address the structural causes that are fuelling
instability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
itself. Thirdly, it must respect the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and legitimate concerns and interests of
all countries concerned. Fourthly, it demands the
commitment and long-term support of the international
community.

Building on existing and ongoing regional peace
and security initiatives, we developed an innovative and
comprehensive approach. We focused on addressing the
root causes of the recurring cycle of violence through
a combination of actions at the national, regional and
international levels. The approach is presented in my
special report before the Council (S/2013/ll9), and
it also formed the basis of the Framework for Peace,
Security and Cooperation for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, signed on 24 February in
Addis Ababa.

The signing of the Framework represents a historic
opportunity. Eleven countries of the Great Lakes
region have committed to respecting the sovereignty
and integrity of their neighbours, to strengthening
economic integration and to neither tolerating nor
providing support to armed groups. The Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo has also
committed to undertaking significant internal reforms,
such as army reform, decentralization, the expansion
of infrastructure and basic social services delivery,
reconciliation and democratization.

The chairs of the African Union, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Southern
African Development Community and I are acting as
co-guarantors of the Framework. All of us understand
that signing the Framework is a beginning, not an end.
Implementation is essential, and innovative national
and regional oversight mechanisms have been included
in the Framework.
Multitrack action plans with benchmarks that will
ensure the measurement of progress must be developed.
The regional oversight mechanism has the format of a
peer review among all signatories. That mechanism,
composed of the ll+4 signatories of the Framework,
will meet at the highest level twice a year to review
progress on its implementation. That meeting will take
place every January at the margins of the African Union
Summit and each September at the annual session of
the General Assembly. I will also appoint a special
envoy who, together with concerned stakeholders,
will support the implementation of the Framework,
including through benchmarks to measure national and
regional progress.

Supporting the implementation of the national
commitments set out in the Framework - and consistent
with the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) - my Special Representative
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo will play a
central role in promoting inclusive and transparent
political dialogue among concerned stakeholders as a
key priority.

To further support the political objectives of the
Framework, my report also proposes the establishment
within MONUSCO of an intervention brigade. The
intervention brigade will have the ability to conduct,
with or without the Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo, offensive operations against
all armed groups that threaten the peace in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That
enforcement capacity, which was initially called for
by the regional actors, seeks to address the imminent
threats to stability and will provide the most appropriate
response to the active conflict environment in which
MONUSCO has been operating for several years.

The intervention brigade will be tasked with
containing the expansion of Congolese and foreign
armed groups alike, neutralizing those groups and
disarming them. That will provide much needed capacity
to our peacekeeping operation. We are now consulting
with current MONUSCO troop-contributing countries
and potential contributors to the international brigade
in order to prepare, should the Council agree, for a
rapid deployment of the brigade. The security situation
remains fragile and demands urgent actions. I call on
the Security Council to authorize the deployment of the
brigade and to provide it with the necessary political
backing.

The effective implementation of the commitments
and oversights mechanisms will require the long-term
efforts of the international community, including the
Security Council. Structural reforms in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the commitments made at the
regional level will need the international community's
sustained support and heightened attention. The
Council should remain seized of the progress made
in implementing the provisions of the Framework.
Commitments must be translated into results.

The latest crisis in North Kivu has displaced
900,000 civilians, bringing the total number of
internally displaced persons in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to 2.6 million.
The people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
deserve to live normal lives and not be subject to rape,
abduction, exactions, fear or worse. We owe them our
best efforts to tackle the root causes of their insecurity.

Eleven Heads of State and Government have
proclaimed their commitment to uniting for this cause.
I call on the Council today to support them. Let us offer
the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo not
only hope, but a concrete engagement for the peace and
stability they have so long deserved.

