Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): At the outset, I
wish to congratulate China on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March. I am confident that, with China's wise and able
leadership, the Council will successfully discharge its
duties and responsibilities. I wish to thank the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Ban Ki-moon, for
his presentation on Somalia. I also wish to thank Prime
Minister Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed of the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia and
Ambassador Boubacar Diarra, Special Representative
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for Somalia, for providing us with a ground-level view
of the situation in Somalia. Lastly, I wish to thank
Mr. Henry Bellingham, Minister for Africa of the
United Kingdom, for sharing his insights and
perspective on Somalia this morning.

The delegation of the Philippines highly
appreciates China's concept note, entitled
"Comprehensive strategy for the realization of peace
and security in Somalia" (S/20ll/ll4, annex), which
helps set the tone of our open debate today.

The situation in Somalia has momentarily taken a
back seat in relation to the pressing developments in
the Middle East. But the deteriorating situation in that
huge and strategic country in the Horn of Africa poses
serious security challenges that, if not addressed
quickly and consistently, could further develop into a
much greater and long-term threat to international
peace and security. The damage and disruption caused
by Somali pirates to international shipping, trade and
tourism and the danger posed by pirates to the safety
and well-being of merchant mariners have far-reaching
negative impacts and potentially catastrophic effects.
The rampant piracy off the coast of Somalia and
beyond is indeed a major concern for the international
community and the Philippines. The Philippines is the
origin of one third of the world's seafarer population
and is among the countries most adversely affected and
seriously alarmed by incidences of piracy off the coast
of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden.

We are now feeling the negative effects of
relentless pirate attacks on cargo ships and even
smaller marine vessels navigating Somali waters and
the wider Indian Ocean. Buoyed by their initial
successes and impunity from prosecution, the Somali
pirates are getting more and more sophisticated and
aggressive in seizing control of unprotected ships. We
see not only more crew members being taken hostage,
but also an escalation of atrocities. Early this year,
Somali pirates shot dead a Filipino seaman aboard a
German-owned ship, the MV Beluga Nomination, off
Seychelles.

As I speak, at least 130 Filipino seafarers from
11 vessels are still being held captive by Somali
pirates. It is a tribute to their courage and tenacity that
they have so far endured the ordeal. The Government
of the Philippines is doing everything within its power
to facilitate their early and safe release so that they can
return to their families and loved ones and resume their
normal lives.

The Philippines supports more robust
international action against piracy. Pirates must be
brought to justice to the extent possible. In this regard,
the Philippines commends the work of Mr. Jack Lang,
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Legal
Issues related to Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, in
developing legal approaches aimed at the prosecution
and imprisonment of captured pirates. In addition, the
international community must push bolder and more
effective anti-piracy measures. There must a concerted
effort among the stakeholders - such as Governments,
shipping companies, manning agencies and seafarers'
associations - to work closely together to comply
with best management practices to deter piracy attacks.

The international naval presence in the Gulf of
Aden and the Indian Ocean, in particular Operation
Atalanta, has done a lot to protect and ensure the safe
passage of merchant vessels in those high-risk waters.
The deployment of navy assets, however, in such a
wide expanse of territory poses logistical and
coordination challenges and strains the limited
resources needed for the operation's sustainability.

It is evident in our debate today that there is a
firm commitment to tackling the urgent problem of
piracy off the coast of Somalia. The long-term solution
to piracy, however, lies on land and not at sea. The
ongoing peace process in Somalia deserves the strong
and vigorous support of the international community.
The peace and security and development needs of that
country should be the paramount goal. Economic and
career opportunities must be created in order to provide
an alternative path for restless Somali youth who are
vulnerable to the lure of piracy.

The Philippines stands ready to work with the
United Nations and other partners to assist in the
efforts to help Somalia attain peace and stability and
fight the menace of piracy. The Somali people urgently
need our continued understanding and help. We should
not disappoint them.

