Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, on behalf of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia, I would like to thank the Argentine Republic
for holding this open debate, as well as to congratulate
you, Madam President, on the manner in which you
have led the presidency of the Security Council during
this month as a whole and during this important open
debate in particular. If I am not mistaken, you are one
of the few Presidents who has remained in the Chamber
throughout the meeting, listening to each and every
representative. We are very pleased about that.

The Plurinational State of Bolivia has followed
closely the open debates convened by the Council,
especially those related to the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts. Today we are remembering those who
10 years ago sacrificed their lives for the principles and
values of the United Nations and its Charter.

We also acknowledge the reports of the Secretary-
General; of Ms. Pillay, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights; of Ms. Amos; and of
Mr. Philip Spoerri.

We agree with the five main points set out in
the respective reports of the Secretary-General as a
response to the various challenges facing us: respect
for international law; compliance by non-State armed
groups; enhancing protection by United Nations
peacekeeping and other relevant missions; improving
humanitarian access; and enhancing accountability
for violations of international humanitarian law,
international human rights law and international
refugee law.

Bolivia nevertheless wishes to draw the Council's
attention to several issues that should be part of the
discussion if we truly wish to consider the structural
causes of armed conflicts and, ultimately, international
responsibility for the protection of civilians in the
framework of international law.

Ms. Pillay's report is both clarifying and alarming.
It shows that in recent weeks more than 1,000 people
have lost their lives in Iraq; 1,319 in Afghanistan; and
more than 100,000 in Syria, since the conflict began.
So many others have died, too, elsewhere on the planet.

In sum, one of the fundamental pillars for ensuring
the protection of civilians has to do, naturally, with
the fight against impunity and full respect for the
norms of international law, which are clearly expressed
in instruments such as the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). That ideal cannot
be translated into reality as long as the possibility of
the ICC's having universal jurisdiction is undermined.
There cannot be first-class and second-class countries:
those that subject themselves to the jurisdiction of the
ICC, and those that not only fail to recognize it, but also
use it as an instrument for their specific ends.

History is demonstrating to us that, unfortunately,
humanitarian law, human rights and democracy, or at
least the speeches that mention them, are but a coverup
for the geopolitical control and appropriation of natural
resources. We wonder, how many times was the defence
of those rights brought up as a pretext for invasion and
pillage? How many times, when they speak to us about
democracy and human rights, should we understand
oil, gold or diamonds? How many times are innocent
civilians the main victims of the conflict, killed for no
reason?
We wish also to draw attention to the privatization
of war and to the use by certain States of private
contractors, whose responsibility for violations of
humanitarian law and human rights is even more
difficult to ascertain than that of the regular forces of
a State.

We must put an end to the logic of the rule of
the strongest and substitute the universal rule of
international law. The High Commissioner for Human
Rights clearly mentioned drone attacks, which result
in civilian victims, where neither responsibility nor
the legal basis for such attacks can be determined. If
international law is truly for all, and if the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations truly apply to all
Member States, then there should be no Guantanamo.
The fact that one State is spying on all others should not
go unpunished. There should be no acts of aggression
against Heads of State such as the one suffered by the
Head of State of Bolivia, Evo Morales Ayma, when he
was travelling through several countries in Europe.
Nor should there be impunity for acts such as case of
the partner of Guardian reporter Greenwald, who was
recently detained for more than nine hours at an airport.

In sum, Bolivia believes that it is necessary to deal
with all of these issues in order to defend civilians
and prevent them from becoming victims of armed
conflicts.

The so-called war on terrorism, as it is designed
and applied, uses instruments of terror, and thus its
results are comparable to terrorism itself. For that
reason, the Plurinational State of Bolivia calls once
again on the international community to live up to the
speeches made in this Chamber and subject ourselves
to the same norms, from the International Criminal
Court to international human rights standards.

We also deem it important to note that under that
perverse logic, the main beneficiary of today's armed
conflicts has been the armaments industry. Hopefully,
these days when we all appear to be suspect and all
appear almost guilty will soon be over, and international
law will triumph over the rule of the strongest.

