Mr. Chikoti (Angola): First of all, we congratulate
the Russian Federation on its accession to the presidency
of the Security Council. We thank Minister Lavrov for
presiding over such an important and timely debate on
the issue of settling conflicts and countering terrorism
in the Middle East and North Africa.

We also take this opportunity to praise the
Secretary-General for his efforts in the promotion
of peace and assure him of our support in these very
challenging times.

The current refugee crisis affecting much of the
European continent has served as a wake-up call to
the entire international community concerning the
importance of resolving conflicts by tackling their
root causes. That is particularly true of the conflicts
that have been plaguing much of the Middle East
and North Africa in recent years. We are aware that
these conflicts have given rise to a number of terrorist
organizations and an extremist ideology that has been
growing stronger due in large measure to increased
social, ethnic and ideological tensions.

What are those roots, and how can we address
them in a comprehensive and sustainable manner,
while respecting the principles and requirements of
international law? Even though the answer to this
question is complex and varies from country to country,
we believe that containing extremism, combatting
socioeconomic inequality and strengthening education
are fundamental approaches to forming sustainable
democratic societies in the region and throughout the
world at large.

We are of the view that extremism in the Middle
East has root causes in foreign interference in the
affairs of States, in policies addressed to regime
change translated into military interventions, and in
the funding and transfer of arms to non-State actors
and opposition groups, as well as other political and
social grievances that have led many people to join
extremist groups out of frustration at these perceived
injustices. On the other hand, we must recognize that
such grievances are also based on historic humiliations
inflicted upon those peoples and are also the cause of
their hatred and intolerance towards Western culture
and civilization and towards other religions and creeds.
Extremist groups, using condemnable terrorist
tactics, seek to impose their culture and values by
leaving no space for diversity, whether religious,
cultural, political or ideological. We therefore believe
that extremism can be successfully countered only by
undermining its ideology of intolerance, undertaking
an ideological struggle to discredit them, empowering
moderate reformists, implementing effective policies
of inclusion and dialogue, achieving change and
mutual political concessions, respecting fundamental
human rights, improving governance and guaranteeing
equitable income policies.

However, the fulfilment of such goals entails, first
and foremost, putting an end to the protracted conflicts
in Iraq, Syria, Yemen, Palestine and Libya, among
others, which are having disastrous political and social
consequences and catastrophic humanitarian effects
on the civilian populations of the region and the entire

world.

The Arab Spring, first perceived as an outstanding
process of political and social change intended to bring
a new era of democracy and prosperity to the Middle
East and North Africa, had instead the undesired effect
of the disintegration of States and the rise of extremist
terrorism and criminal organizations. We therefore
believe that gradual change, respect for Government
institutions and the rule of law are better suited to
ensuring positive reforms rather than revolutionary
change. Sudden change, as witnessed during the Arab
Spring, lacked structure and leadership, creating an
environment conducive to protracted power struggles.

The chaos that has prevailed in Libya since 2011
following the forceful removal of the Al-Qadhafi
regime has placed a humanitarian and security crisis
on Europe's doorstep, which faces a huge influx of
migrants from Africa due to porous borders and the
breakdown of the security structure in the country.
Criminal networks have taken advantage of the situation
and are trafficking migrants across the Mediterranean
Sea on a massive scale, in a perilous voyage to escape
the desperate conditions of war and social deprivation
in their home countries in Africa and the Middle East.
In addition, while taking advantage of the situation,
terrorist organizations such as the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant/Islamic State, Al-Qaida and others
thrive in such an environments of chaos and use them
as effective recruitment grounds.

If is obvious that terrorism cannot be defeated only
by tackling extremist leaders and holding premature
elections without the conditions for their holding
being met. Extremist ideology must be challenged at
its core, which includes two critical elements. The first
is the lack of education and a high rate of illiteracy in
many Arab and African countries. Education based
on the promotion of critical thinking and analysis
and successful education reform will engender a new
generation of independent-minded citizens, which is a
critical element for establishing and maintaining a stable
democracy and making effective the multidimensional
fight against extremism. The second is to improve
the international response mechanism via a coherent
and unified structure as a barrier to prevent conflicts
from spiralling out of control, as is the case in Syria.
Such a mechanism, to be spearheaded by the Security
Council, should support States in need of political and
social reform, while respecting their sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate our desire to
help facilitate a political solution to the crisis in Libya
and to the devastating conflicts in the Middle East.
In the meantime, something must be done to curtail
the rise of nationalism in Europe upon the arrival of
hundreds of thousands of refugees and migrants, by
raising awareness among the European population of
the causes of such a phenomenon and by promoting the
values of tolerance and understanding of the plight of
these destitute people in absolute need of help. Moreover,
the international community should drastically change
many of the options that have been at the heart of its
approach to dealing with the situations that prevail in
many countries ofthe Middle East and Africa subject to
conflict and deterioration in the humanitarian situation.

Proxy wars by regional Powers, which undermine the
often-fragile social cohesion of multicultural societies,
have also served the ranks of extremists and terrorists
by stoking ethnic tensions. The Security Council, which
unfortunately has been deeply divided on the issue of
finding appropriate solutions to the conflicts prevailing
in the Middle East and North Africa, should lead by
example and reaffirm the importance of the peaceful
settlement of disputes as stipulated in Chapter VI of
the Charter of the United Nations. The Government of
Angola reaffirms its commitment to actively support
the world coalition to fight the terrorist threat and the
spread of extremist ideologies, taking into account the
fact that no country is safe from such a threat.

