Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to begin this statement by
thanking the Secretary-General for his report, which
we were briefed on this morning by Special Envoy
Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, who for almost three years
has spared no effort in working to find a solution to
the serious and devastating crisis in Yemen. We thank
and commend him for his noble work. He is leaving his
job with his head held high, after working diligently
to fulfil the task he was entrusted with. We also thank
Mr. John Ging for his similarly informative briefing as
Director of the Coordination and Response Division
of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. Both his and Mr. Ould Cheikh
Ahmed's reports described an extremely serious
situation on the humanitarian, political and social fronts.

Equatorial Guinea is very grateful to you,
Mr. President, for your excellent stewardship of the
Council and for ensuring that the Council's work has
been carried out to everyone's satisfaction, one tangible
proof of which was yesterday's adoption of resolution
2402 (2018), one of the two resolutions we adopted
yesterday, which will ensure continued dialogue
between all the active political forces in Yemen, in
accordance with previous Council resolutions. We
firmly believe that the new resolution will make it
possible for the international community to achieve
its objectives in the tragic political and humanitarian
situation that Yemen is currently enduring.

In our view, it is the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the maintenance of international
peace and security - which is the chief task of the
Security Council - that we must take into account
if we are to achieve the purposes and objectives of
today's resolution, with the aim of resolving the current
chaotic situation in Yemen in the areas of peace and
security, humanitarian issues and sustainable human
development in its broadest sense. It is urgent that
we take action with the support of the international
community and in accordance with Security Council
rules, in order to provide an appropriate and sustainable
response to the conflict in Yemen, which is likely to
continue doing enormous material and human damage
to its people.

We have seen from the most recent report of the
Panel of Experts (S/2018/68) that the humanitarian
situation in Yemen is devastating, and that is why we
hope that with the adoption of the resolution submitted
by the Russian Federation yesterday, we can achieve the
satisfactory outcome so long desired by every member
of the Council, since the continuing current situation
only encourages the terrorist groups that have sprung
up all over the country. We call on Yemen and its allies
to comply with the resolution with a view to ending
the country's humanitarian crisis and alleviating the
economic, social and cultural problems facing the
people of Yemen. We commend Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates for their significant support in
that regard.

Lastly, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea urges
Member States to comply strictly with the arms embargo
outlined in resolution 2216 (2015) and to refrain from
creating obstacles to Yemen's access to humanitarian
assistance, where more than 20 million people are
suffering from critical deprivation. In conclusion, we
call on the parties involved in the conflict to resume
the political process with a view to alleviating the
humanitarian crisis and the war's severely damaging
impact on the civilian population, as described in
today's briefings.

