The Secretary-General: Since this will be the
last time I will speak in this Chamber in the presence
of my friend Ambassador Aguilar Zinser from Mexico,
let me also say how much we will miss him, his wit,
his sense of humour, his independent spirit and his
keen sense of justice and fair play. He has made a
contribution and I am happy to know that even though
he is leaving us, the United Nations and the Security
Council, the United Nations will be with him and he
will be one of our ambassadors out there, and will
speak about the important and indispensable role of
this Organization. We will miss you, Mr. Ambassador,
and you can leave with the full knowledge that you
have made a difference and you have made a
contribution.

The Council meets today to mark the completion
of one of the largest, most complex and most unusual
tasks that was ever entrusted to the Secretariat - the
only humanitarian programme ever to have been
funded entirely from resources belonging to the nation
it was designed to help.

The mandate you gave us to assume temporary
custody of Iraq's oil exports and apply the revenue to a
humanitarian programme is unprecedented in the
history of the United Nations. It was a task that arose
from the sanctions imposed on Iraq, also by this
Council, after the invasion and occupation of Kuwait in
August 1990. At that time, few of us could have
imagined that those sanctions would remain in place
for nearly 13 years, or the terrible toll they would
impose on the health and nutrition of millions of
innocent people, particularly the most vulnerable.

As early as 1991, with growing concern over the
humanitarian situation in the country, the United
Nations proposed measures to enable Iraq to sell
limited quantities of oil to meet its people's needs. The
Government of Iraq declined these offers contained in
Security Council resolutions 706 (1991) and 712
(1991). By 1995, with the door to exports and imports
closed, Iraq's essential services from electricity to
hospital care and education had been severely
degraded. Yet, there was still no sign that Iraq would
soon comply fully with the conditions the Council had
imposed for the lifting of sanctions.

In April 1995, rightly considering that innocent
Iraqis should, as far as possible, be spared the
consequences of their Government's refusal to comply,
the Council adopted resolution 986 (1995) establishing
the oil-for-food programme. It was not until May 1996
that the Government of Iraq agreed to sign a
memorandum of understanding.

The first Iraqi oil export under the oil-for-food
programme was in December 1996 and the first
shipments of food arrived in March 1997. Under the
programme the Secretary-General was required to
supervise the sale of Iraqi oil and to monitor the
spending of the proceeds on specific groups and
services for the benefit of the Iraqi people.

In nearly seven years of operation, the oil-for-
food programme has been required to meet an almost
impossible series of challenges, using some $46 billion
of Iraqi export earnings on behalf of the Iraqi people.
Under it, nine different United Nations agencies,
programmes and funds developed and managed
humanitarian operations in Iraq, meeting the needs of
the civilian population across some 24 economic and
social sectors.

During these seven years, the programme
delivered food rations sufficient to feed all 27 million
residents of Iraq. As a result, the malnutrition rate
among Iraqi children was reduced by 50 per cent,
national vaccination campaigns reduced child mortality
from preventable diseases, and as of today, there have
been no reported cases of polio in Iraq for almost three
years. Electricity blackouts in Baghdad were reduced
under peak summer loads. Clean water became more
available for personal use. And the programme enabled
the overcrowded schools throughout the country to
operate in two shifts instead of three.

Let me stress that the bulk of all the work
performed by the oil-for-food programme in Iraq has
been carried out by Iraqi nationals working for the
United Nations. I wish to express my gratitude and
admiration for the competence, loyalty and devotion of
the national staff, many of whom have incurred
considerable risks in carrying out the programme.
Indeed, a significant number have lost their lives, and I
pay special tribute to them.

Let me also pay tribute to the international staff
who have worked on the programme, and particularly
to its Executive Director, Benon Sevan. He has served
the Organization in this, as in his many previous
capacities, far beyond the call of duty.

At midnight tomorrow, in accordance with
Security Council resolutions, we are handing over all
these responsibilities, together with the remaining
funds and assets - assets ranging from schools to
electrical power stations and some $8.2 billion worth
of food, medicines and other essential supplies - to
the Coalition Provisional Authority.

The actual delivery of those items will continue
well into next year. Any unspent or undisbursed
amounts will be transferred to the Development Fund
for Iraq after the programme closes.

I am glad to say that the Coalition Provisional
Authority is making arrangements to transfer most of
the 2,500 Iraqis who have been working for the United
Nations in the three northern governorates to posts in
the local government. I hope their colleagues serving in
the centre and the south of Iraq - over eight hundred
of them in all - will receive similar consideration.

We take pride in the fact that we have achieved
an orderly handover of such a large and expensive
programme on time and in spite of the current
insecurity in Iraq and the disruptive bomb attack on our
headquarters. Especially since the cruel loss of life and
injuries on 19 August - not just of our international
staff, but of our local staff as well - all of us at the
United Nations now feel intimately connected to the
trauma that Iraqis are living through day by day. We
are closing the oil-for-food programme, but we remain
determined to continue helping Iraq's long-suffering
people in whatever ways are still open to us, and we
are determined to implement the other mandates you
have given us.

