Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate. I
would like to thank the Secretary-General, the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations and the
Under-Secretary-General for Field Support for their
useful statements, as well as the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General who have
given us their field experiences and advice.

This debate on transition and exit strategies
comes at an opportune moment. We have had extensive
deliberations on how peacekeeping can be made more
effective, including through strengthening strategic
partnerships with regional organizations and troop- and
police-contributing countries. The United Nations and
the wider international community have sustained
efforts to resolve conflicts by peaceful means.
However, those endeavours are being put to the test by
new threats to global peace and security such as
terrorism, piracy, drug trafficking and organized crime.
The situation is further complicated by the increasing
activities of non-State actors and dire humanitarian
consequences for innocent civilian populations,
including women and children.

Peacekeeping is an essential and indispensable
tool available to the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. It is therefore
important to ensure that peacekeeping operations are
carried out in an effective manner, with built-in
transition and exit strategies. Their primary and key
objective should be to create conditions for sustainable
peace on the ground so that the reconfiguration or
withdrawal of United Nations peacekeeping missions
can be carried out with minimal or no risk of relapse
into conflict.

We are convinced that to be successful, any
transition or exit strategy must be underpinned by five
essential considerations.

First, there must be careful planning that entails a
thorough understanding of the causes of the conflict
and how existing local or internal structures can be
utilized in the search for a solution. Secondly, clear and
situation-specific peacekeeping mandates should be
developed, kept under review by the Security Council
and varied as may be necessary, based on the dynamics
of the situation on the ground.

Thirdly, a programme with timelines and
benchmarks for priority activities, including
reconciliation, stabilization and consolidation of the
peace, should be developed and owned by the national
authorities. It should focus on key priorities such as
support for building the capacity of national
institutions, including security sector reform.

Fourthly, some peacebuilding activities should be
planned and implemented at the earliest stages of
peacekeeping. It is important to ensure that people
afflicted by conflict receive tangible peace dividends
through provision of basic services such as health care,
education, shelter and improvement of their standards
of living. To this end, more resources need to be
allocated to programmes and activities that improve the
welfare of the people.

Fifthly, we reiterate the need for the United
Nations system to ensure greater coherence in
peacekeeping, peacemaking, peacebuilding and
development activities. In our view, it is time that the
United Nations system and the broader international
community commit more resources to peacebuilding
activities. The Peacebuilding Fund is an important
instrument for the provision of flexible funding to
countries on the Peacebuilding Commission agenda
and other countries in need. However, its total financial
resources are limited to about $350 million, and yet the
budgets of some peacekeeping missions amount to
$500 million or even $1 billion per year.

In conclusion, Uganda reiterates the need to
further strengthen the partnership between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations.
This is critical if we are to optimize their contributions
to conflict prevention, conflict mediation, conflict
resolution, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

