The President (spoke in French): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
September, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, personally and on behalf of the Council, to His
Excellency Mr. Pascal Gayama, Charge d'affaires a.i.
of the Permanent Mission of the Congo to the United
Nations, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of August 2007. I should like to
thank him for the great skill with which he led our
work and for the personal sense of receptiveness that
he demonstrated. I am sure that I speak for all members
of the Council in recognizing him as a true
professional.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Threats to international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Algeria, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Yousfi
(Algeria) look a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in French): Permit me at
the outset to express to the representative of Algeria,
on behalf of all delegations, our most sincere
condolences for the tragic events that took place in
Algeria yesterday.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
After consultations among members of the

Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

the

"The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms the terrorist attack that occurred
in Batna, Algeria, on 6 September 2007, causing
numerous deaths and injuries, and expresses its
deep sympathy and condolences to the victims of
this heinous act of terrorism and their families
and to the people and the Government of Algeria.

"The Security Council underlines the need
to bring the perpetrators, organizers, financiers
and sponsors of this reprehensible act of
terrorism to justice, and urges all States, in
accordance with their obligations under
international law and resolutions 1373 (2001) and
1624 (2005), to cooperate actively with the
Algerian authorities in this regard.

"The Security Council reaffirms that
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security, and that any acts
of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation, wherever,
whenever and by whomsoever committed.

"The Security Council further reaffirms the
need to combat by all means, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, threats to
international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts. The Council reminds States that
they must ensure that any measures taken to
combat terrorism comply with all their
obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law.

"The Security Council reiterates its
determination to combat all forms of terrorism, in
accordance with its responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2007/32.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.
07-49859

