Mr. Serrano: Financing is an essential component
of proliferation. Therefore, financial measures are one
of the most effective tools to counter proliferation.
Preventive measures make it difficult for criminals to
raise or transfer funds, thereby reducing the capacity
of proliferation networks. Financing intelligence
provides advanced warning of attempts to illegally
transfer sensitive goods or materials. Shipments can be
discovered and interdicted on the basis of suspicious
transaction reports by financial institutions. Every
movement of goods has an associated financial
transaction. Financial investigations can follow
the money trails to look behind transactions and
declarations, analyse proliferation networks and
identify facilitators.

The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) is a
global standards-setting body for combating money
laundering and the financing of terrorism and
proliferation, with a total of 198 jurisdictions included
in the global network. The FATF was established in
1989 to combat money laundering associated with
drug trafficking and has expanded its role since then.
In 2001, we developed effective tools to fight terrorist
financing. From 2008, in response to the increased
threat of proliferation, the FATF took up the task of
combating proliferation financing. Since then we have
analysed how proliferation networks use financing and
have adopted international standards to that end.

The FATF standards set specific requirements to
give effect to Security Council resolutions, including
targeted financial sanctions to counter proliferation
and terrorism. Standards are enforced through rigorous
peer-review and follow-up procedures, which have
greatly increased the number of jurisdictions that
comply with the requirements. That gives the Security
Council more effective tools.

It is important to underline that the role of the
FATF in countering proliferation goes beyond targeted
financial sanctions. We have built the infrastructure
needed to combat the financing of proliferation with
criminal laws and investigative powers, due diligence
and suspicious transaction reporting by financial
institutions and transparency requirements regarding
the control of corporate vehicles and legal arrangements.
We apply measures that weaken the ability of non-State
actors to maintain facilitation networks and to raise
or spend money. The FATF provides guidance on
cooperation and coordination, both domestically
and internationally.

To sum up, the FATF standards provide a
comprehensive basis to combat the financing of
proliferation by both State and non-State actors.
However, we still face important challenges. Some
countries simply do not have the capacity to exercise
effective controls. We need to support those countries.
Many more countries do not understand the risks, or
do not fully exploit the opportunities of financial
intelligence to counter proliferation. More work is
needed to link up the relevant authorities in each country.

Finally, at the global level, we need to ensure
that emerging financial technologies can develop
without being exploited for the purposes of terrorism
or proliferation. One of the priorities of the Spanish
presidency of the FATF is therefore to establish a
partnership with the international community to ensure
that new technology and developments properly manage
associated risks.

The financial measures that the FATF promotes are
an important tool against proliferation. We stand ready
to support further progress under the leadership of the
Security Council.

