Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to join others in thanking Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mariano
Fernandez for his comprehensive briefing on the recent
developments in Haiti and for presenting the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (S/2012/128).

Despite periods of political uncertainty and the
resultant instability during the past year, Haiti has
made a notable recovery from the devastating
earthquake of January 2010. Today, there are fewer
people living in camps than last year. More than
1million people have been relocated so far. Several
hundred schools have been rebuilt. Health services
have improved. More than 100,000 temporary shelter
units have been built to accommodate 400,000 affected
persons. Emergency food assistance now covers
4 million Haitians, and 5 million cubic metres of debris
have been removed. That would not have been possible
without the strong commitment and support of the
international community. We commend the role played
by the United Nations and its agencies, as well as the
Interim Haiti Recovery Commission.

The security situation has also improved,
although it remains fragile and suffers from an
insufficient policing capacity. Moreover, the country
witnessed the peaceful transfer of power last year,
which reflects the faith of the Haitian people in
democracy. In December 2011, the International
Monetary Fund noted that the economic situation in
Haiti is improving, and it predicted positive gross
domestic product growth for the year 2012.

Progress in recovery and reconstruction has,
however, been slowed down due to the continuing
political uncertainty in the aftermath of last year's
elections. The delay in the formation of a Government
for several months, the lack of understanding between
two important organs of the Government and avoidable
controversies are, unfortunately, affecting the overall

gains made on the recovery front. That has affected
donor confidence, and the appeal of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs was funded to
the tune of only 55 per cent in 2011. The political
infighting has also delayed the adoption of a number of
legislative measures and preparations for elections to
the Senate and local bodies appear stalled. The
resignation of Prime Minister Conille last month has
further exacerbated political tensions. We hope that the
process of parliamentary approval for the new Prime
Minister and the formation of a new Government will
be completed soon.

The need of the hour is for the Haitian leaders to
set aside their differences and to work collectively for
an effective administration that can implement the
reforms necessary for economic growth and strengthen
the capacity of rule of law institutions. Political
stability is fundamental to effective governance, which
alone can stimulate development, investment and the
confidence of the international community.

Given the prevailing situation, the role of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) continues to be critical to recovery
efforts, to ensuring the overall security and stability
and to the capacity-building of Haitian national
institutions, particularly the national police. That will
also help the national authorities deal with the reported
emergence of new armed groups belonging to the
disbanded army. We commend the leadership of
MINUSTAH and its peacekeepers and engineers for
doing excellent work in the most demanding
circumstances. MINUSTAH has provided security for
the distribution of humanitarian assistance to some
4.3 million Haitians and helped provide temporary
shelter to 1.5 million people. Military engineering
companies have played a significant role in removing
rubble, repairing roads and setting up temporary
shelters. MINUSTAH's important role in assisting the
authorities to respond to the epidemic and the
hurricane can hardly be overemphasized.

We hope that the Haitian national institutions will
gradually assume a larger role and ultimately take over
MINUSTAH's responsibilities. Against that backdrop,
MINUSTAH should focus its efforts on supporting the
political process, capacity-building and the
consolidation of Haitian national institutions, including
the national police force. The future force
configuration of the Mission should be based on
overall improvement of the security situation, as well
as stabilization of the political and socio-economic
situations.

India has contributed three formed police units,
totalling 458 personnel, to MINUSTAH. The
performance of the Indian units has been widely
appreciated in view of their exemplary dedication and
devotion to duty. India also made a modest
contribution to the efforts of the Haitian authorities to
deal with the earthquake devastation in 2010. In the
immediate aftermath of the earthquake, India made a
cash contribution of $5 million to the Government of
Haiti towards relief measures as a token of our
solidarity with the people of Haiti. India has also
contributed $500,000 every year since 2009 to the
Central Emergency Response Fund, which continues to
play an important role in the recovery work in Haiti.
We have also undertaken a waste management project
through a joint India-Brazil-South Africa initiative. In
addition, India will soon undertake a project for the
construction of low-cost housing units.

In conclusion, the continuing support of the
international community, coupled with stable and
effective governance, remains critical for sustainable
peace, security, stability and development in Haiti. We
remain committed to continuing our support for the
efforts of the Haitian authorities to rebuild the country.
It is our hope that Haiti will soon emerge from its
current problems and move towards stability and
development.

