Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Kosovo, Mr. Zannier, for
presenting the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2009/300). The Russian side has
carefully analyzed that document.

We welcome the participation in today's Council
meeting of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
Mr. Vuk Jeremic'. We are grateful for the assessments
he has provided, and we share them. We listened
carefully to the statement by Mr. Hyseni, although one
cannot call it a standard of objectivity.

We are concerned by the fact that despite all the
signals from the Security Council to Pristina on the
need to respect the Council's decisions, the
representatives of the Kosovo authorities - and this
was clearly referred to in the Secretary-General's
report - in their public statements continue to demand
that the United Nations Mission in Kosovo end its
activities, due to the alleged irrelevance of Council
resolution 1244 (1999) and their being under no legal
obligations to implement it. We believe such behaviour
is unacceptable.

Once again we would like to recall that resolution
1244 (1999) continues to remain fully in effect. In
accordance with it, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Mission he heads in Kosovo
should continue to carry out their functions, including
assisting and ensuring the rights and security of ethnic
minorities and achieving in the province democratic
standards established by the international community.
A great deal remains to be done in that regard.

Any independent steps circumventing the
Security Council to substantially alter the geography of
UNMIK's activities would unequivocally run counter
to resolution 1244 (1999) and the package approach to
reconfiguring UNMIK adopted by this Council in
November 2008. I would recall that in accordance with
that approach, any international presence in the
province, including the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), must operate in a status-
neutral framework while complying with the
prerogatives of the United Nations and resolution 1244
(1999).

We note the positive role of UNMIK and the
personal role of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Zannier, in de-escalating
tensions in the area of the town of Suchodol/Brdjani,
on the outskirts of Kosovska Metrovica in April and
May this year. We believe that responsibilities for what
took place lie, above all, with the Kosovo Albanian
side, who, despite the protests of the local Serbs,
unilaterally began to work on restoring the houses of
the Kosovo Albanian refugees.

Resolving such a complex and sensitive problem
as refugee returns is something that the Kosovo
Albanian authorities essentially turned into a political
act. For the first time in the past ten years, the return of
refugees would take place without the participation of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, but with the support of international
police and military forces. While recognizing the right
of refugees to return to their homes, we are of the View
that this process must be carried out on an equal
footing, taking into account the views of both the
Albanian and Serb communities in the province.

We welcome the ongoing negotiations between
Belgrade and the United Nations on involving
representatives of EULEX on the six technical issues
for ensuring the well-being of the Serbian community
in the province. This dialogue clearly will be
worthwhile, on the condition that a constructive
position and good will be demonstrated not only by
Belgrade but also by Pristina. So far, as we see in the
Secretary-General's report, the Kosovo authorities
demonstrate a reluctance to take part in this process.

We believe that it is necessary that the
International Court of Justice consider, objectively and
impartially, the submission of the General Assembly on
whether the unilateral declaration of Kosovo's
independence is consistent with international law. On
16 April Russia presented to the Court a written report
reflecting Russia's fundamental position on this issue.

Taking into account that the General Assembly's
Fifth Committee is currently discussing the UNMIK
budget for 2009-2010, we hope that the resources that
will ultimately be allocated to the Mission in Kosovo
will prove sufficient for it to carry out its mandate and
will take into account the desires of the Serbian side.

We are certain that there is no alternative to
maintaining the Security Council's leading role in
advancing the Kosovo process. The Council must
continue to serve as the guarantor of compliance with
international law, the United Nations Charter and the
decisions of the Council itself.

