As I brief the Security Council today, I remain acutely conscious of the deep suffering of the Syrian people, who in this decade experienced death, injury, displacement, destruction, detention, torture, terror, indignities, instability, de-development and destitution on a massive scale, and who are now also grappling with coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and economic collapse. It was with a heavy heart that I learned that many Syrians were among those killed or injured in the tragic explosion in Beirut. Many more Syrians in Lebanon have lost their livelihoods or been left homeless and hungry. The ramifications for Syria's humanitarian and economic supply chains and revenue from transit trade will doubtless be significant, given the already collapsing Syrian economy. Let me take this opportunity to inform the Council, with deep sorrow, that, among the United Nations personnel injured in the explosion was Deputy Special Envoy Khawla Matar, who was on her way to Damascus as part of consultations to prepare the upcoming session of the Constitutional Committee. Fortunately, she is on the road to recovery. I am sure everyone will join me in extending to her our sincere good wishes for her full return to health and to the vigorous pursuit of our shared mission. Also as I brief the Council today, preparations are being made to convene the third session of the small body of the Syrian-owned and -led, United Nations- facilitated Constitutional Committee in Geneva on Monday, 24 August. Convening the small body is obviously challenging, given the global COVID-19 pandemic. We have been closely monitoring the spread of the virus in Syria, Geneva and indeed across the globe. We have also been following the health advice of our host country, Switzerland, whose generous support I deeply appreciate, and the guidance from the United Nations Office at Geneva, where the Committee meetings take place. In the light of all the information and expert advice available to us, barring any further developments in the coming days related to the pandemic, and with the agreement of the co-Chairs and the positive response of Committee members, we are planning to move ahead. We will remain in contact with the co-Chair nominated by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and the co-Chair nominated by the opposition Syrian Negotiations Commission, as well as members of the middle third, to make the necessary arrangements. We will of course be implementing strict health and safety protocols to mitigate risk. After a hiatus of nine months, due to differences over the agenda until March and then to COVID-19 restrictions, it is worth remembering that the Constitutional Committee meets on the basis of a Government and opposition agreement, which guides its work. We note that this was the first political agreement between the parties to begin to implement a key aspect of resolution 2254 (2015), which called for setting a schedule and process for drafting a new constitution. That agreement reflects some key principles, including respect for the Charter of the United Nations, Security Council resolutions, Syria's sovereignty, unity, independence and territorial integrity, the Syrian-led and -owned nature of the process and the role of the United Nations as a facilitator. The agreement calls on the co-Chairs to promote gender mainstreaming in the work of the Constitutional Committee, which builds on the achievement of the representation of women at nearly 30 per cent. The agreement also recalls wider objectives: United Nations- supervised elections based on a new constitution, as envisaged in resolution 2254 (2015), and the need for a broader political process in order to implement resolution 2254 (2015). In addition, the agreement mandates the Committee, within the context of the United Nations-facilitated Geneva process, to "prepare and draft for popular approval a constitutional reform as a contribution to the political settlement in Syria and the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015)." This is a momentous task - to establish a foundational act, a social contract for Syrians after a decade of conflict and amid deep divisions and mistrust. Constitutions express the sovereignty of nations and set out fundamental rights; political, cultural, social and economic rights; the rule of law and good governance; the people's relationship with their Government; how political representatives are elected and what their powers and responsibilities are. During and between sessions, I have been ready to support the co-Chairs and Committee members to help bridge differences by exercising my good offices, and I have sought to facilitate in a manner that ensures the Committee's continuing credibility, balance and inclusivity, in accordance with my mandate and the agreement that brought the Committee to life. The forthcoming session has been made possible by the co-Chairs agreeing on an agenda that is "in line with the mandate, the Terms of Reference and Core Rules of Procedure of the Constitutional Committee, discussing the national foundations and principles." I reiterate my appreciation to the co-Chairs for reaching this agreement. I recall the pragmatic and business-like way in which they chaired proceedings, particularly during the first session, when there was also an agreed agenda. I therefore look forward to meeting them on arrival in Geneva and to their positive chairing of the next session. In the same spirit, I continue to encourage all Committee members to come to Geneva ready to engage in earnest in substantive talks on the basis of the agenda that the co-Chairs have agreed, without any preconditions. Consistent with prudent pandemic-related mitigation measures, I believe we should work together now to move this process forward in a business-like manner, with aseries of regular meetings in the months ahead, including an agenda for the next meeting. This is important, because millions of Syrians continue to face immense suffering and do not have the luxury of waiting for a political breakthrough. Civil society interlocutors often tell us that they know a single meeting of the Constitutional Committee will not bring immediate changes on the ground. But substantial and serious engagement by all parties would give them hope that a meaningful process that could have a long-lasting and positive impact on the lives of the Syrian people is on the horizon. Frustration with the lack of progress on the political process has been continuously impressed upon me by members of the Women's Advisory Board, who continue to meet virtually and whom I look forward to consulting with later this week and again next week during the Constitutional Committee meeting. The Advisory Board is also working to support the constitutional process and promote gender and women's rights. It continues to draw attention to the spread of COVID-19 in already vulnerable communities, the economic suffering of Syrians and the urgent humanitarian needs of the most vulnerable in society -female-headed households, Syrian refugees and internally displaced persons and families struggling to cope with extreme poverty. Our concern for the impact of the pandemic on the Syrian people remains acute and is growing. As of 18 August, the total number of COVID-19 cases in Syria is 2,114, including 1,844 confirmed by the Ministry of Health in Government- held areas, 51 cases in north-west Syria, including the first cases in two internally displaced persons camps, and 219 in the north-east. Ofcourse, overall testing capacity has increased but remains vastly insufficient. Therefore, as Under-Secretary-General Lowcock told the Security Council late last month (S/2020/758, annex I), the true number of cases is probably much higher, and the pandemic's impact may be far more serious than these numbers suggest. We already see that all areas are experiencing significant shortages of medical and personal protective equipment and that there are concerns about the effect of COVID-19 on health workers. The United Nations family is leading preparedness and mitigation measures across the country, but the needs are immense and the resources are insufficient. We need the Council's continued support, including in securing humanitarian access for all those in need of relief, in accordance with international humanitarian law. And we need to sustain the waivers of sanctions that can undermine the country's capacity to ensure access to food, essential health supplies and COVID-19 medical support in response to the pandemic. We also need a complete, immediate nationwide ceasefire, as called for in resolution 2254 (2015), to enable an all-out effort to combat the pandemic. In the north-west, the calm brought about by Russian and Turkish efforts largely continues to hold. But the last month has seen reports of sustained mutual rocket attacks, artillery strikes, ground clashes and sporadic air strikes, including reports of civilians being injured and killed in these incidents. Meanwhile, earlier this week, the Turkish Ministry of Defence stated that an improvised explosive device (IED) targeted a joint Russian-Turkish patrol, damaging a Turkish vehicle. Subsequently, yesterday there was a brief uptick in pro-Government air strikes in northern Idlib. Throughout August we have heard of both sides reinforcing or even establishing new military positions along front lines. We urge Turkey and Russia in particular to contain all escalatory incidents and dynamics, restore calm and continue cooperation. And we call on all relevant actors to ensure that any actions taken to address Security Council-listed terrorist groups are effective, targeted and in line with international humanitarian law, while ensuring the protection of civilians. Meanwhile, attacks by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant continue to grow in frequency and impact. The north-east has seen ongoing skirmishes and security incidents in and around Tall Abyad and Ras al-Ayn, resulting in civilian casualties, as well as protests in Deir ez-Zor, following the killing of prominent tribal figures there. Yesterday an IED targeted Russian forces in Deir ez-Zor, killing a Russian general and injuring two officers. Earlier this week, we also saw reports of an altercation between Syrian Government and United States forces. Syrian State media accused the United States of opening fire from the air and ground on a Syrian Government checkpoint, killing one soldier and injuring two others. The United States-led coalition says it had come under fire from individuals in the vicinity, responded in self-defence and denies that aircraft were used. This incident is another stark reminder of the need for a sustainable arrangement for the north-east that includes all actors and respects and ultimately restores Syria's sovereignty, unity, independence and territorial integrity, in line with resolution 2254 (2015). The south-west has seen recurring tensions, as well as protests and several violent incidents, some resulting in fatalities. Geopolitical tensions also remain acute. Earlier this month, Israel stated that it carried out air strikes on military targets, killing four men who Israel claims were planting explosives at the perimeter of the occupied Syrian Golan Heights. The Syrian Government stated that these missiles caused "material damage". Some of these developments remind us that many of the tensions and incidents taking place across Syria are international in scope, that Syria's sovereignty remains compromised and that the presence of five foreign armies creates a serious risk of threats to international peace and security. This is one reason that the Constitutional Committee's work can be a door opener, but it cannot in and of itself resolve the conflict. There is a real need for constructive diplomacy among key international players if all aspects of my mandate, as enshrined in resolution 2254 (2015), are to see progress. I hope that forthcoming opportunities for direct contacts among key players will enable them to deepen their conversations and bridge the often-significant gaps between their stated positions, as well as enable united support behind the United Nations effort. I see ample scope for key international players to make a difference, working together and with Syrians step by step on a range of issues critical to realizing my mandate pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015): ensuring the release of detainees and abductees and clarifying the fate of missing persons; creating a safe, calm and neutral environment in which refugees can return safely, voluntarily and with dignity; reaching a final political settlement that meets the Syrian people's legitimate aspirations, built around a new Constitution and inclusive, free and fair elections under United Nations supervision; and addressing the presence of the five foreign armies and fully restoring Syria's sovereignty, unity, independence and territorial integrity. There are still other issues where there remains ample room for constructive diplomacy, such as sanctions and working towards Syria's economic recovery and prosperity. But for now, for next week, let us focus on supporting the members of the Constitutional Committee in deepening their work and in building confidence in a political route out of the Syrian conflict.
