Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura for his very
informative briefing and exemplary commitment. I also
wish to commend the exceptional work of the Special
Envoy and reiterate to him France's full and entire
support for the crucial month ahead of us.

Each of us is well aware that Syria is at a
crossroads. It could either topple to military escalation
in Idlib, which would open one of the darkest chapters
of the Syrian tragedy, or take the demanding path of
true political momentum towards a settlement of the
conflict. It is our conviction that today, and perhaps for
the first time in seven years, there is a narrow window
of opportunity in this respect, and it is our collective
responsibility to seize it. Today both the darkest and
the most promising scenarios are possibilities; the
choice depends largely on us and on the ability of the
Council to unite around the option of peace - a step
that, despite the tremendous difficulties of which we all
are aware, is today within our reach. In that context, the
creation of a constitutional committee can and should
be the inflection point that we seek - the first stage
of a genuine political dynamic. The establishment of
that committee as soon as possible is therefore our
priority today.

Staffan de Mistura has just presented us with a
mixed picture - to put it mildly - of the progress
made on the political scene. Ten months after the
announcement of the establishment of the constitutional
committee during the Syrian National Dialogue
Congress, held in Sochi in January, that forum has
yet to meet. Let us say it how it is; that stalemate is
directly linked to obstruction by the Syrian regime,
which ultimately tells us that it does not wish to take
part in the ongoing diplomatic efforts, while its allies
are unable or unwilling to convince it to put an end to
its intransigence. The lists from the opposition and the
regime were sent to the United Nations several months
ago, but the systematic obstruction by the regime and
its allies on the composition of the third third of the
committee has paralysed those efforts. I remind the
Council that the Sochi Congress gave a mandate to the
Special Envoy for the composition of that committee. It
is our collective responsibility to firmly support him in
his efforts and to call for an end to any obstruction to
the implementation of the road map that we all agreed.

It is therefore imperative that the first meeting
of the committee take place as soon as possible and
with a clear time frame in order to put an end to
these delay tactics. We are determined to support the
Special Envoy in carrying out his work, and we need
a specific date. I wish to inform Special Envoy Staffan
de Mistura that, in keeping with the role accorded the
United Nations in this process, he has all the room for
manoeuvre that may be necessary to move forward.
That is the thrust of the support that the ministers of
the small group have publicly provided to him on the
margins of the General Assembly. We also call for the
committee, whose inclusivity is key, not to be stalled
by unbalanced operating rules. It is incumbent on all
Syrians, not just the regime in Damascus, to decide on
their own constitution.

Finally, the political process cannot be restricted to
the constitutional committee alone. This is only the first
step in a process consistent with resolution 2254 (2015),
which should in particular include an electoral process
that is inclusive and credible and the establishment of a
safe and neutral environment in Syria. We would also
be interested to hear the thoughts of Staffan de Mistura
on the regime's implementation of Law 10, which is of
particular concern to us.

Secondly, I wish to come back to the situation
on the ground. The agreement between Turkey and
Russia has temporarily averted the prospect of a
major humanitarian disaster. However, it offers the
inhabitants of Idlib only a short respite; there are major
challenges remaining. We will therefore continue to
closely monitor the implementation of the agreement
on the ground, calling for a long-term ceasefire. We
must also do everything possible to guarantee the
protection of civilians, including humanitarian and
medical personnel, as well as ensuring full, safe and
unhindered humanitarian access throughout Syrian
territory. It is imperative that humanitarian aid remain
independent, neutral and equitable. The objective
remains the long-term avoidance of an offensive that
would have disastrous migratory, humanitarian and
security consequences for Syria and the entire region.
Our efforts to avert a tragedy in Idlib must continue
in parallel with our commitment to begin the work of
the constitutional committee and, ultimately, to initiate
a political process. Everything is connected; it is a
question of breaking the cycle of violence in Syria and
finally creating a space for a true political process.

In that context, what can we do in the coming
weeks to support the mediation of the United Nations?
France, along with its partners from the small group,
strongly advocated the convening as soon as possible
of a credible and inclusive constitutional committee to
initiate the drafting of a new constitution. That is our
road map for laying the groundwork for free and fair
elections that are open to the participation of refugees
and internally displaced persons, under the supervision
of the United Nations, in a safe and neutral environment
that protects the rights of Syrians and provides them
with concrete guarantees, while preventing the regime
from rendering the process meaningless. We will spare
no effort to move forward on those priorities, which
must unite us all. The members of the small group will
continue to fully support the Special Envoy in that
regard, and I welcome their participation today.

Let us not close the narrow window of opportunity
that has opened for the formation of the constitutional
committee, which offers the hope of initiating a political
process aimed at resolving the Syrian crisis. If these
efforts do not prove successful, we will return to square
one, and 10 months of diplomatic efforts - including
on the part of the Astana guarantors - will all have
been in vain. The process of ending the crisis, with
the return of refugees and the reconstruction that must
accompany it, will be blocked over the long term before
it has even begun. It is therefore time to use the next
few weeks to ensure the convening of the first meeting
of the committee. Given the gravity of the situation,
waiting to see is not an option. That must be our common
priority today, around which, on behalf of France, I call
on all the members of the Council to unite.

