Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
too would like to thank the Chairpersons of the three
Committees for their reports. The usefulness of these
public debates, in which we hear briefings, as well as
comments from Council members and non-members,
goes without saying.

I fully endorse the statement to be made by the
presidency of the European Union, but I also would
like to refer to a few particular aspects of our
Committees' work.

France welcomes the two-year extension of the
mandate of the 1540 Committee. In the coming weeks,
the Committee is to draft a programme of work,
covering all aspects of resolution 1540 (2004), without
favouring or neglecting any. France will make
proposals to the Committee in this exercise, which we
feel is important for two reasons. First, resolution 1540
(2004) is the only multilateral tool for comprehensively
dealing with the proliferation of the triple threat of
weapons of mass destruction, their means of delivery
and related material. No aspect should be left out.
Secondly, the Security Council has decided to extend
the Committee's mandate, and in the coming two years
the Committee must report to the Council on the
implementation of the resolution by States. It now must
equip itself with the tools required to meet that
ambitious objective.

At the same time, greater attention must be given
by the Committee to the question of assistance.
Achieving full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) in the next two years will require that greater
assistance be given to States for whom this undertaking
is most difficult.

The Chairman of the Al-Qaida/Taliban Sanctions
Committee reported to us on the very useful recent
visits to Qatar, Yemen and Saudi Arabia. This
reconfirms the interest of this Committee and of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee in visits to the field, as
long as they are well-prepared, well-coordinated and
thorough.

France welcomes the fact that the Committee has
decided to resume review of its delisting procedures, as
well as procedures with regard to humanitarian
exemptions. Today, individual sanctions have become
an essential international instrument in combating
terrorism, as well as support for various peace
processes. The Security Council has broken new
ground by creating this new tool; but, like any new
instrument, it must be improved upon.

We believe it has become urgent to set up a
mechanism that, firstly, will make procedures for
individuals and States simpler and more readable.
Secondly, it must ensure that all delisting and
exemption requests are received by the Committee and
dealt with accordingly. To this end, France proposes
that a focal point be set up within the Secretariat for
the direct receipt from listed individuals of their
requests for delisting or exemption. This focal point
will then ensure that the request is passed on to the
Committee and will inform the individuals concerned
as to the response to their request. Setting up a single
focal point for the various sanctions committees will
make the procedures more accessible, clearer and more
standardized and will ensure that all requests are
considered. We truly hope that there will be broad
support for our proposal and that it can be implemented
in the near future.

In the list of activities presented to us by the
Chairperson of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, I
would like to refer in particular to the adoption of
guidelines for the respect of human rights. The
obligation placed upon States to respect international
law, in particular human rights and humanitarian
international law, must, in point of fact, be duly taken
into account by the Committee and its Executive
Directorate.

I am also particularly interested in the progress
achieved in the area of cooperation with regional
organizations, including their assistance in drafting
reports.

Sll'V.5446

 

Finally, I note the will expressed to consider new
ways of responding to problems faced by States that do
not fully implement resolution 1373 (2001). That
desire echoes one of the recommendations of the
Secretary-General in his report that we be unified
against terrorism. He has suggested that we define
parameters to draw a distinction between States that do
not have all the means necessary for implementing
their obligations from those that have the means but
lack the necessary will. The Council must be firm with
the latter.

In expressing these thoughts, we are responding
to one of the tasks assigned to us by the summit in
September - namely, that of strengthening the follow-
up and monitoring capacity of the three Committees.

In conclusion, I would like to refer to the French
Government's "white book" on domestic security
against terrorism, which I would be happy to present to
the Counter-Terrorism Committee. It underscores the
essential role played by the United Nations in
combating terrorism, because the United Nations alone
can provide the universal framework for mobilizing, on
the political front, all States and for setting legally
binding norms.

