Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this urgent and
important meeting. I also thank Assistant Secretary-
General Zerihoun for his briefing.

Malaysia is gravely concerned at the provocations
and escalating violence in and around the holy sites of
the Old City of Jerusalem. We condemn in the strongest
terms any and all attempts to alter the character and
status of the Holy City of Jerusalem. Such sinister
attempts are in blatant violation of numerous Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions. We strongly
condemn all such acts of provocation, incitement and
violence at the holy sites by all sides, which only fuel
tensions and exacerbate the deteriorating security
situation on the ground. We strongly urge all parties to
exercise restraint and uphold respect for the sanctity of
the holy sites.

It should come as no surprise that this unresolved
situation has culminated in the current outbreak of
violence and the resulting death and destruction.
Time and again, the Council has been warned about
the ticking time bomb in occupied Palestine, and the
Palestinian people are growing increasingly desperate
at being dehumanized and suffering often-daily
humiliations, oppression and mistreatment under the
longest occupation in modern history. Yet time and
again, the Council has done nothing.

In the General Assembly, the Special Committee
to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of
the Occupied Territories, as well as the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, have diligently reported on the various atrocities
and grave violations of human rights committed by the
occupying Power year after year for decades, without
any effective measures being taken to address that grave
injustice. This has further emboldened the occupying
Power to conduct itself with greater impunity and more
repressive policies.

In the mainstream media, we see only a ludicrously
one-sided, hugely distorted narrative to explain the
current situation: that of Palestinian terrorists trying
to kill and injure as many peace-loving Israelis as
possible. We do not see reports of the arbitrary killings
and the illegal targeting of children and women by the
Israeli forces and the settlers. We do not read about
the daily humiliations and mistreatment suffered by
the Palestinians at the hands of the occupying force.
We do not even hear the words "occupation" or "self-
determination" mentioned anywhere in the mainstream
media to provide the proper context, and we do not
apply the same standard of human rights in Palestine
and Israel as we preach elsewhere globally.

Is it really surprising, then, that the subjugated
and oppressed choose to fight the illegal occupier for
the legitimate right to freedom and self-determination,
since for far too long, all other legal, economic,
political, diplomatic and media channels have been
systematically and exhaustively blocked?

Each time a cycle of violence erupts, countless
innocent people, including women and children, are
tragically killed, injured or traumatized, and the
international community, particularly the Security
Council, shares the blame for having allowed the
situation to persist with impunity. Enough is enough.
In shouldering its Charter responsibility to maintain
international peace and security, Malaysia wishes to
unequivocally demand United Nations or international
protection for the occupied Palestinian territory. Such
United Nations protection would prevent the continuing
massacres and gross violations of human rights in
occupied Palestinian territory. It would also benefit the
Israelis by addressing their security concerns.

The call for United Nations protection, in line
with international humanitarian law, particularly the
Geneva Conventions, would ensure accountability
for all parties to the conflict and enforce or monitor
adherence to international law, international human
rights law and various General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions, so as to maintain peace and
security in the occupied territory. Such protection
has numerous precedents in United Nations history,
including in Kosovo, East Timor, Lebanon, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and even in Palestine itself. The
Council must not delay discussions on the proposal,
and Malaysia looks forward to working closely with the
Secretary-General and other Council members in this
regard.

In noting the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation on the
reinvigorated role of the Quartet and its expanded
format, we underscore the importance of its engagement
within the Council.

In calling for United Nations protection to address
the current crisis, we must not lose sight of the long-
term need for a final and comprehensive solution to the
conflict. Seventy years after the failure to grant self-
determination to the Palestinian people, the international
community has lost any pretext for a legitimate excuse
to further perpetuate the Israeli occupation. Delays in
addressing the root causes of the conflict attributed to
looming elections, ineffectual Quartet meetings and
half-hearted bilateral initiatives begin to appear as
facades to prolong the occupation and to deny justice,
dignity and freedom to the Palestinian people.

Meanwhile, illegal Israeli settlements continue to
expand, giving rise to questions about the sincerity
of Israel's commitment to the two-State solution. In
the first half of this year alone, the number of settler
homes built in the West Bank increased by 54.8 per cent
compared to the same period last year.

Against the backdrop of decades of impunity,
illegal Israeli policies and practices and systematic
dehumanization of Palestinians, we are seeing an
unacceptable increase in terrorist attacks by extremist
Israeli settlers. We cannot deny that the continuing and
unjust occupation of Palestine is a powerful rallying
point worldwide that further fuels radicalism and
extremism due to the obstruction of peaceful legal and
diplomatic means of resistance.

Malaysia stresses the need for the Council to act
urgently in the light of the deteriorating situation on
the ground, address the root causes of the conflict and
finally put an end to the longest occupation in modern
history. If we continue to turn a blind eye to the problem,
there is no doubt that we will pay a much higher price in
the future, which will not be in the long-term interest of
Palestine, Israel and the world.

