Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): I would like to express
our appreciation to Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and Mr. Vladimir
Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General of the Office of
Counter-Terrorism, for their comprehensive briefings,
and to Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, for his statement. We
also thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/2018/539).

Addressing the challenges to establishing sustained
peace, stability and security in Afghanistan remains
a central issue. We were pleased that the temporary
ceasefire in Afghanistan during Eid Al-Fitr was
respected. It was unprecedented, and images from all
over Afghanistan testified to the Afghan people's desire
for peace. In addition, the civic peace-tent movement is
another illustration of our Afghan brothers and sisters'
demand for peace. We call once again for an end to the
violence. Turkey continues to stand ready to contribute
to Afghan-led and -owned peace and reconciliation
efforts. Access to education for Afghan women and
girls is critical to promoting a culture of peace in
Afghanistan and plays a central role in Turkey's
assistance efforts there.

We take note of the findings of the Secretary-
General's report on the efforts to ensure an inclusive
and credible electoral process in Afghanistan. Ensuring
that the upcoming elections are held successfully will
be important to all of our efforts to help Afghanistan
achieve stability, security and prosperity. But the low
and uneven voter-registration turnout in the provinces
is worrying, and swift and effective measures should be
taken to rectify the situation. The fragmented political
environment in Afghanistan is another area of concern.
We join the Secretary-General in his call to all Afghan
political stakeholders to act in a spirit of unity and work
together to ensure credible elections and advance the
peace process.

Enhancing collaboration among the countries
of the region continues to be crucial, which is why
Turkey continues to contribute to regional cooperation
efforts for Afghanistan. This year, in line with our
continued support for the country, we are co-chairing
the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process. During the
meeting for senior officials of the Process held in
Istanbul in April, participating countries highlighted
the importance of reviewing the implementation of
confidence-building measures.
We also want to note the successful finalization of
the Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for Peace and
Solidarity, and hope that its expeditious implementation
through working groups will help both countries deal
with their numerous challenges.

We cannot overemphasize the importance for
Afghanistan of consolidating the achievements of the
past 17 years, which requires sustained support on
the part of the international community for President
Ashraf Ghani and the Afghan Government and people.
We commend the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan for its efforts to assist the Government
and the people of Afghanistan in their endeavours to
achieve a stable, peaceful and prosperous country.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Turkey's
commitment to continuing to stand by the Afghan
people in their quest for a better future for as long as
our help is needed.

