Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (Spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by thanking you, Minister
McCully, for agreeing to preside over this meeting of
the Security Council. I believe that reflects not just
just the importance that New Zealand attaches to this
debate, but also the shared feeling among the members
of the Council in our support of Afghanistan.

I would also like to welcome the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), Ambassador Tadamichi Yamamoto, on
his first appearance in the Chamber. The Special
Representative can count on Spain's support, and I am
sure he can count on the trust of the Security Council.

Allow me as well, as I customarily do - and I
would not have it any other way - to associate myself
with the statement to be delivered later by the observer
of the European Union on behalf of its member States.

Today, we adopted a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2016/14) on Afghanistan. That may be easy
to say, but it is of great importance. First, that is
because of the relevance of that instrument. We should
point that the Council had not adopted a presidential
statement on Afghanistan since 2014. Secondly, that is
because this adoption underscores once again the unity
of the Security Council in its support for Afghanistan,
its Government and its citizens - something that
is extremely important at this time. Thirdly, that is
because of its timeliness. We are a few weeks away
from what will undoubtedly be the most important
international encounter for Afghanistan of recent
years. I am referring to the Brussels Conference on
Afghanistan to be held in October. At the Conference,
the Government of Afghanistan will share with the
international community its new National Peace and
Development Framework, which is its strategy to
continue its in-depth work on economic, social and
institutional development in the country on the basis of
the notable successes achieved in previous years. For
our part, we members of the international community
will have an opportunity to renew our political and
financial support for those ongoing efforts for the
benefit of all Afghans.

I would now like to refer to the political situation
in Afghanistan, to which the Special Representative
referred and which is the subject of the report
(S/2016/768) of the Secretary-General. Spain supports
the Secretary-General's call to all political leaders in
Afghanistan to demonstrate responsibility and a spirit
of cooperation and to always give pride of place to the
common interests and the well-being of the citizens of
Afghanistan as they try to find answers to the challenges
the country faces. The upcoming Brussels Conference
serves to highlight the necessity and importnace of
such unity, both along the path to the Conference itself
as well as in the period immediately following it.

Moreover, I cannot fail to mention the delicate
security situation prevailing in the country. Spain
adamantly condemns all acts of terrorism, irrespective
of their justification, and we reiterate our support for
the Government of Afghanistan in its fight against that
scourge. Such actions will not succeed in dampening
the determination of the Afghan people to bring about
a stable and prosperous Afghanistan - a process in
which Afghan women will undoubtedly be called upon
to play an important role. I thank the Ambassador
Saikal for referring to that issue in his statement.

As a delegation that is particularly committed
to that issue, I would also like to thank Special
Representative Yamamoto for his commitment to
the women and peace and security agenda. In July,
together with his team, he briefed the informal group
of experts pursuant to resolution 2242 (2015) and gave
us detailed and valuable information on the issue.
We also welcome the commitments undertaken by
the Government of Afghanistan in recent months, in
particular the adoption of its national action plan on
resolution 1325 (2000) and its national strategy on the
elimination of violence against women. We encourage
the Government to invest in effectively implementing
them. The challenges are huge and much remains to be
done, but this is the correct path.

We also welcome the fact that gender training for
UNAMA personnel has been improved and that the
leadership of the Mission meets regularly to develop
and follow up on its women and peace and security
strategy as part of its efforts to ensure that its Afghan
interlocutors give greater importance to the participation
and protection of women and girls in Afghanistan. For
Spain, that is not a side issue; it is central. That is why
we also believe it is important to include strategic and
disaggregated information on the issue in the regular
briefings to the Council and in the periodic reports of
the Secretary-General. The next UNAMA debate, to be
held under the Spanish presidency, should be a good
time to address the issue.

I do not want to conclude without reiterating
Spain's support for the efforts towards a peace and
reconciliation process led by and for Afghans. That is
the only way to guarantee lasting, stable peace. To those
ends, cooperation and coordination by all stakeholders
in the region is essential - above all, there is no
substitute for it.

