Mr. Menon (Singapore): My delegation, too,
would like to join preceding speakers in conveying our
condolences to the Government and the people of
Bangladesh and to the families of the nine Bangladeshi
peacekeepers killed last Friday in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive progress report on the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
for the last three months. I would like also to thank
Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, Foreign Minister of East Timor,
for the comprehensive statement he made a short while
ago.

My delegation would like also to pay tribute to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Sukehiro Hasegawa for his leadership and outstanding
work. We are encouraged by the steady progress made
in various aspects of Timor-Leste's development
efforts.

The Secretary-General's report has confirmed
that the decision taken in May 2004 to extend the
mandate of UNMISET was the correct one. I would
like to make a few observations with respect to the
Secretary-General's report.

First, it is clear from the Secretary-General's
report that Timor-Leste's judiciary and public
administrative systems are still in the early stages of
development and that much more needs to be done to
strengthen the capacity of Timorese State institutions.
The work of the international judges and of the United
Nations civilian advisers remains crucial to the
development of the justice system and the legal and
financial institutions. Building up those key institutions
will take time, and we would like to commend the
judges and the United Nations civilian advisers for
their hard work and dedication. The work of the justice
sector, especially in the operations of the district
courts, is an important and integral part of the ongoing
efforts to rebuild and establish the rule of law in the
country. The continued support of United Nations legal
advisers will definitely help to facilitate that process.

Secondly, we are heartened to note the progress
made in the development of the various law
enforcement agencies and in the training of the
Timorese police force. From the report, it is clear that
UNMISET civilian police advisers, especially police
trainers, are still critically needed to provide mentoring
and guidance to those enforcement agencies in the area
of developing standard operating procedures, ethics
and human rights training, and anti-riot training. Until
the initial capacity of the Timorese police and defence
force is fully realized, the international civilian police
advisers will be much needed to help bolster the
capacity of the local police, in particular the border
police unit, and to provide a good foundation for the
long-term security of the country.

Thirdly, one of the key challenges facing the
Timor-Leste Government is the issue of border
management and control. United Nations liaison
officers can play a critical role in the urgent and
necessary task of building up the expertise and
professionalism of the Timorese border units in
managing border-related issues and, in doing so,
contribute positively towards maintaining the overall
order and stability.

We fully support the Secretary-General's
assessment that, despite the extraordinary progress
made in Timor-Leste, significant challenges remain
and that the provision of international assistance
beyond the current mandate is crucial for the long-term
security, stability and sustained development of that
young nation.

The report of the High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change has correctly identified the
importance of helping to build and strengthen
important key institutions as part of the process of
peacebuilding in post-conflict countries. That is one
recommendation that has found broad in-principle
support from the United Nations membership. It is also
a recommendation which has a strong bearing on the
current situation in Timor-Leste.

Timor-Leste is in the early stages of
peacebuilding. It will continue to require international
assistance, especially in strengthening its public
administration, its judicial institutions and its security
forces. Let us, as responsible partners, continue to
render the needed support to that young nation, so that
it can see concrete and measurable progress in its
efforts at nation-building.

As the Secretary-General has pointed out in his
report, a premature termination of the important tasks
before us could jeopardize the achievements as well as
the significant investment that the international
community has made in Timor-Leste since 1999. We
would therefore urge the Security Council to support
the judicious recommendations of the transition
working groups and of the Secretary-General that we
maintain a United Nations mission with a scaled-down
structure in Timor-Leste for an additional 12-month
period, and that we conduct a further evaluation of
Timor-Leste's self-sufficiency by May 2006.

