Mr. Roed-Larsen: Today, my report on the
situation in the Middle East marks a departure from our
traditional monthly briefings. Although more innocent
victims have, tragically, fallen on both sides, I will not
update the Council on the recent upsurge in violence. I
will not caution against a vicious circle of violence and
retribution or comment on the specifics of the latest
terrorist attacks, the latest incursions or the latest
assassinations. Nor will I spell out their impact on the
tension in the region. The Secretary-General has
clearly stated his positions on all those issues, and the
Council debated them at length this week. And, unlike
in previous briefings, I will not present the Council
with the disheartening details of the tragic
humanitarian situation in the West Bank and Gaza, and
the dire conditions that United Nations agencies are
steadfastly working to mitigate. Council members are
all too aware of - and familiar with - those
problems.

Instead, I will focus my briefing on what I see as
a crucial and potentially seminal juncture for peace
efforts in the Middle East. The choices that the parties
make, and the paths that they take, will shape the future
of Middle East peace for many years to come. I will
articulate those choices and will sketch alternative
paths shortly. But before I get to them, I would like to
emphasize that I fully acknowledge that there is no
magic formula for Middle East peacemaking. However,
a critical lesson from three years of violence and
bloodshed is that only an overall political settlement
can reverse the deteriorating security, humanitarian and
economic situations both in the occupied Palestinian
territories and in Israel. That is why my briefing to the
Council today will focus on just that: the real chance for a
political solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

Two months ago, before the Council, I described
the Government of Israel's recently announced Gaza
withdrawal initiative as a courageous step that could
lead to a meaningful revival of the peace process. I
praised Prime Minister Sharon for his historic decision
to bring the settlers back to Israel and to hand occupied
territories back to the Palestinians. In my February
briefing, I said, in the context of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, that

"No Israeli prime minister has previously had the
boldness and the vision to say he will remove
settlers - as long called for by the international
community - and initiate a plan for its
implementation. The proposed step - withdrawal
from occupied territory - should be welcomed
by all." (S/PV.49]2, p. 2)

I also said that that step could revive a meaningful
peace process by re-engaging the parties and the
international community. That in turn could lead to full
implementation of the road map and to the realization
of the vision of two States, Israel and Palestine, living
side by side in peace and security.

Not many shared my optimism at the time, and
perhaps even fewer do so today. Some look at the
events of the past two weeks as proof that the
Government of Israel is avoiding its commitments
under the road map and that instead it is attempting to
pre-empt the outcome of negotiations to deny the
Palestinian people their basic rights. Others look at the
Palestinian reaction to Prime Minister Sharon's
announcement as proof that the Palestinian Authority is
not ready to live up to its road map commitments and
that it is unprepared to assume its responsibilities in
vacated Palestinian areas. According to the proponents
of those views, it is only a matter of time before havoc
and chaos erupt, drawing the parties deeper into
conflict and despair.

I choose not to share that pessimism. I still
believe that the Gaza withdrawal, if carried out in the
right way, can usher in a new era of peacemaking in the
Middle East. I also continue to maintain that, if such a
withdrawal is implemented in the wrong way, it will
lead to more violence, quite possibly bringing us to a
new low in the dismal annals of the Palestinian-Israeli
tragedy. That is the crossroads at which we find
ourselves today.

As I see it, only a rigorously engaged
international community, led by the Quartet and by the
Council, can enable the parties to make the right
choice. Needless to say, any Israeli withdrawal from
the West Bank and Gaza that restores Palestinian rights
is a welcome development. The withdrawal plans will
deliver almost the whole remaining 40 per cent of the
Gaza Strip to the Palestinians, in addition to the 60 per
cent that was handed over to the Palestinian Authority
10 years ago. They will also include withdrawals in the
north of the West Bank. The international community
should certainly lend a hand to see that the Palestinians
recover their land in Gaza and to ensure that other steps
in the same direction follow in the West Bank.

But, for the Gaza withdrawal to mark the
beginning of an era of peace and security and a
departure from decades of violence, it needs to contain
two main elements.

First, the withdrawal should constitute an end of
the occupation of the Gaza Strip - not merely a
military redeployment - and should be recognized as
such by the international community. In other words,
the Withdrawal should be full and complete, and it
should lead to the consolidation of Palestinian control
over its territory and international crossings.

Occupation will end only when Palestinians gain
control over their affairs in Gaza, when they go about
their daily lives without being subjected to Israeli
controls, when they live free from the fear of yet
another military incursion in their cities and villages
and when they can travel to other countries from their
territory free from Israeli control. For that to happen,
robust and reliable security and administrative
arrangements are needed for post-withdrawal Gaza.

The withdrawal from Gaza confronts Israel with a
security dilemma: if it withdraws completely but in a
context of hostility and mistrust, Gaza could become a
launching pad for more attacks against its own
territory. If it retains control over territory in, or
international access to, Gaza, the occupation continues,
and so, most probably, would violent acts against
Israel. That would defeat the very purpose of the
withdrawal plan.

One way to resolve this dilemma is through
temporary and internationally supervised security
arrangements. An international presence, with the
consent of the parties, would enable Israel to withdraw
completely from Gaza and free itself from the
occupation. It would also enable the Palestinians to live
normally, free from Israeli controls, while rebuilding
their shattered security capabilities and fighting
terrorism and violence in cooperation with regional and
international players.

The second element is that the withdrawal should
be accompanied by the implementation of other
Palestinian and Israeli obligations under the road map.
That is a way of ensuring that the withdrawal constitutes
the beginning, and not the end, of a peace process and
is an integral part of the Quartet's road map.

Meanwhile, the Palestinian Authority must
immediately reorganize its ailing security system under
the authority of an empowered Interior Minister and,
with the help of its partners, must start taking effective
measures to curb violence and terror. Let me put this in
the clearest possible terms: there is no excuse for the
Palestinian Authority to avoid fulfilling that obligation
any longer. Fighting terrorism is not a payoff that
depends on the reciprocity of Israeli measures.
Terrorism is against international law, and the
Palestinian Authority must do everything in its power
to end it once and for all. The international community
will judge the Palestinian Authority first and foremost
by acts in that field.

While preparing for the withdrawal, Israel should
immediately remove all settlement outposts erected
since March 2001 and completely freeze settlement
activities throughout the West Bank. There is no excuse
for Israel to avoid that obligation. Settlement activities
are also against international law and must come to an
end.

To put it another way, the withdrawal from Gaza
must be part of the implementation of the road map,
not a substitute for it. The past failures of the parties to
implement the road map cannot be a justification for
shelving it. In fact, the Gaza withdrawal plan could
become a historic opportunity leading to full
implementation of the road map.

Allow me to explain why this is necessary. The
road map represents the consensus of the international
community on how to resolve the protracted Arab-Israeli
conflict in a realistic, gradual and comprehensive way,
encompassing the Syrian and Lebanese tracks. It has
been accepted by both parties and endorsed by the
Security Council, the Quartet and regional partners. No
previous peace plan has enjoyed such a broad and deep
level of support.

The road map tackles both immediate concerns
and final status issues, which I will address in turn.
Regarding the immediate concerns of security and
territory, the road map lays out concrete, reciprocal and
parallel steps that both parties should take to reverse
the current situation. Security and territory are the most
pressing issues of the current conflict and are also the
key to any progress.

On security, the core obligation on the Palestinian
Authority is the following - and here I quote the text
of the road map.

"Palestinians declare an unequivocal end to
violence and terrorism and undertake visible
efforts on the ground to arrest, disrupt and
restrain individuals and groups conducting and
planning violent attacks on Israelis anywhere.

"Rebuilt and refocused Palestinian Authority
security apparatus begins sustained, targeted and
effective operations aimed at confronting all
those engaged in terror and dismantlement of
terrorist capabilities and infrastructure. This
includes commencing confiscation of illegal
weapons and consolidation of security authority,
free of association with terror and corruption."
(5/2003/529, annex)

On security and territory, the core obligation on
the Israeli side is the following.

"[The Government of Israel] takes no
actions undermining trust, including deportations,
attacks on civilians; confiscation and/or demolition
of Palestinian homes and property as a punitive
measure or to facilitate Israeli construction;
destruction of Palestinian institutions and
infrastructure; and other measures specified in the
Tenet work plan.

u

"The Government of Israel immediately
dismantles settlement outposts erected since
March 2001.

"Consistent with the Mitchell Report, [the
Government of Israel] freezes all settlement
activity, including natural growth of settlements."
(ibid.)

Unfortunately, as the Secretariat has already
informed the Council, both parties have failed to meet
their road map obligations.

The Government of Israel has not dismantled the
settlement outposts, implemented a settlement freeze or
abstained from taking measures undermining trust. In
fact, by the time the road map implementation
collapsed last year, settlement outposts had actually
increased. Large tracts of Palestinian land were
confiscated for the construction of the barrier, which
has directly impacted tens of thousands and has made
the Palestinians wonder whether they will ever have a
viable and independent State. The International Court
of Justice is currently deliberating this issue and is
expected to give its opinion soon. Also during the
attempted implementation of the road map, many
Palestinians were killed, including an alarming number
of women and children. Meanwhile, extrajudicial
assassinations continued, plunging the Palestinian
population into a new wave of anger and despair.

Despite the best efforts of Mahmoud Abbas, a
Prime Minister committed to peace, the Palestinian
Authority failed to curb violence or reorganize its
security services under the authority of an empowered
Interior Minister. Terrorist attacks continued, claiming
more innocent Israeli lives and drawing more Israeli
scepticism about the presence of a Palestinian partner
for peace. Unable to exercise his powers, Mr. Abbas
resigned, bringing the implementation of the road map
to a halt. Since then, and despite the goodwill of
current Prime Minister Ahmed Qurei, also a man of
peace, the Palestinian Authority's credibility is
diminishing. In fact, the Palestinian Authority has
reached a state of near paralysis.

The aforementioned immediate concerns need to
be tackled - and can be tackled - if we are to get to
the second key component of the road map: final status
issues. The road map paves the way for the resumption
of negotiations aimed at reaching a "final and
comprehensive permanent status agreement that ends
the Israel-Palestinian conflict in 2005". That agreement
- and here I quote the road map,

'4

. will resolve the Israel-Palestinian conflict,
and end the occupation that began in 1967, based
on the foundations of the Madrid Conference, the
principle of land for peace, [United Nations
Security Council] resolutions 242 [(l967)], 338
[(1973)] and 1397 [(2002)], agreements previously
reached by the parties, and the initiative of Saudi
Crown Prince Abdullah - endorsed by the Beirut
Arab League Summit". (ibid.)

The road map states those carefully worded
parameters, which reflect the consensus of the
international community, for a reason: to reassure the
parties that a final peace agreement would guarantee
their fundamental demands.

Palestinians need to be reassured that a final
status agreement will respect their basic rights,
enshrined in so many United Nations resolutions,
regarding the refugees, the settlements, the status of
Jerusalem and the borders. Israelis need to be reassured
that the final peace agreement will really be final,
putting an end to the conflict and to the claims
associated with it, ending terror and violence and
leading to Israel's acceptance by all its neighbours.
They also need to be reassured that the resolution of
the conflict will be based on a negotiated, fair and
realistic deal. By articulating such a political horizon to
the parties, the road map aims to embolden them to
perform the most difficult immediate tasks, notably on
security and territory. That is why the road map is
called hope-driven and performance-based. It is our
firm belief that both dimensions should be maintained.

However, while the road map provides us with
the means to get to the final status, the international
community will not prejudice the outcome of final
status negotiations. Those are matters for the parties.

As a member of the Quartet, we emphasize that
no declared views on the possible shape of a final
settlement can pre-empt the negotiations on that
settlement. This would destroy the hope that drives the
road map and erode the parties' ability to perform the
tasks it stipulates.

Today, as Prime Ministers Sharon and Qurei have
repeated their commitment to the road map, there is a
real chance for the implementation of the road map.
There is no excuse for further delays, and both parties
must take immediate steps towards the implementation
of their obligations. Sadly, it is unrealistic to expect
that the parties, mired in a violent relationship devoid
of almost any trust, will - left on their own - take all
the decisions necessary to return to the path to peace.
Therefore, it is incumbent on the international
community, with the Security Council at the fore, to
lead the parties towards a viable solution. The Security
Council has, needless to say, the mandate and the
responsibility to restore peace and security in that part
of the world. Above all, it has the authority and
legitimacy to intervene in a way that will ensure the
consent of all parties concerned.

In fact, the Security Council has already taken
ownership of the Middle East peace process. The
foundations of that process are derived both directly
and indirectly from its resolutions. By adopting
resolution 1397 (2002), the Council enshrined the end
goal of the peace process: the vision of two States,
Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and
security. The Council also adopted the way to achieve
that goal, the road map, in its resolution 1515 (2003).

Withdrawal from the Gaza Strip set the stage for
the next step of the Council's stewardship over the
process. In that regard, Israel itself set a precedent with
its withdrawal from south Lebanon. As is the case
today, direct negotiations between the parties over the
terms of the withdrawal from Lebanon were not
possible. Israel, therefore, had wisely asked the
Secretary-General to help facilitate the withdrawal.
Based on a report by the Secretary-General, the
Security Council issued a statement defining the
parameters of that withdrawal. The statement also set
obligations for both sides and asked the Secretariat to
work with all parties in order to ensure their
compliance with those obligations. Once Israel had
fully honoured its obligations, the Council adopted
another resolution certifying Israel's conformity with
previous resolutions, concluding that the occupation of
southern Lebanon had ended and setting parameters for
the parties' responsibilities afterwards. As is the case
today with the Gaza withdrawal proposal, a unilateral
initiative was implemented in full coordination with
the international community and the peace partners on
the ground. The parameters for success of the Gaza
withdrawal are clear for all to see, and they can only be
derived from the parties' obligations under the road
map.

Crucial choices lie ahead of us. The Government
of Israel could choose to travel the road that leads to a
genuine revival of the peace process and, with the
assistance of the international community, create
conditions that would help the Palestinian Authority to
act decisively against violence and terror. It could,
however, choose to travel down the path that leads in
the opposite direction.

Similarly, the Palestinian leadership could choose
to reorganize itself and act decisively against terror and
violence. With the assistance of the international
community, Palestinian Authority President Arafat
could choose to take a historic action in order to
reinvigorate and refocus the Palestinian Authority, end
the current vacuum and paralysis and revitalize the
Palestinian leadership. Such action would address the
Palestinian Authority's frustrating and increasing
credibility deficit and therefore engage Israel on the
track of peace. The Palestinian Authority, however,
could also choose inertia or to travel down the path that
leads in a different direction.

For its part, the international community could
choose vigorous involvement at this stage, helping to
transform the Gaza withdrawal plan into a full
implementation of the Quartet road map and bringing
the parties back to the track of peacemaking based on
international legitimacy. That choice would have
tremendous implications for the peace and security of
the entire Middle East, and I urge the Council and the
rest of the international community to seriously
consider it. Or, the international community could
decide to stand by and watch events as they unfold.

I dread to think of the consequences of such a
choice, stemming from a continued delusion on both
sides of the divide that by force alone victory can be
achieved by either side. May I remind the members of
the Council of the words of Bonaparte: "nothing
permanent is founded on force". Or, as British diplomat
and scholar Robert Cooper has put it,

"Ultimately there are two sources of power: force
and legitimacy. People obey out of fear of
violence or out of respect for authority.
Civilization and order come from putting force at
the service of legitimate authority Force
without legitimacy brings chaos; legitimacy
without force will be overthrown."

