Mr. Ben Sliman (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I
extend to you, Mr. President, my warm congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I commend you on guiding the
Council with wisdom and efficiency.

Today, we meet in an open debate on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
against the backdrop of a complete standstill, the lack
of any prospects for peace and the inability of the
Organization to uphold the noble purposes for which
it was established, in particular with regard to the
Palestinian issue.

At the outset, I would like to express our grave
concern about the deteriorating situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories and the increasing suffering of
the Palestinian people as a result of the scourge of the
occupation and deprivation and a suffocating economic
crisis, exacerbated by diminishing international
aid, despite the pledges of numerous countries and
international bodies and organizations.

The deadlocked political outlook of the Palestinian
issue has serious implications not only for the
Palestinian people but also throughout the Middle East,
a region that is in a critical position, thus putting it in
a state of constant turbulence and instability. Israel's
non-compliance with its international obligations
and its ongoing flagrant violations of the fundmental
human rights of the Palestinians only exacerbate the
situation. The Palestinian people are therefore living
constantly under the aggression and violence not only
of the Israeli military machine but also of the extremist
settlers with the full complicity of the occupation army
and the Israeli Government, as well as international
betrayal. The Israeli Government has therefore come
to perceive that as condoning its ongoing serious
violations and policy of uprooting and ethnic cleansing.
Moreover, Israel has been rewarded and even shielded
from accountability with impunity.

The Palestinian people are living in a disastrous
situation with no decisive international position on
Israeli violations of international law and its provisions.
They can no longer tolerate neglect and indifference. I
must be clear that the lack of a credible solution would
ultimately lead to a new situation, inciting sentiments
that would be exploited by extremist elements
throughout the world. Unfortunately, here and there
we have started to hear calls for jihad to be adopted as
the key instrument to putting an end to the historical
injustice long endured by the Palestinian people.

I call on all delegations gathered here today in
the primary organ and forum entrusted with the
maintenance of international pace and security to
consider the value of our meetings. Regrettably, such
meetings have proved that they do not live up to the
responsibility required of the serious situation that
threatens the Palestinian people's security and the
region's stability. The region needs a climate of trust to
bring about peaceful exchanges among its peoples and
to establish institutions and structures that promote the
development of democratic societies.

Our meetings and the long-standing methods of the
United Nations in dealing with the Palestinian issue are
nothing other than steps towards conflict management.
They do not establish the dynamic to address the core
issues in order to resolve the conflict and enable the
Palestinian people to exercise their inalienable national
rights and to establish an independent State, within
the 1967 borders, with Holy Jerusalem as its capital.
While my country calls for increasing such debates
and maintaining their regularity, at the same time it
urges that ways be found to inspire hope among the
Palestinians and the entire international community
through respect for the moral and legal authority of the
relevant United Nations resolutions. That would be an
incentive to rapidly and seriously relaunch the peace
process on all tracks in order to achieve the two-State
solution in line with those resolutions.

The failure of the international community to
address the Palestinian question with the earnestness
and scrupulousness that the tragic situation of the
Palestinian people requires has led to the escalation
of acts of aggression committed by Israeli settlers
against Palestinian citizens and their property. Such
practices are a natural result of Israel's continuing
lack of commitment to its international obligations, its
ongoing occupation and its alteration of the facts on
the ground, which has targeted the city of Jerusalem
and its surroundings in an effort to change its Arab and
Islamic identity and to annex vast tracts of Palestinian
land. The Israeli occupying forces also continue to seize
by force large areas of Palestinian territory - farms,
residential neighbourhoods and aquifers - under
various pretexts and designations. All these practices
are designed to make any future agreement based on
the two-State solution a virtually unattainable if not
completely impossible option.

We all recognize that a two-State solution is critical
to any meaningful peace process that can lead to the
restoration of the Palestinian people's legitimate rights.
These are the core ingredients of a settlement of the
conflict that does not emanate from a vacuum but is
inherently anchored in international and regional
instruments and United Nations resolutions. We must
reaffirm our resolve that they will be revived and
enforced, in the hope that the international community
will continue to have a chance to put an end to the
current impasse in the negotiations, salvage the peace
process and imbue it with a new dynamism.

In that context, we hope that the United Nations,
especially the Security Council and the General
Assembly, can comply with their historic obligations
at this critical juncture of the Palestinian question
by reaffirming its core principles, the framework
instruments and the terms of reference so as to pave
the way for a new path in the peace process, for which
a first landmark would be giving full support to the
ongoing efforts to help Palestine acquire non-member
State observer status in the General Assembly. We are
confident that Palestine's acquisition of that status
would demonstrate to the whole world its readiness to
assume its role as a peace-loving State, fully committed
to United Nations resolutions and instruments, as well
as a critical factor in the maintenance of peace and
stability in the region and in the world as a whole.

