Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to join my colleagues in welcoming

Ms. Asha-Rose Migiro and to thank Mr. Antonio Maria
Costa and Mr. Louis Sylvain-Goma for their valuable
presentations. I would also like to express my gratitude
and appreciation to the delegation of Gabon for
organizing this important debate on the impact of illicit
arms tracking on peace and security, a subject well
within the competence of this Council, which is
mandated to maintain international peace and security.
It is natural that we focus on the region of Central
Africa, one of the areas most affected by the scourge of
small arms.

Small arms are the most commonly used weapons
in civil conflict, in acts of terrorism and in ordinary
and organized crimes, so much so that they have been
described as weapons of mass destruction because of
the huge number of casualties they cause, especially
among women and children. Unlike for chemical,
biological and nuclear weapons, however, there is so
far no international non-proliferation regime for small
and light weapons.

Statistics indicate that more than 100 States
Members of the United Nations possess about 1,000
arms factories that produce about 8 million pieces of
weapons annually. The number of small arms in
circulation is estimated to be about 700 million, which
translates to one weapon for each 10 individuals in the
world.

These weapons are a universal threat to humanity.
They cause suffering and destruction in many regions,
especially in Central Africa, which has witnessed so
many wars that they have been described as a "world
war" because of the huge number of casualties they
have caused directly or indirectly. That region and its
society continue to suffer the consequences, be it to
economic development or at the humanitarian level,
which hinder progress and delay the achievement of
the Millennium Development Goals.

This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
Bamako Declaration on an African Common Position
on the Illicit Proliferation, Circulation and Trafficking
of Small Arms and Light Weapons, as well as the
Nairobi Declaration on the Problem of the Proliferation
of Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons in the Great
Lakes Region and the Horn ofAfrica.

The problem of small arms cannot be handled
merely through efforts to monitor them because it is an
integral part of a wider context where conflicts
intersect with issues of security, violence, organized
crime, human rights and development.

We are a few months away from the Fourth
Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the
Implementation of the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects in
June. In this respect, Lebanon commends the efforts of
the United Nations to contain the spread of small and
light weapons and believes that they should be
accompanied by efforts to address the root causes of
crises and conflicts and to build effective institutions,
as well as to eradicate hunger, poverty and illiteracy,
which are principal causes of wars and conflicts in
Africa.

Efforts to stop the spread of weapons should also
be accompanied by encouragement of armed groups to
abandon their weapons, to reintegrate their members,
especially children, into society and to provide
incentives and means to do so. In this regard, we
commend the work of the many non-governmental
organizations to achieve those goals.

Lebanon long suffered from the spread of these
weapons and the ensuing destruction, especially in the
years between 1975 and 1990. Therefore, we call for
strengthening international cooperation to establish
controls and ensure effective oversight and monitoring
of the production of these weapons and their legitimate
possession, storage, export and import.

Lebanon also calls for continued work to achieve
common ground and an international consensus on a
binding international instrument in this regard.
Lebanon believes that this does not infringe the
inherent right of States to individual or collective self-
defence in the event of aggression against a Member of
the United Nations, as stipulated in Article 51 of the
Charter, or the right of peoples to resist occupation and
to achieve self-determination.

