Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): As a result of the joint efforts of the international
community, the peace process in the former Yugoslavia
recently achieved an important breakthrough. Following the
initialling of the Peace Agreement last month by the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Croatia, the international Conference in London made
decisions with regard to carrying out civilian tasks. The
parties officially signed the Peace Agreement yesterday,
thus providing an important opportunity for the speedy
overall political settlement of the situation in the former
Yugoslavia.

 

We warmly welcome these positive developments.
We believe that the signing of these Agreements
conforms with the fundamental interests of the people of
the various countries in the former Yugoslavia and is
conducive to the peace and stability of Europe and the
world. We hope that the parties will respect this
Agreement and work continuously for an early realization
of peace and stability in the former Yugoslavia so that the
countries of that region can live in harmony and its
peoples and national groups can enjoy a peaceful life.

The fundamental solution for the former Yugoslavia
is to achieve an overall political settlement by peaceful
means. The international community should respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the countries of the
region and strive to enable those countries to live in
harmony. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has made
unremitting efforts in the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and should be acknowledged and encouraged
by the international community. The Security Council
must strive to resolve soon the question of the status of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in the United Nations.

In the last three years, the United Nations has made
considerable efforts for the peace process in the former
Yugoslavia. It has deployed peace-keeping forces in the
former Yugoslavia and has played a role in containing the
conflict, in providing humanitarian assistance and in
preventive deployment. The actions of the United Nations
in this area have achieved some results, but there are also
lessons that can be used as references in undertaking
future operations of this kind.

Implementing the Peace Agreement for Bosnia and
Herzegovina is undoubtedly an important operation, and
the United Nations and the Security Council must
shoulder important responsibilities. Therefore, the Security
Council, when it takes a decision, should abide strictly by
the purposes and principles of the Charter.

On the basis of China's position in support of the
peace process in the former Yugoslavia and of its hope
for an early realization of lasting peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and also in view of the urgent wishes of the
parties concerned and the fact that this draft resolution
calls for extraordinary action in extraordinary
circumstances, the Chinese delegation will vote in support
of the draft resolution before us. This does not mean
however that China's position has undergone any change:
that is, China has all along disapproved of operations
authorized by the Security Council when at every turn it

 

invokes Chapter VII of the Charter and adopts mandatory
measures. Still less can it approve the Security Council's
authorization of the unlimited use of force. We believe that
the implementation force (IFOR), in carrying out its task,
must maintain neutrality and impartiality and avoid wanton
use of force so as to avoid damaging the image of the
United Nations. We believe that IFOR should provide the
Security Council with timely and full reports on its
implementation task so that it can accept the necessary
control of and guidance from the Security Council.

China is particularly concerned with the former
Yugoslavia and the development of the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We do not have, nor do we seek, selfish
interests in the former Yugoslavia. We support the peace
process in the former Yugoslavia and sincerely hope that
peace, lasting peace, security and development can be
realized as soon as possible and that the people will be able
to live peaceful lives in this area. China will continue to
make efforts to promote the peace process in the former
Yugoslavia. On the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful
Coexistence, China has developed friendly and cooperative
relations with the countries of the former Yugoslavia.

