Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal is grateful to the Bolivian
presidency for organizing this important meeting and
thanks Ms. Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, for her briefing on her report on the
current state of the investigations and proceedings of
her Office with regard to the Darfur issue, pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005). Senegal once again pledges its
full support to Ms. Bensouda.

Nobody can deny the importance of combating
impunity for serious crimes committed anywhere
and, particularly in Africa. That combat requires
the combined efforts of all stakeholders. Senegal
recognizes the role of the International Criminal Court
in that regard and understands the hope for justice
that the Court represents for the millions of victims
of heinous crimes. Indeed, the fight against impunity
and the respect for the rule of law are fundamental
principles in which we firmly believe and which are
embodied in the Constitutive Act of the African Union.
We are particularly attached to the recognition of the
universality of human rights.

Senegal also believes that peace is our common
aspiration. As such, seeking a peaceful solution
to the situation in Darfur through dialogue, while
simultaneously addressing its victims' demands for
justice is certainly difficult, but necessary. While my
country is commited to the principles of responsibility
and justice, it remains convinced that lasting and
comprehensive peace can only be achieved through
dialogue and reconciliation. That is also the position
of the African Union, which calls for the restoration of
peace andjustice in Darfur.

The report under consideration indicates continuous
attacks on internally displaced persons within the
country, including sexual and gender-based violence
in Darfur camps. In that regard, I would point out that
Senegal condemns, in the strongest terms, all forms
of violence against civilians. We call on all parties to
take the necessary steps so that the perpetrators of such
acts are brought to justice. My country nevertheless
welcomes the lifting of restrictions on movement in
certain areas of Darfur, which, it must be said, makes
it easier to carry out the mandate of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur in
the region.

Moreover, it should be recalled that the Office ofthe
Prosecutor is carrying out its mandate in a constrained
budgetary environment, which has the effect oflimiting
investigative and prosecutorial activities. Senegal would
therefore like to reiterate that it will continue to call
and work for the Assembly of States Parties to provide
the Office with the necessary resources to conduct its
work. My delegation would also like to recall that it is
up to the Security Council to ensure that the necessary
United Nations contributions are provided to the Court
in connection with cases the Council has referred to it.

The political and security situation in Darfur
continues to pose a major challenge for the international
community and to require greater effort from us all. In
that regard, while recognizing that political dialogue,
joint efforts by stakeholders and establishing security
remain the only way to achieve lasting peace in Darfur,
we must nevertheless bear in mind that the victims
are impatiently awaiting justice, as they are the first
to suffer from the prevailing instability. My delegation
remains of the view that a spirit of dialogue and
cooperation among the parties is both the way to resolve
common problems and the best guarantee of a solution
that addresses the need for peace and the demand for
justice for Darfur.

