Mr. Jonasson (Iceland): These are disturbing
times in the Middle East. The situation in Syria
remains of great concern, and we call on all parties to
do their utmost to ensure that the Annan peace plan
will succeed. The international community, as well as
the actors on the ground, must do all they can to
prevent further conflict in Syria, while at the same time
taking steps towards achieving permanent peace. These
steps must necessarily address the legitimate
aspirations and concerns of the Syrian people.

I will focus my statement on the question of
Palestine, which Iceland would like to see receiving
more attention by the Security Council.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict continues to be a
core issue for peace and security in the Middle East.
The changes we are seeing in the region must include a
solution to the conflict; only by addressing this core
problem can we expect changes to bring sustainable
peace. Continued and accelerated settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, remain the main obstacle to peace. The
request for the settlement activities to end cannot be
called a precondition. These are illegal actions, in
violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention. According
to the Convention, all parties are obliged to ensure
respect for the Convention in all circumstances. This is
a question not only of politics; it is a question of
upholding international humanitarian law. Iceland
therefore welcomes the resolution adopted by the
Human Rights Council in Geneva on conducting an
international investigation into the settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.
We urge Israel to cooperate with the fact-finding team.

We encourage the members of the Security
Council to accept the invitation of President Abbas to
visit the occupied Palestinian territory at the earliest
convenience. Such a visit would give members a chance
to see for themselves the situation on the ground and
how the settlements, the wall, the roadblocks and
checkpoints, the separate road system for settlers and
so on are systematically cementing the occupation and
seriously undermining the two-State solution. By
accepting the invitation, the Security Council would
demonstrate its willingness to study the situation first
hand.

At the moment, it seems that all avenues are
closed to the Palestinians. Their membership
application to the United Nations has been vetoed
beforehand. They have demonstrated their willingness
to negotiate on the basis of international law and the
Road Map, but negotiations are a difficult sell with
settlement activities continuing unabated. A draft
resolution on the settlements was vetoed last year, and
Palestinians continue to be illegally displaced from
their homes.

The current situation reflects very badly on the
international community, and the Security Council
should renew its commitment to settling the conflict
and inform the rest of the membership on how it
intends to proceed. Palestinians are yearning for
freedom and dignity. They are looking to the United
Nations to help them realize their right to
self-determination and freedom from occupation.
Iceland fully supports the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and reiterates its call on
the Security Council to recommend to the General
Assembly that Palestine be accepted as the 194th State
Member of the United Nations.

