Mr. De Mistura (spoke in French): I thank you
very much, Mr. President, for this opportunity.

(spoke in English)

As members are aware, I will be briefing the
Council in a few days, on 8 December. On that
occasion, I will be able to elaborate more on the overall
political process in Syria, which needs to maintain its
momentum because, as we have always said, we cannot
simply let the facts on the ground take place; we also
need to constantly maintain a political momentum.

Today, however, let us focus on the immediate crisis
in Aleppo. As the Council is aware and as has already
been indicated, my colleague from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Stephen O'Brien, and my colleague
UNICEF Regional Director Geert Cappelaere will
elaborate further on the humanitarian tragedy and the
United Nations response, particularly and specifically
with respect to Aleppo. So, on my side, at least at this
stage, I am of course available for questions on a few
points, because the real floor belongs to those who are
handling and want to handle the humanitarian aspect.

Over the past two weeks, both ground and air
assaults on eastern Aleppo and also, frankly, attacks
on western Aleppo have intensified, culminating in
the capture last weekend by Government forces of
several districts in the northern part of eastern Aleppo,
thereby de facto splitting the largest opposition-held
urban stronghold into two sides. It is estimated that
almost 40 per cent of the area previously held by armed
opposition groups is now in the hands of Government
forces.

Over the past few days, thousands of civilians
have fled from eastern Aleppo neighbourhoods to
other parts of the city, and initial reports indicated
that up to 16,000 people are being displaced; in fact,
the figure is growing by the hour, as the Council will
be hearing from Stephen O'Brien. It is likely that
thousands more will flee should the fighting continue
to spread and further intensify over the coming days.
I have therefore strongly suggested - and I have been
informed that that has now been agreed upon by the
Government - that Ali Al-Za'tari, our Humanitarian
Coordinator and Resident Coordinator in Damascus,
together with as many members as possible of the
United Nations international country team, should go
to Aleppo as soon as possible in order to rejoin our
many colleagues who are nationals and have already
started to work from within the country team in order
to assist the Syrian civilian population in Aleppo, both
eastern and western.

Violence in Aleppo is not one-sided, let us be frank.
Even if attacks on western Aleppo are not on the same
scale, we have recently seen attacks from eastern Aleppo
on residential quarters there, including the shelling of a
school on 20 November in which reportedly 10 children
died and many more were injured. Yesterday Stephen
O'Brien - we were together in Brussels - reported
that up to 25,000 people had been displaced in western
Aleppo over the past few weeks. The Council will
hear further updates again; as can be seen, the figure
is increasing.

Even as we focus on Aleppo today, we should
remember that the war continues in Idlib, Hama,
Al-Waer, Homs, north of Latakia, western Ghouta,
north-western Damascus and eastern Ghouta. Each
of those areas deserves a separate description, but the
underlying theme remains the same: the continued
dominance of a military over a political strategy, and
the brutal price paid by civilians in that process.
Tens of thousands still remain in opposition-
controlled areas in Aleppo, and they are living under
constant threat resulting from the ongoing fighting.
Others are at risk while attempting to flee the fighting,
adding to the dangers associated with attempting to flee
across an active front line. We have received reliable
reports indicating that, in many cases, opposition
groups have been actually preventing civilians from
leaving areas under their control. We are also concerned
that, upon reaching Government-controlled areas or
those controlled by the Syrian defence forces, civilians
perceived to have lived in opposition-controlled areas
or to have connections with armed opposition groups
may have been detained. Tens of thousands of civilians
on all sides are therefore in need of aid.

The United Nations should be able to access those
in need, wherever they are, by all means or routes
possible, and without preconditions. In short, aid needs
to be delivered to those inside and outside Aleppo, and
those who have left must be protected from retribution.
Our line will unavoidably be - as it has always been
the case in the past in other difficult situations - that
the United Nations and its partners should be allowed
and should be ready to reach all sides of eastern Aleppo
with urgent humanitarian aid. That is the principle.
If, subsequently, implementing that measure is not
immediately possible in a comprehensive and effective
manner, the United Nations should nevertheless not
hesitate to try to help all those whom it can reach today,
in view of the current circumstances. The priority
is reaching people, those we have been concerned
and worried about and who have been isolated from
humanitarian aid since June.

When I met Foreign Minister Al-Moualem in
Damascus on 20 November, I addressed the issue of
aerial attacks on hospitals in eastern Aleppo, which
the Secretary-General himself condemned on the same
day. I publicly suggested that a verification mission be
sent to eastern and western Aleppo to assess damage on
the hospitals, which is also a suggestion that, I think,
our Humanitarian Coordinator in Damascus has been
making. I reiterate that call in the Council today.

You will recall, Mr. President, that last month,
since there were no other plans going forward that
could stop the violence from continuing, I proposed a
political initiative for Aleppo, not really a humanitarian
one, but a comprehensive one that is separate from
humanitarian proposals. It requires an end to the
violence, the departure of Al-Nusra Front fighters
from eastern Aleppo and the preservation of the local
administration - not a separation, not an autonomy,
not a new type of administration, but the preservation
of the local administration. That would be guaranteed
by those with the power to give such a guarantee. That
proposal, in one form or another, has actually been
discussed now for at least six weeks in Lausanne in
follow-up meetings of some of the participants of the
original Lausanne meeting and in other discussions.

I myself have continued to push those ideas,
including most recently during my visit to Damascus
and through contacts with the opposition and armed
opposition groups. That proposal is still on the table,
and is particularly applicable to that part of eastern
Aleppo that is still under the control of the armed
opposition with a clear presence of Al-Nusra in it.
While the situation on the ground is fast evolving,
that proposal has become less obviously applicable
immediately, but a part of it, the departure ofAl-Nusra,
the actual stopping of the bombing, the humanitarian
access and the preservation - I repeat - of the local
administration is still on the table.

I am convinced that helping to ensure the departure
of those fighters whom the Council considers to
be terrorists, the Al-Nusra, and who to this day
remain in parts of eastern Aleppo still controlled by
the opposition, should be and could be an outcome
around which everyone in Syria and the international
community could still agree. I therefore urge concerned
stakeholders not to lose their focus on that practical
initiative, which is still valid, particularly at this very
delicate moment when the forecast could be that the
fighting in eastern Aleppo may continue for weeks
with a lot of collateral, tragic effects. That may also
spare innocent civilian lives and ensure the separation
of terrorist elements from other armed groups.

As I said, I will be brief, and as I said, there is
plenty of evidence that the military logic is currently
prevailing on both sides. The Council, on behalf
of the international community, should call on all
belligerents and their sponsors to ensure full respect
for international humanitarian law and the protection
of civilians in Aleppo. But make no mistake about the
fact that none of the military developments that we are
witnessing point to what one could call a stable ongoing,
permanent military solution. Indeed, any sustainable
solution to the Syrian tragedy, when it comes, will have
to include a formula for the stability of the country
in order to ensure the non-recurrence of the terrorist
threat and the return to What could be a stable Syria. It
is my strong conviction that such a formula cannot be
brought about without a negotiated political settlement
to the crisis, one that involves a mechanism for sharing
power and implementing the agenda set forth in Council
resolution 2254 (2015). I look forward, therefore, to
briefing Council members in person next week, on
8 December, in order to speak in further detail of the
options that may and should exist in order to continue
pushing towards the attainment of a political process.

