Mr. Oh Joon (Republic ofKorea): I would first like
to express appreciation to the presidency of the United
States for convening today's meeting and to the Member
States of the Council for inviting the Republic of Korea
to participate. I would also like to thank Mr. Feltman
and Mr. Al Hussein for their briefings.

Last year, the commission of inquiry issued its
landmark report (A/HRC/25/63), which shed light on the
nature, gravity and scale of human rights violations in
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The report
raised critical awareness of the need to strengthen our
collective efforts to improve the human rights situation
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. Given
the growing concern of the international community,
the Security Council formally added the situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to its agenda
and held its first discussion on the issue in this very
Chamber on 22 December 2014 (see S/PV.7353). I was
here and spoke, as my country had a seat on the Council
at that time. I explained why North Korea's human
rights issues were taken to heart in South Korea. One
year later, what has changed?

At the United Nations, we adopted more resolutions
in the Human Rights Council and the General Assembly.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights opened a field-based structure in
Seoul. There have been meetings, seminars and panel
discussions on the issue in different parts of the world.
On the Korean peninsula, a new round of reunions for
separated families living in the two Koreas took place
last October. However, we have not seen a meaningful
change in the human rights situation in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. As we heard in today's
briefing, dire human rights violations persist and, in
some cases, are becoming worse. We still have a long
way to go.

My Government believes that addressing the
North Korean human rights issue is critical not only
to promoting human rights as a universal value, but
also to maintaining peace in the Korean peninsula. We
therefore urge the Security Council to keep playing an
active role in improving the situation. We also ask the
High Commissioner for Human Rights to pursue his
efforts to improve the human rights situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The Republic
of Korea will continue to engage with other Member
States to address and resolve this matter, while providing
humanitarian assistance to the North Korean people
in order to alleviate their plight. We hope that, with a
view to addressing the concerns of the international
community, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
will work with us to implement the relevant United
Nations resolutions. The Democratic People's Republic
of Korea needs to engage and cooperate with United
Nations human rights mechanisms. We believe that
to do so will ultimately be in the best interests of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

This year marks 70 years of division of the Korean
nation. The issue of separated family members, whose
average age is around 80, remains the most urgent
humanitarian concern for the entire Korean people. We
expect the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to
share with us a sense of urgency andjoin us in seeking
a fundamental and comprehensive resolution to the
issue, including by holding family reunions on a larger
scale and on a regular basis.

I would like to end my statement by quoting
Ms. Hyeon-seo Lee, a young North Korean woman who
escaped from North Korea as a teenager and devoted
the following 12 years of her life to rescuing her mother
and brother. In her book entitled The Girl with Seven
Names, she said,

"Leaving North Korea is not like leaving any other
country. It is more like leaving another universe. I
will never truly be free of its gravity, no matter how
far I journey."
What does she mean? Why was it so difficult for her
to leave a place others call a gulag? Why does she feel
the pull of its gravity even when she is physically so far
away from North Korea?

I can only imagine that perhaps she meant that she
could never escape the gravity of the pain and suffering
that her people were enduring. Maybe neither you nor
I, Madam President, nor anyone else in the Chamber
will ever understand her. We may never fully grasp the
onerousness of her burden, because we were not there
with her when she spent every day for 12 years, praying
for the safety and survival of her family and doing all
in her power to get them out before it was too late. Now
we have heard from her and many other defectors from
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. While we
continue to embrace North Koreans who leave their
home, the best thing we can do, Madam President, may
well be to help North Koreans realize their future in
safety and with dignity in their own country.

The meeting rose at 4.35 pm.
