Mr. Axworthy (Canada): I am very glad that we
have been able to bring such warm weather from the
Canadian North - Canadian weather.

I should also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
your very fine initiative in convening this meeting.
Canada welcomes this special Security Council meeting
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and we have
been very encouraged by the very effective, strong and
powerful presentations made by the United States
Secretary of State, the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, the leaders of the African States, the members
and the Secretary-General of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), and the facilitator. It has really been one of
the very important consensus-building exercises that this
Organization has been involved in.

We are glad to be here because this is an issue that
involves us all. The conflict in the Congo jeopardizes
regional peace. It certainly undermines the fragile
prospects for stability in an African country that is very
central to the continent's interests. But most importantly,
it is senselessly taking many innocent lives and ending
the hopes of countless others, and for that reason we must
all shoulder our responsibilities.

(spoke in French)

 

A solution that creates lasting peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is therefore imperative. Canada is
hopeful that this gathering will bring progress.

As we focus on building a more promising future for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region, we
also need to be mindful of the sometimes disheartening
past. Last month, the Independent Inquiry into the actions
of the United Nations during the 1994 Genocide in Rwanda
published its findings.

(spoke in English)

As the President of Rwanda has reminded us, this
report is a stinging portrait of failure in Africa by Members
of this Organization, members of the Council and the
United Nations Secretariat. It documents a failure to
participate, anticipate and prepare; a failure to
communicate; a failure to exert leadership and to commit
resources - in short, an abysmal failure by the global
community to act when the people of Rwanda most
desperately needed our help.

I commend the Secretary-General for establishing this
unprecedented inquiry and for acknowledging the role he
and the United Nations Secretariat played in the tragedy.

But the burden of responsibility is spread wide. We -
as the Security Council, as Member States and as
individuals - would do well to take the
Secretary-General's example and clearly acknowledge our
own shortcomings in Rwanda.

However, retroactive mea culpas alone serve little
purpose. We cannot undo the past, but we can learn from
it and apply its lessons to the present.
The Inquiry highlights how terribly wrong things went
in Rwanda, yet it also provides specific guidelines on how
to prevent tragedies in the future. The Inquiry underlines
how human security - the safety and protection of
civilians - has become a central concern in modern armed
conflict. In so doing, it underlines the need to integrate the
human dimension into action on matters of war and peace.

The Inquiry reinforces the importance of African
issues to the Security Council's activities and to Council
credibility. It underlines how the Council neglects the
continent at its peril and the appalling price Africans pay
when the Council fails to act. It lays all of this out clearly,
methodically and indelibly, making it difficult, if not
impossible, for the Security Council henceforth to shrink
from or ignore its obligation to support peace and security
in Africa.

There are encouraging signs that the Council is
learning from experience. I believe the deliberations on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo that we have heard
today are evidence that we are taking those obligations to
heart.

It is true that there has been no lack of Council
consideration of the armed conflicts that continue to beset
parts of Africa, as well as a search for solutions. To this
end, the Council's recent open debates on Africa have
helped focus attention. But it is also true that thematic
discussions on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, on the abuse of small arms and light military
weapons and on war-affected children are helping broaden
the Council's awareness and inform its responses to the
security challenges of the new century. They have served
to highlight the specific impact in African war zones.

Beyond words and awareness there are also deeds.
There is an increasing sense that, in Africa as elsewhere,
the Council must lend its weight to ongoing peace efforts
being made by others. In the Sudan, for example, the
ongoing armed conflict is a serious concern that, beyond
the glare of the media spotlight, continues to take a
devastating toll. The Security Council should consider
how it can support the Inter-Governmental Authority on
Development in its mediation efforts.

In Sierra Leone, the Security Council established a
new Mission that is helping implement a fragile Peace
Agreement and bring a measure of peace and security for
the people of that country. For the first time, a United
Nations peacekeeping operation's mandate specifically
includes the protection of civilians. The Council is
currently considering the expansion of this operation; the
Secretary-General is making recommendations. It is now
up to the Council members to demonstrate their
willingness to match our professed concern with resources
and resolutely endorse his plan.

In Angola, Canada has been working on practical
ways to make the sanctions regime relating to the illicit
trade in diamonds, weapons and petroleum more effective.
These measures are aimed at bringing an end to the
senseless civil conflict that has claimed so many lives. If
accepted and successful, these new measures on Angola
might be applied to other conflicts, and we hope they will
provide a model for constraining the market place of
conflict.

 

All of this is progress: progress in concrete Council
action in Africa and progress in making the advancement of
human security an important focus of this activity. But it is
tenuous progress. The Council's engagement needs to be
reinforced and sustained. We must not shrink from doing
what is needed. Too often, the Council is motivated by
avoiding cost and evading risk. This cannot be the case in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The conflict and
turbulence in the Democratic Republic reflect many of the
realities of modern war. It is clearly a significant human
security challenge, and it is one of the most complex
conflicts facing the global community. The Council's active
involvement is therefore indispensable.

The territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is contested by foreign military forces occupying
vast swathes of its eastern provinces. Some domestic
opposition forces have chosen military conflict over
political means to contest national leadership. Dialogue on
the country's future institutions and on the path to
democracy is thwarted by both internal and external forces.
An array of military groups and militias - armed,
dangerous and acting with impunity - use Congolese
territory to contest the Governments of many of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo's neighbours.

The influence of the new war economies is significant.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo's economic
development languishes, with some of its rich endowment
of resources shamelessly pilfered to support war-making.

Most important, ordinary people are suffering at an
appalling and unacceptable level. Civilians are the principal
victims of this violence. Tens of thousands have been
uprooted from their homes. Thousands have been killed or
maimed. Women and children suffer hugely.

( spoke in French)
There are, however, other equally important realities.
The people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo are a
nation, united in their commitment to maintaining the
integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo's
territory and the security of its borders. The people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo desire peace, with open
dialogue. They want a chance to establish democratic
institutions and to have a representative Government in
order to realize their aspirations for stability and economic
and social development.

Today we have heard many of the leaders of African
countries neighbouring the Democratic Republic of the
Congo express the same desire for peace, stability and a
return to normality. They too want closure on these
problems.

(spoke in English)

The elements of a solution, as we have heard today,
are there. The Lusaka Agreement, signed last summer, is
central to resolving the conflicts. It addresses the principal
issues that need to be resolved: a ceasefire and
disengagement of troops, a national political dialogue, the
orderly withdrawal of all foreign forces, the disarmament
of armed groups, the re-establishment of State
administration and the creation of a framework for
implementation of the accord that involves the United
Nations.

The tools are there, but the momentum has stalled.
Therefore, we strongly welcome the initiative of the
United States in convening this meeting, its willingness to
engage fully in efforts to resolve the conflict and its
leadership in bringing the parties together here in New
York.

The prospects for peace are tied primarily to the
actions and decisions of those directly involved. The onus
is clearly on them. As President Mandela said last week
in the context of Burundi, no one can reach agreement
but the parties themselves. His wise counsel rings equally
true for those involved in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. However, the global community can and should
now play an active role in reviving the peace process and
in achieving the goals set by the Lusaka Agreement. The
time has come for the international community to assume
its share of the burden - not just African countries, but
all of us. This should not be a responsibility to be
contracted out to an ad hoc coalition; instead, it must be
met by truly collective efforts, funded not as a charity
case but by assessed contributions - in other words,
through the United Nations Security Council and through
a United Nations operation.
In the first instance, this means the early deployment
of 500 United Nations observers, already agreed to by the
Security Council last November. They will need to be
supported with a clear mandate and adequate resources.
To that end, Canada supports the immediate creation of
a robust United Nations mission along the lines proposed
by the Secretary-General to assist in the implementation
of the Lusaka Agreement, and whose mandate should
include clear and unequivocal provision for the protection
of civilians under Chapter VII of the Charter.

 

The Joint Military Commission (JMC) plays a central
part in ensuring that the Lusaka Agreement is respected.
Canada will contribute $500,000 to the operation of the
JMC. We expect that the JMC and the United Nations
peacekeeping presence will work hand in hand in the full
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement. I can say to the
Secretary-General that our contribution will be delivered
immediately.

Canada has been and will continue to help in other
ways. We believe our most useful contribution, in addition
to support for United Nations efforts, is in supporting the
inter-Congolese dialogue, as well as the institutional
development of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Indeed, we have already been actively involved in efforts
to promote reconciliation and peace. Canada has in the past
supported projects emphasizing conflict prevention through
the promotion of human rights, increasing popular
participation in decision-making and encouraging good
economic management.

Canada will reinforce these efforts. In the coming
months, we will provide $2 million to support the peace
and reconciliation process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and in the region. One million dollars will be
earmarked for the inter-Congolese dialogue, led by Sir
Ketumile Masire at the request of Secretary-General Salim
Salim of the Organization of African Unity (OAU).

The serious, indeed tragic, problem of child soldiers
demands particular attention. Last year, Canada contributed
to the organization of the Kinshasa Forum on the
demobilization and reintegration of child soldiers in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Further concrete actions
aimed at helping war-affected children are important in
order to consolidate peace efforts. To that end, Canada will
contribute $1 million to help with disarmament,
rehabilitation and reintegration, including to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo National Commission on Child
Soldiers.

The regional conference on war-affected children to be
held this April in Accra, hosted by Ghana and Canada, will
consider other concrete measures with relevance to West
Africa, and undoubtedly to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Great Lakes situation. It is our aim that the
lessons learned from these initiatives will be shared and
built upon at a global conference to be hosted by Canada
next September on the broad question of war and children.

Since its nadir, so vividly recalled in the Rwanda
Inquiry report, the Security Council has been making
headway in being more actively involved in Africa. There
is hope that in this instance the past is not prologue.

( spoke in French)

More resolute engagement in promoting peace and
security in Africa; increased understanding of the need to
relaunch an approach that links Council action with other
efforts; recognition that a more human-centred approach
to security challenges is needed in Africa - these are all
positive trends.

(spoke in English)

This week's meetings on the Democratic Republic of
the Congo are further and welcome evidence of Security
Council commitment to these ends, to which Canadians
are fully dedicated in their support.

