Mr. J ovanovie: The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
the victim of the unilateral and brutal aggression of the
United States of America and other member States of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), has had two
basic goals: to defend itself from that aggression, which it
has done successfully, and to have the resolution of all
questions and problems related to Kosovo and Metohija, an
integral part of Serbia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, shifted from the track of war and destruction
to the track of political decision-making and law.

After the unilateral, unauthorized military action by
NATO against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia - a
State Member of the United Nations and a founding
Member of the world Organization - which lasted for two
and a half months, this question has finally been put on the
agenda of the Security Council. Unfortunately, this was
done only in the wake of great delays and of many civilian
victims, destruction and a humanitarian catastrophe of a
size unprecedented in post-war European history.

The aggression was not directed only against the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia but also against all peace-
loving peoples and all those standing in the way of
attempts to create a unipolar world based on the policy of
force and the establishment of global hegemony and
domination. In that sense, the systematic destruction of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the killing of
innocent civilians, which lasted two and half months, has
been a denial of all of the basic principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, and in particular of the principles
of the settlement of disputes by peaceful means; respect
for the sovereign equality of States, regardless of their
size and political, economic and military might; non-
intervention and non-interference in internal affairs; and
the right to choose one's own road to internal
development and international position.

As one of the founding Members of the United
Nations. the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia issued timely
but unsuccessful warnings to, and requested protection
from, the Security Council, as the key organ responsible
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
asking it to stand up to the policy of force and diktat and
to engage actively in favour of a peaceful solution to the
situation in Kosovo and Metohija.

Under pressure from the countries that spearheaded
the aggression against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, the Security Council turned a deaf ear to
Yugoslavia's repeated requests that the aggression be
condemned and stopped. The annals of the world
Organization will therefore record the disgraceful fact that
during 78 days of ruthless, savage aggression by the most
powerful military organization against a small and peace-
loving country, the Security Council could not bring itself
to condemn and stop the aggressor. This is all the more
so since the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia did not
attack any of its neighbours, nor did it threaten anyone.

Before and during the aggression, the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia had all along indicated its interest
in and readiness for a political solution to the crisis that
would respect the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
the country and enable the highest level of autonomy in
Kosovo and Metohija, guaranteeing full equality for the
members of all ethnic groups in accordance with the
highest international standards. In that connection, on 6
April 1999, at the very beginning of the aggression by
NATO, the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Republic of Serbia expressed their
unequivocal readiness, following the talks between
President Milosevic and Mr. Rugova, for a political

 

solution in Kosovo and Metohija to be reached in direct
talks between the Government of Serbia and the
representatives of the Albanian minority in Kosovo and
Metohija.

Also, on 9 May 1999, the Supreme Defence Council
took a decision on the beginning of withdrawal of part of
the units of the army of Yugoslavia and the special police
forces from Kosovo and Metohija, following the elimination
of the terrorist Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA). The
actions of the Yugoslav security forces in Kosovo and
Metohija have been taken within the framework of the
legitimate efforts of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to
stamp out terrorism, aided and abetted from abroad and
aimed at causing a sovereign part of the Yugoslav territory
to secede. Instead of welcoming that step, NATO
intensified the bombing of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, thereby causing a mass exodus of the civilian
population from Kosovo and Metohija and other parts of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

At the same time, by focusing its raids exclusively on
civilian targets, NATO has caused untold suffering to the
entire population of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
Those who gave and carried out the orders for NAT O's
aggression against Yugoslavia have over the past 78 days
violated all known international conventions in the field of
the law of war, human rights and fundamental freedoms.
No civilian target was spared by NATO planes. For the first
time, NATO designated as legitimate targets hospitals,
housing blocks, refugee centres and convoys, media
institutions and journalists, prisons, schools, kindergartens,
business centres and shopping malls, buses and passenger
trains, even foreign diplomatic missions.

Set on intimidating and punishing the entire Yugoslav
people, the NATO aggressors have destroyed the economy
and the infrastructure, including bridges, roads and
railroads, as well as power grids and the country's water
supply system. Hundreds of thousands of people are now
jobless, and millions are without any income. By destroying
pharmaceutical and chemical plants and oil refineries, by
bombing national parks and using inhumane weapons,
including depleted uranium ammunition, NATO has caused
an ecological catastrophe whose consequences will be felt
for generations.

On behalf of the Government and people of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, I address to you, Mr.
President, and to the members of the Security Council the
following requests.

First, to point out the responsibility of the NATO
member States for flagrantly violating the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and for the
unauthorized and brutal bombing of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, which resulted in a massive humanitarian
catastrophe, the destruction of the civilian infrastructure
and the economy of the country, the death of more than
2,000 persons and the wounding of more than 6,000
innocent civilians. Secondly, to stress the moral, political
and material obligation of the NATO member States fully
to compensate the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and its
citizens within the shortest possible period of time for all
the damage caused by the unauthorized and ruthless
incessant bombing of the last 78 days. And thirdly, to
restore to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, a peace-
loving and independent country and a founding Member
of the United Nations and of many other international
organizations, all of its suspended rights in the world
Organization, international and financial institutions and
in other international organizations and associations, as
well as to lift all existing sanctions and unilateral
restrictions and all other discriminatory measures. I call
on the Council to receive this request with understanding
and the necessary urgency.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia accepted the
G-8 principles of 7 May 1999 and the Ahtisaari-
Chernomyrdin plan for the political solution of the crisis.
In that context, the National Assembly of the Republic of
Serbia made on 3 June 1999 the decision regarding the
acceptance of that plan, which confirms the territorial
integrity of Yugoslavia and a role for the United Nations
in the solution of the crisis. The Ahtisaari-Chernomyrdin
plan provided for a conclusion of a military-technical
agreement determining the timetable and routes for the
withdrawal of military and police forces of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia from Kosovo and Metohija,
including the elements for the return of some of them to
Kosovo and Metohija.

Instead, we have faced NATO attempts to deploy its
troops in Kosovo and Metohija by way of insisting on
some political elements without a decision and a mandate
from the Security Council. This provides further proof
that the aggressor is trying to marginalize and bypass the
world Organization, as well as the G-8 principles, with
the aim of achieving its final goal of occupying a
sovereign part of the Republic of Serbia and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.

In order to achieve lasting and stable peace in the
region and to reaffirm the roles of the United Nations and

 

the Security Council as the highest bodies for the
maintenance of international peace and security, it is
necessary to deploy the United Nations peacekeeping
mission in Kosovo and Metohija on the basis of a decision
of the Security Council and of Chapter VI of the Charter of
the United Nations and with the prior and full agreement of
the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

In that context, the Security Council draft resolution
should contain the following positions: a firm and
unequivocal reaffirmation of full respect for the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia; a political solution to the situation in Kosovo
and Metohija that would be based on broad autonomy, in
accordance with the highest international standards, such as
the Paris Charter and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Copenhagen document,
ensuring the full equality of all ethnic communities. The
solution for Kosovo and Metohija must fall within the legal
frameworks of the Republic of Serbia and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, which implies that all State and
public services in the province, including the organs of law
and order, should function according to the Constitutions
and laws of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the
Republic of Serbia.

The draft resolution should not contain provisions on
the International Tribunal, considering that that institution
has no jurisdiction over the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and was not included in the principles of the Ahtisaari-
Chemomyrdin plan.

It should contain a condemnation of the NATO
aggression against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia as an
act in violation of the Charter of the United Nations and a
threat to international peace and security; a reference to the
reports of United Nations Under-Secretary-General Sergio
Vieira de Mello and United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights Mary Robinson, which should point to the
civilian casualties and material destruction as consequences
of the NATO aggression, and a condemnation of the use of
inhumane weapons - cluster and graphite bombs and
depleted uranium ammunition; a condemnation of the
NATO bombing of foreign diplomatic and consular
missions in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, which
represents a violation of international legal norms,
especially of the 1973 Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of Crimes against Internationally Protected
Persons, including Diplomatic Agents; provisions ensuring
unhindered and safe passage of refugees - Yugoslav
citizens that left the country because of the NATO
aggression - and the procedures and criteria established by
the competent Yugoslav Federal Republican authorities
and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees; and respect for the Constitution and laws of
the Republic of Serbia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia as necessary preconditions for the solution of
all questions and a successful evolution of the
international presence.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia firmly believes
that the United Nations mission in Kosovo and Metohija,
which would include military and civil components,
would have to have the mandate and authority of the
United Nations and the Security Council. The mandate of
the mission should consist of the supervision of the
implementation of the comprehensive agreement on
Kosovo and Metohija, the withdrawal of Yugoslav
military and police forces, the return of refugees and
displaced persons and cooperation with international
humanitarian organizations in providing assistance to all
in need of it. The mission must guarantee full security
and equality to all citizens in Kosovo and Metohija,
regardless of their religious and national affiliations, and
prevent all violence, especially the resurgence of terrorism
and separatism. The mission as a whole must be
responsible to and report to the Secretary-General, that is,
the Security Council of the United Nations. The Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia cannot accept a mission that
would take over the role of government in Kosovo and
Metohija or any form of open or hidden protectorate.

Considering that the NATO aggressors have carried
out brutal crimes against the members of all national
communities living in Kosovo and Metohija, the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia is, on principle and for other
reasons, against the participation in the United Nations
mission by the countries that have taken an active part in
the aggression. We consider that the mission must reflect
equal, regional and political representation which includes
participation by countries such as Russia, China, India
and non-aligned and developing countries from various
regions of the world.

Yugoslavia requests that the commander of the
military part and the head of the civil part of the mission
be appointed by the Secretary-General of the United
Nations on the basis of consultations with the Security
Council and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia as the
host country. Also, the commander of the military part
and the head of the civilian part of the mission should be
directly responsible to the Secretary-General, that is, the
Security Council.

 

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia considers that the
mandate and the duration of the United Nations mission
must be limited in time. This includes the possibility of
their being renewed after three or six months, on the basis
of a decision of the Security Council and with the
agreement of the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. The attempt to grant an open mandate to the
United Nations mission is absolutely unacceptable to the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, since this would amount
to a gross violation of the sovereignty of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, which otherwise is being
reaffirmed by the proposed draft resolution.

I must note with regret that the draft resolution
proposed by the G-8 is yet another attempt to marginalize
the world Organization aimed at legalizing post festum the
brutal aggression to which the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia has been exposed in the last two and a half
months. In doing so, the Security Council and the
international community would become accomplices in the
most drastic violation of the basic principles of the Charter
of the United Nations to date and in legalizing the rule of
force rather than the rule of international law.

It is an historic anomaly that the victim of the
aggression is being proclaimed guilty by those who are in
possession of force and power and are in breach of all
norms of international law and civilized behaviour among
States, although the entire world public knows very well
who is the victim and who is the guilty party.

The solutions which are being tried to be imposed on
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia set a dangerous
precedent for the international community and a great
encouragement to separatist and terrorist groups all over the
world. They provide a broad authority to those who have
conducted a total genocidal war against a sovereign and
peace-loving country and legitimize the policy of ultimatum
and diktat. In sub-item (a) and (b) of operative paragraph
9, the draft resolution requests in all practical terms that the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia renounce a part of its
sovereign territory and grant amnesty to terrorists.
Furthermore, in operative paragraph 11, the draft resolution
establishes a protectorate, provides for the creation of a
separate political and economic system in the province and
opens up the possibility of the secession of Kosovo and
Metohija from Serbia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia.

In adopting the present text of the draft resolution, the
Security Council would be writing one of the darkest pages
of its history. In doing so, the Security Council would not
only be instrumental in a de facto dismemberment of a
sovereign European State, but would also set a negative
precedent with far-reaching consequences for overall
international relations, in particular for the position of
small and medium-sized developing countries. In that
way, the Security Council would in fact support the
nefarious theory of limited sovereignty and open the
floodgates to the unimpeded intervention and interference
of the mighty and powerful in the internal affairs of other
States.

By opposing these provisions, the Security Council
shall stand up in defence not only of the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, but also of the basic principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and international law and, by the
same token, of its own authority as the highest organ for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
