Mr. Vedova (Italy): Thanks to the initiative of
New Zealand, I am pleased to have this opportunity
to intervene today on a crucial topic. I wish to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing, as
well as the Prime Ministers of Samoa and Jamaica
and the Minister of Finance of the Seychelles for their
contributions to this important debate.

The challenges affecting small island developing
States (SIDS) deserve the attention of the Security
Council. Italy, as a peninsula surrounded by the sea, is
deeply convinced that those challenges are both specific
and global, with wide-ranging consequences that can
affect our common security. Helping to improve the
food security, sea defences, renewable energy systems,
natural risk-management and economic competitiveness
of small island developing States is also an opportunity
to build a comprehensive and sustainable development
model that will also benefit other countries.

Climate change is a key element of the equation.
On a national basis, Italy has gathered broad expertise
in learning to face natural disasters, floods, soil erosion
and rising sea levels. For example, the rising level of the
Adriatic Sea poses a risk to the world heritage city of
Venice. To address that challenge a highly sophisticated
system - called MOSES 4 has been developed to
protect the city from tides that are up to three metres
high.

Many other countries face similar challenges,
as therefore the international community must stand
together in providing needed answers and support.
As a follow-up to the 2014 Samoa Conference, I have
pleasure in confirming that Italy will host a stock-
taking event at ministerial level, which will take place
in Milan from 14 to 15 October in connection with
EXPO 2015. We look forward to welcoming everyone
to that event, which will allow us to assess the progress
made by SIDS and donors, monitor the commitments
undertaken in Samoa, and connect them to the global
debate on food security and nutrition promoted by Italy
through the EXPO, whose theme will be "Feeding the
Planet, Energy for Life". As a founding member and
permanent supporter of the Global Island Partnership,
Italy will also host the annual Steering Committee
meeting of the Global Island Partnership in Turin next
October.

Energy is another crucial element of the equation.
Renewable energy sources are among the main points
of focus of cooperation with Pacific SIDS through the
regional environmental partnership that since 2007 we,
together with Austria, Luxembourg and Spain, have been
supporting financially. The scope of that partnership
was expanded recently to include climate-change
adaptation. Another programme supported by Italy,
and implemented through the International Union for
Conservation of Nature, seeks to carry out targeted
renewable energy projects in response to the problem
of energy dependency.

More recently, we have been developing a
cooperation programme to help meet the specific
challenges and needs of our Caribbean partners. In early
July, we hosted in Italy a specialized training course
on illegal financial flows for experts and officers from
the Caribbean Community countries. Since the SIDS
Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway
recognizes sustainable tourism as an important driver
of sustainable economic growth, Italy is financing a
World Bank pilot project to strengthen agro-tourism
clusters and foster growth prospects in the area.

Finally, I have pleasure in announcing that Italy is
launching a new regional cooperation programme in
the Caribbean in the field of disaster risk management
and rural development. The project will assist local
institutions in dealing with disaster risk management
and better responding to the evolving needs of farming
communities.

It is my privilege to address the Security Council,
and I wish to conclude by underlining the importance
of ensuring that the voice of small island developing
States reaches the Council. Italy attaches great
importance to the reform of the Security Council. We
share the goal of assuring better representation for
certain categories of States, cutting across traditional
United Nations regional groups. Small States make up
one such category, including small island developing
States, whose specific needs and aspirations should be
addressed.

