Mrs. Ratsifandrihamanana (spoke in French): I
wish to thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting on a
subject that looms large among our shared concerns. I
commend Mr. Jan Eliasson and Mr. Guehenno on their
exhaustive briefings, which the African Union fully
endorses, being one of the pillars of the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID).

Our participation in this meeting transcends the
symbolic act of being present here. We are here above
all to reaffirm the African Union's firm commitment to
discharging its duties and responsibilities to work
alongside the United Nations for the success of the
effective deployment of UNAMID and the Hybrid
Operation as a whole. We are also here to reiterate our
resolve to establish close cooperation with all the
partners involved in that unique enterprise, aware as
we are of the challenge we face. We cannot allow that
unprecedented operation to fail. Today more than ever
before, we must demonstrate solidarity and mutual
confidence.

We are also here to recall the long and difficult
road travelled, the many obstacles and the reoccurring
difficulties that emerged before the decisive turning
point of 31 December 2007 - the transfer of authority
from the African Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS) to
UNAMID, which represented a significant milestone in
the quest for peace in Darfur and the region. We take
this opportunity once again to hail the personnel and
troops of AMIS for their selflessness and the heroic
work which they undertook in extremely difficult
circumstances.

We are also here to share the decisions adopted at
the latest Assembly of Heads of State and Government
of the African Union. The Assembly emphasized the
relaunching of the peace negotiations on 27 October
2007 in Sirte. In that connection, the Assembly
reaffirmed its support for the joint efforts of the two
Special Envoys, Mr. Jan Eliasson and Mr. Salim
Ahmed Salim, and called upon the various parties
involved to cooperate further, since the use of arms is
no longer an alternative. The Sudanese Government
has been strongly encouraged to continue to cooperate

with the African Union and the United Nations with a
View to facilitating the implementation of UNAMID's
mandate.

We take this opportunity to praise and encourage
the troops that make up UNAMID and to thank the
troop-contributing countries and the donor countries
for their generosity.

As we see it, there has been no lack of will but
rather a lack of resources. Today, we would like to call
upon the Council to take a close look at the problems
of resources and logistics, which were referred to a
moment ago by Mr. Guehenno.

We realize, however, that a great deal has to be
done before we achieve our shared objective of peace
and the effective return to normalcy in Darfur, in the
Sudan and throughout the region. We must be more
careful, since instability in Darfur has spread
throughout the region and new concerns beset us with
the recent events in Chad, as well as in Kenya.

(spoke in English)

The UNAMID operation represents a concrete
testimony of the new and emerging partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations
such as the African Union in the continued quest for
international peace and security. We encourage the
Council to continue to strengthen the support for the
efforts deployed by regional organizations on behalf of
the Council, which remains the primary custodian of
international peace and security under the Charter of
the United Nations.

We therefore appeal to all to continue to support
the process and to take all necessary measures towards
addressing the outstanding gaps in the critical
capabilities required to ensure the effectiveness of
UNAMID. We thank the Government of the Sudan for
the cooperation it has extended thus far and urge it to
continue in this spirit, so as to resolve the remaining
outstanding issues of land, air transportation and the
freedom of movement of UNAMID. We believe this
will greatly assist in facilitating the speedy and smooth
deployment of various components of UNAMID.

With regard to the relation between Chad and the
Sudan, the African Union continues to engage both
member States constantly, with the facilitation of His
Excellency Colonel Muammar Al-Qadhafi, the leader
of the great Libyan Arab J amahiriya.
We believe that the success of this Hybrid
Operation depends largely on the early achievement of
a comprehensive political agreement. In this respect,
we reaffirm the commitment of the African Union to
continue to work closely with the United Nations
towards the advancement of the political process. We
recognize the obvious challenges involved in the
process, but we are confident that the parties and
stakeholders will continue to play constructive roles
towards moving the peace process forward. We are
encouraged by the attendance of some of the
movements in the talks on Juba and their willingness to
unify their positions on a common negotiating
platform.

(spoke in French)

I cannot conclude without failing to note, once
again, our sincere appreciation to both Mr. Guehenno
and Mr. Eliasson for their tireless efforts in this
process. Finally, I would like to echo all of those
Africans who are devoted to peace in expressing once
again our thanks to and our confidence in all of the
members of this Council.

