Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council is meeting today in an emergency
meeting at the request of the majority of its members,
which, along with a large number of countries and
people around the world, are gravely concerned about
an international peace and security-related issue. This
is about a dangerous precedent, and one that requires
our consideration.

Over the past few days, fear has emerged in the
international community with regard to one of the issues
that has been on the Security Council's agenda since its
establishment - the question of Palestine. Such fear
also emanates from the repercussions and impact of
unilateral decisions that are at odds with international
law and threaten the system of international
political relations. That system was founded based
on the Charter of the United Nations over 70 years
ago to prevent the repetition of the scourges of war
and to regulate relations among peoples in an era that
supposedly takes into account the fundamental rights
of peoples on an equal basis. We are confronted with a
test of that system, a test of the rule of law. Our efforts
will not be successful unless we work together in the
framework of international legitimacy. If we surrender
and fail, the repercussions will be grave - whether on
this question or other international issues - for years
to come.

The issue of Al-Quds Al-Sharif is rooted
in history. Generations of followers of the three
Abrahamic religions have been closely linked to
that city for hundreds of years. In modern times
and under the umbrella of the United Nations, the
international community succeeded in setting legal
parameters to address this issue when the Organization
decided to establish two States on the Palestinian
territories - pursuant to resolution 181 (II). Therefore,
the sole rationale and only solid basis for addressing
the question of Al-Quds Al-Sharif in the context of the
Palestinian question is to follow that reality - pursuant
to international law, as established through United
Nations and Security Council resolutions. All such
resolutions have unequivocally rejected the occupation
of Jerusalem that started in 1967.

Since we are meeting today to shed light on
the danger of infringing upon the legal parameters
that were reached over dozens of years, it might be
appropriate to recall the most important binding
Council resolutions on Jerusalem, longstanding and
more contemporary ones alike. Resolution 242 (1967)
provided for the withdrawal of Israel from the territories
occupied in 1967, including Jerusalem. Resolution 478
(1980) rejected the occupation of the city by force and
considered Israel's imposition of the so-called basic law
to be a violation of international law and asserted that
the basic law did not alter the legal status of the city.
It also maintained that the basic law had no impact on
the applicability in Al-Quds Al-Sharif of the Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War.

It is also of vital importance to recall the latest
Council resolutions on the matter. Some of them are
only one year old. We are referring to resolution 2334
(2016), which reaffirmed that the Security Council
does not recognize any alteration of the 4 June 1967
lines, including with regard to Al-Quds Al-Sharif,
unless it is a result of negotiations between the two
parties. Moreover, resolution 478 (1980) called for
the withdrawal of all diplomatic missions from
Jerusalem, since the international community does not
recognize it as the capital of Israel. Resolution 2334
(2016) clearly requested that all countries differentiate
between Israeli territories and those occupied in 1967,
including Jerusalem.

Those are all resolutions of the Security Council
elaborated over decades and up until this very day.
Taken as a whole, they constitute the corpus of law
governing the status of Jerusalem. They are the
binding Security Council resolutions that all countries
have pledged, pursuant to the Charter of the United
Nations, to implement and abide by in order to maintain
international peace and security. They are the Council
resolutions that represent the only reality and logic with
regard to Al-Quds Al-Sharif.

Based on what I have just referred to, the Arab
Republic of Egypt denounces the United States decision
to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of the State of
Israel and to move its Embassy to Jerusalem. We also
reject any implications of that decision. We would also
like to stress that such unilateral decisions violate
international legitimacy, and therefore have no impact
on the legal status of the city of Jerusalem, as it is a city
under occupation. It is not legally permissible to take
any action that would alter the status quo of the city.

As I have explained, and as is well-known to
everyone, given the highly sensitive nature of the
question of Jerusalem, we would like to express our
serious concern about the potential repercussions of
such a decision on the stability of the region - since
it will arouse sentiments among Muslim and Arab
peoples given the great spiritual, cultural and historical
status of the city of Jerusalem in Arab and Muslim
hearts. Such a decision will also have a grave negative
impact on the peace process between the Palestinian
and Israelis. That process was founded on major terms
of reference, including providing that the question of
the city of Jerusalem was to be a final-status issue to be
settled through negotiations between the two parties.

The call to safeguard the international legal terms
of reference and international law is not a luxury,
especially in a region that is beset by conflict and a
world subjected to huge challenges. We have no need
for further unjustified chaos. This is a call that takes
into account what is before our very eyes - the huge
danger posed by the deterioration of the international
legal system. Therefore, we once again reaffirm that the
status of Jerusalem as a city under occupation, pursuant
to Council resolutions, has not changed and will not
change unless the parties agree to that issue through
negotiations. We call upon United Nations agencies
to face the emerging challenges on the Palestinian
question in a way that maintains the inalienable rights
ofthe Palestinian people, including the right to establish
an independent State along the 4 June 1967 lines, with
east Jerusalem as its capital.

Egypt will always uphold its pledge to reach fair,
just and durable peace in the region, based on the
parameters of international legitimacy.

