Mr. Annabi: I am pleased to provide members of
the Security Council with an update on developments
in Kosovo since our last briefing to the Council, which
took place on 13 July.

Last month saw the culmination of the first phase
of the civil registration process. Of the Kosovo
Albanian majority, some 90 per cent participated in the
registration process. Of those applications, some
100,000 were subject to a review process, which should
be completed by the end of this month. Of the review
cases processed to date, 29 per cent have been
substantiated, bringing the total number of names
placed on the civil registry to more than 930,000. In
addition, 181,642 applications have been received from
outside Kosovo, of which 31,619 have been approved
to date.

Over the past month, the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has made
major efforts to ensure that the registration would be
simple and safe. Nevertheless, widespread intimidation
from hard-line Serb elements, including open threats to
cut off pensions or inflict physical injury, dissuaded the
vast majority of Kosovo Serbs from participating in the
process. In addition, Kosovo Turkish participation was
limited due to ongoing divisions within their
community over demands they had presented regarding
the status of the Turkish language. Some radical
elements repeatedly rejected UNMIK's proposals
designed to ensure the full use of the Turkish language
in municipalities where the Kosovo Turkish community
resides. Despite the Turkish Government's
endorsement of the Mission's proposal on this issue,
those elements maintained their demands for the
imposition of Turkish as a third national language. As a
result, the Kosovo Turkish community was not able to
mobilize for registration prior to the end of the
registration process.

Following the completion of the civil registration,
the focus is now shifting to the upcoming municipal
elections. Mr. Kouchner, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, has announced that those
municipal elections would be held on 28 October. To
date, the Central Election Commission has certified a
total of 20 political parties, two coalitions, three
citizens' initiatives and 15 independent candidates.
One of UNMIK's main concerns in the pre-election
period is the recent rise in what is perceived to be
politically motivated violence, particularly against
members of the Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK).
The most serious incident was the killing of a member
of the Istok LDK presidency who had been abducted on
23 July. Since the beginning of August, three other
local LDK representatives have been the targets of
separate shooting incidents, and one local LDK office
has been bombed.

UNMIK takes the threat of political violence or
intimidation very seriously. It is therefore readjusting
police priorities to face that challenge. Every available
strategy will be explored and used as necessary, from
security training for party members to police escorts
and/or personal protection in especially high-risk
situations. Incidents will be vigorously investigated
and the Mission will strictly enforce the election code
of conduct, which prohibits political entities from
involvement in violence or intimidation. UNMIK will
not hesitate to remove from the ballot any candidate or
political party in cases where involvement in politically
motivated violence can be substantiated.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General has held over the past month two "town hall"
meetings, as they are called, which were attended by
hundreds of local residents over the past week to
discuss the concerns of the local population. He used
those opportunities to urge the population to participate
in the upcoming elections and to call for tolerance
across ethnic communities. For their part, local
residents questioned the Special Representative as to
what measures UNMIK would take to ensure that the
elections would be free and fair. They also raised
questions over property issues and travel documents.
Those town hall meetings were the first in a series of
such meetings that the Special Representative plans to
hold throughout the province over the coming weeks.

In mid-July, Mr. Kouchner also presented his
initial concept of a pact for Kosovo society involving a
step-by-step elaboration of a legal framework for
substantial autonomy and community protection during
the interim administrative period. The pact will not
address the issue of Kosovo's final status. The first
element of that pact, the regulation on the self-
government of municipalities, has been signed into
force by Mr. Kouchner. Other elements of the pact will
include mechanisms to protect the rights of Kosovo's
various ethnic communities and the eventual
establishment of Kosovo-wide institutions for genuine
self-government. All such institutions will remain
under the authority of the Special Representative, in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1244
(1999).

As part of UNMIK's commitment to equal rights
for all of Kosovo's communities, Mr. Kouchner has
launched a new initiative designed to improve
conditions and services for Kosovo's non-Serb and
non-Albanian communities. That initiative envisages
special support programmes for those communities in a
number of areas that include health, education, social
welfare and public services. The Special
Representative has already held an initial round of
constructive consultations with representatives from
Kosovo's Bosniac, Gorani, Turkish, Egyptian and
Askalji communities in support of that initiative. In
those consultations, UNMIK is including
representatives from all non-Serb and non-Albanian
political parties, irrespective of the level of public
support they appear to enjoy.
In another significant development, from 21 to 23
July, a group of 40 representatives of Kosovo Serb and
Albanian communities met in Airlie, Virginia, at a
conference convened by the United States Institute of
Peace. The conference unanimously adopted a
declaration that is now referred to as the Airlie
Declaration, which endorses the building of democracy
in Kosovo as the highest priority, and the holding of
free elections as a key element in that process. The
Declaration also recognizes the fundamental right of all
Kosovo residents to return to the province and the
cultivation of a strong and vibrant multi-ethnic civil
society as essential for the future of Kosovo. The
conference participants also committed themselves to
what they called a pact against Violence that would
promote tolerance, prevent negative exploitation of
ethnic issues and enable physical integration and
political participation for all residents of Kosovo.

Following the Airlie House conference, the
Interim Administrative Council (IAC) and the Kosovo
Transitional Council (KTC) representatives expressed
strong support for the Declaration adopted there.
Discussions are now being held on how to transform
the Declaration into a series of concrete initiatives.
UNMIK has expressed its readiness to play an active
role in this effort. This will be particularly important,
given the traditional reluctance of most local political
leaders to engage in direct dialogue with each other
while inside Kosovo. In addition to following up on the
Airlie House Declaration, both the IAC and the KTC
continue to work constructively on a number of key
issues, including the endorsement of the revised
Kosovo consolidated budget and an extensive
stocktaking of the work of the joint interim
administrative departments.

Progress on these issues was facilitated by the
continuing cooperative attitude of the Serb National
Council of Gracanica and by the return of Mr. Thaci
and his Party for Democratic Progress of Kosovo
(PPDK) to the joint administrative bodies, following a
walkout in early July, which we reported to the Council
last month.

Another significant development over the past
month was the phasing out of the humanitarian pillar of
UNMIK. On 15 July, this pillar was officially phased
out as a formal component within UNMIK. Mr. Eric
Morris, who is a very experienced Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
staff member and a former Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Bosnia, has
been appointed as the United Nations Humanitarian
Coordinator for Kosovo. Mr. Morris will also serve as
the Special Envoy of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees for the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. The focus of his activities so far has been
on the establishment of a humanitarian accounting
project, aimed at identifying gaps in the transition from
emergency to development work in all communities in
Kosovo. It will also review what United Nations
assistance will be needed in order to fill these gaps
over the coming winter.

While voluntary return movements of Kosovars
from Western Europe and other countries have
continued at a regular pace, non-voluntary returns from
Germany and Switzerland are rapidly rising. These
forced returns jumped from 600 during the month of
May to over 1,700 in the month of July. Since
February, over 5,600 persons have been returned
involuntarily to Kosovo, including some 3,300 from
Germany and over 2,300 from Switzerland. Although
the Governments involved normally support UNMIK's
position on not forcing the return of minorities, there
have been a number of Kosovo Roma and Gorani
among the non-voluntary returns.

A few days ago, on 14 August, UNMIK assumed
responsibility for, and subsequently shut down, the
Zvecan lead smelter in the Mitrovica region, which
represented a major health hazard, threatening both the
local community and the international personnel
stationed in the area. Recent air samples indicated a
level of lead pollution which is 200 times the
international standard established by the World Health
Organization. The shutdown of the Zvecan lead smelter
facility, which was carried out with assistance from the
Kosovo Force (KFOR), faced little resistance. Since
then, the security situation in Zvecan has been stable
and the general atmosphere remains calm.

UNMIK has taken a number of steps to manage
the health crisis and to mitigate the economic impact
on the smelter's workforce. Cleanup operations at the
facility are under way and medical facilities have been
set up to test the lead levels in blood for both the
workers and the members of the local population. More
than 1,400 of the estimated 1,500 Kosovo Serb workers
of the facility have registered with UNMIK and have
been paid an advance on their August salaries.

While there were demonstrations at the beginning
of this week involving up to 1,000 people, these
demonstrations have remained orderly. Within days of
the takeover, the number of participants in the
demonstrations has dropped to 100 to 200 people.
Combined with the high registration rate of the
smelter's workforce with UNMIK, this trend indicates
a growing confidence among the plant's Kosovo Serb
employees in UNMIK's administration.

An initial inspection of the smelter indicates
widespread neglect, poor safety and environmental
standards and a consequent collapse of worker morale.
UNMIK's Trepca Administration, reinforced by a
consortium of experts from three major international
mining companies, will now assess the technical,
environmental and financial feasibility of the entire
Trepca mining and metallurgical complex in northern
Kosovo. At the same time, UNMIK will also repair or
replace safety and production equipment. As part of
this effort, up to 2,000 local Trepca workers will be
employed over the next year. The budget for this phase
of Trepca's renovation has been set at $16 million and
includes funds for workers' salaries, equipment and
payments to the consortium. Most of this sum has
already been raised from the European Union, the
United States, France and Italy.

I would like to turn now to the situation in
Mitrovica. There was an upsurge in violence and
instability in the city over the latter half of July, and
this underscores the fragility of the peace process in
northern Kosovo. Incidents of inter-ethnic violence
have been accompanied by the periodic outbreak of
organized unrest among elements of the Kosovo Serb
community in the northern part of the city. On more
than one occasion during this period, order was
restored following direct contacts with leaders from the
Serb National Council of Mitrovica. This unrest
became particularly acute in the wake of the UNMIK
police's detention of a Kosovo Serb "bridge watcher"
on 16 July. Following the arrest, UNMIK police
officers were illegally detained, their weapons and
equipment seized and their apartments broken into and
ransacked.

By the end of the July, as a result of UNMIK and
KFOR action, the situation had significantly calmed
down and improved. Nevertheless, these episodes of
organized unrest highlight the relative ease with which
determined troublemakers can raise tensions in the
northern part of the city.

UNMIK and KFOR have reviewed their joint
operation plans and reinforcement options for the
Mitrovica area. This is, however, only a short-term
solution that will enable the Mission to better respond
to future incidents of unrest. It is essential to take the
initiative away from the radical elements within the
Kosovo Serb community. Together with KFOR,
UNMIK is revising its plans for the north of Kosovo
and developing a comprehensive strategy to extend and
reinforce the influence of the international community
in the area.

As regards the overall security situation, minority
populations continue to be the target of ethnic Violence
and intimidation. Kosovo Serbs and Kosovo Roma, in
particular, have been the Victims of shootings and
grenade arson attacks. In one of the most recent
incidents, a group of Kosovo Serb children was injured
in a grenade attack in Obilic, in the Pristina region.
Despite these continuing challenges to the security of
minority communities, some small-scale spontaneous
returns have taken place, including 35 Kosovo Serb
internally displaced persons who returned to Slivovo in
the Pristina region and about 100 internally displaced
persons to the village of Grace in Vucitrn, again in the
Mitrovica region.

In the wake of these returns, a representative of
the Serb National Council (SNC) in Mitrovica attended
a meeting of the Steering Committee of the Joint
Committee on Returns on 31 July. This marked the first
time the SNC-Mitrovica has participated in a Kosovo-
wide institution.

The SNC-Mitrovica members have subsequently
become involved in a plan to organize what are called
go-and-see Visits for Kosovo Serbs to the Osojane
valley in the Istok municipality in the Pec region.

Low-intensity guerrilla activity continues in the
Presevo valley in southern Serbia. There have been
intermittent reports of violent clashes, which are
believed to involve members of what is called the
Liberation Army of Presevo, Medvedja and Bujanovac
(UPCMB) and Serbian security forces. At the end of
July, a series of incidents, including extended
exchanges of gunfire and mortar attacks, were recorded
inside the ground safety zone east of Dobrosin.

While there has been no major influx of Albanian
internally displaced persons in response to this
violence, some 35 new arrivals have registered for
assistance with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in the anilane
and Pristina regions over the past month. These recent
developments serve as a reminder that the situation in
southern Serbia remains an issue of concern.

In conclusion, I would like to say that in the
coming weeks, UNMIK will continue its ongoing
efforts to generate and sustain a climate in which free
and fair elections can take place. These efforts will
remain at the top of UNMIK's agenda. UNMIK will
also closely monitor all aspects of the electoral process
and will use every means at its disposal to deter and
punish acts of political violence. In addition, UNMIK
will continue its work to improve conditions for
Kosovo's ethnic minorities - including their material
and security conditions.

The Secretary-General will submit to the Council
next month a report on UNMIK's activities, and he has
asked his Special Representative, Mr. Kouchner, to be
available - perhaps towards the end of September -
to introduce the report to the Council. Mr. Kouchner
will be in a position to provide additional details on
UNMIK's activities. In the days to come we will work
out with the incoming President the dates of that
presentation to the Council.

