Ms. Bolafios Perez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to congratulate you, Sir, and your team
on your country's leadership and work as President of
the Security Council this month, which is a particularly

busy one. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his informative briefing.

Guatemala remains steadfast in its belief that
diplomacy and dialogue are the best way to achieve
a long-term solution in each of the conflicts that
undermine the Middle East region. Although the extent
of the existing intransigence and hostilities could
suggest that such a view is naive, we continue to believe
that political solutions to the disputes that have divided
the region for years are the only path that offers lasting
stability and the possibility of returning to the path of
progress and development.

The recent events between Israel and Palestine
have not been encouraging. The 51 days of conflict had
disastrous consequences. More than 2,100 Palestinians
died, along with more than 70 Israelis. Almost one third
of the population of the Gaza Strip was expelled from
their homes. Many of them lost all their belongings.
Whole neighbourhoods, including basic public
infrastructure, were devastated. Dozens of schools,
hospitals and clinics were destroyed or damaged.
United Nations facilities were affected and United
Nations staff lost their lives. The Secretary-General
called the destruction indescribable. The successful
reconstruction of Gaza requires a strong political basis.

In that regard, we deem the reconciliation agreement
reached on 25 September in Cairo to be positive. We
hope that all stakeholders will strive to ensure that it is
fully implemented. We also believe that the Conference
on Palestine and the reconstruction of Gaza that took
place in Cairo on 12 October is a step in the right
direction. It is encouraging that the reconstruction
work has begun. We hope that such work helps the
civilian population most affected by the conflict. In
that regard, we recognize the success of the temporary
tripartite agreement negotiated by the United Nations
in ensuring the entry of reconstruction materials into
the Gaza Strip.

However, the peace process must continue. It
is therefore necessary to promote an environment
conducive to peace, mutual understanding and respect
for human rights. That should include an investigation
into all possible violations of international humanitarian
law committed by all sides during the conflict. We
also believe that it will be important to strengthen
the ceasefire agreement for the resumption of any
kind of peace talks. Along the same lines, it is vital
that all parties refrain from any unilateral action and
provocations that could contribute to increased tension.

It is essential not to lose sight of the root causes of
the recent hostilities: a restrictive occupation that has
continued for nearly half a century, the ongoing denial
of Palestinian rights and a lack of tangible progress in
the peace negotiations. The parties must make a true
and renewed effort to chart a clear path towards a just
and lasting negotiated peace that includes, among
other things, the lifting of the embargo, the cessation
of settlement construction, taking Israel's legitimate
security concerns into account and the establishment
of two States living side by side in peace and security.

We are aware of the enormous challenges that the
pursuit of a political solution at both the national and the
international levels may mean for the parties. However,
we insist that it is the only way left. Continuing along
the current course will only deepen the divisions,
thereby hampering the desired goal ofpeace. The status
quo is not an option.

