Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for holding this
meeting on the visit to Iraq and Kuwait.

(spoke in English)

On 28 and 29 June, the members of the Security
Council visited the State ofKuwait and, for the first time,
the Republic of Iraq, in a mission co-led by the State of
Kuwait and the United States of America. The purpose
of the visit was, first, to demonstrate the Security
Council's support for Iraq's post-conflict recovery and
reconstruction and for the sovereignty, unity, security
and territorial integrity of Iraq; secondly, to observe
and support the efforts of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) aimed at implementing its
mandate, in line with resolutions 2470 (2019) and 2107
(2013) and other related Security Council resolutions;
thirdly, to observe and support the efforts of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, established under resolution 2379
(2017); fourthly, to recognize the challenges Iraq faces
in its transition into a post-conflict environment to
include addressing the humanitarian situation, the need
for economic reform and attracting inward investment,
and to better understand the aspirations and concerns of
the Iraqi people as they begin the process of stabilizing
and rebuilding their country; and fifthly, to address
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and the return of
Kuwaiti property, including the national archives, in
line with a solution 2107 (2013).

The visit was conducted over two days in Kuwait
City and Baghdad. On the first day, in Kuwait City,
the members of the Security Council met with Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs Sheikh
Sabah Khalid Al Hamad Al Sabah. The members of
the Security Council discussed bilateral engagement
between Iraq and Kuwait and regional issues. In Kuwait
City, we met with the Deputy Special Representative
for Political Affairs of UNAMI, Alice Walpole, and
the head of the International Committee of the Red
Cross delegation in Kuwait in his capacity as Chair of
the Tripartite Mechanism, Omar Odeh. The members
of the Security Council discussed the role of both
organizations in the implementation of resolution 2107
(2013) to resolve outstanding issues related to missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and the return
of Kuwaiti property, including the national archives.
Members of the Security Council also met World Bank
representative, Ghassan Khoja, to discuss follow-up
of international financial bridges to Iraq, including
from the 2018 Kuwait International Conference for
Reconstruction of Iraq, co-chaired by Kuwait, Iraq,
the United Nations, the European Union and the
World Bank.

On the second day, in Baghdad, the members of
the Security Council met with President Barham Salih,
Prime Minister Adil Abd Al-Mahdi, Foreign Minister
Mohamed Ali Alhakim, Speaker of the Council of
Representatives Mohammed Al-Halbousi, Kurdistan
Regional Government President Nechirvan Barzani,
and representatives of political blocs in the Council
of Representatives and members of civil society and
non-governmental organizations. During meetings
with the Iraqi interlocutors, members of the Security
Council recognized the progress Iraq has made while
also noting that challenges remain in Iraq's post-
conflict recovery and reconstruction.

Members of the Security Council welcomed
the positive progress towards the full formation of
the Government of Iraq, with the confirmation of
Ministers for Justice, Defence and Interior on 24 June.
The members of the Security Council welcomed the
continued engagement of the Government of Iraq
and the Kurdistan Regional Government to resolve
all outstanding issues in accordance with the Iraqi
Constitution. They also welcomed progress towards the
full formation of a new Kurdistan Regional Government.
The members of the Security Council reaffirmed
that the Government of Iraq is upholding the values set
forth in the Iraqi Constitution and is responding to the
needs of all Iraqis, including woman, youth, children,
displaced persons and persons belonging to all ethnic
and religious groups. Members of the Security Council
also commended Iraq for seeking stepped-up regional
diplomatic and economic reintegration.

