Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Our delegation would also like to express its
gratitude to you, Mr. President, for your initiative in
organizing today's open debate. We believe this
discussion is both timely and useful, especially at this
time when challenges to international peace and security
are confronting the world community with the task of
developing a strategy for early warning, timely monitoring
and prevention of conflicts and crises.

A key role in preventive diplomacy rightly belongs
to the United Nations, which possesses substantial
capabilities in this sphere. The main issues of preventive
strategy as well as political monitoring of their
implementation must remain exclusively within the
purview of the Security Council. Such an approach
closely coincides with the conclusion drawn by the
Secretary-General in his report on the work of the
Organization to the effect that undermining the primary
role of the Security Council in maintaining international
peace and security casts doubt on the very foundations of
international law, such as the United Nations Charter. It
is important that this idea underlies the Security Council's
draft presidential statement prepared on the initiative of
Slovenia.

In fulfilling its Charter role as the body that bears
major responsibility for maintenance of international
peace and security, the Council has the right - either at
the request of States or on its own initiative - to use a
broad set of instruments established within the framework
of the United Nations to prevent disputes from erupting
into armed conflicts.

However, we are convinced that preventive services
to Member States must be provided only with their
consent and with respect for the principle of non-
interference in internal affairs. Only the unequivocally

 

expressed agreement of the host country to preventive
actions can serve as a legal and political basis for the
adoption of relevant measures and also serve as a guarantee
for their effectiveness.

In this connection, we proceed from the premise that
any United Nations response, including in situations of a
humanitarian nature, must be undertaken pursuant to the
Charter and through a decision of the Security Council. The
development of world processes undoubtedly dictates the
advisability of developing norms of international law and
adapting them to new realities. However, such work must
be carried out collectively on the sound basis of the
Charter, which would enable us to develop agreed upon
decisions whose legitimacy would not be subject to doubt.

Of special significance is the observance by States
involved in a dispute of the obligations under Chapter VI
of the Charter, providing for a broad set of instruments for
the settlement of disputes through peaceful means.

The Security Council can play an important role in
preventing armed conflicts by enhancing the effectiveness
of arms embargoes. As we have repeatedly emphasized, an
arms embargo full of holes can only aggravate a military
confrontation between conflicting parties.

Preventive measures should also include steps to
demobilize and disarm former combatants and reintegrate
them into peaceful life, which might be an effective means
for ensuring the irreversibility of peace processes in former
hot spots. An example of this is the difficult situation
regarding compliance with the Protocol on Military Issues
in Tajikistan. Of special importance is assistance to the
United Nations Mission in Tajikistan, along with adequate
financial and material support from the international
community.

Without an effective arms embargo, we cannot
stabilize the situation in Kosovo and in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. The failure of efforts to disarm the
combatants has, unfortunately, led to a breakdown of the
peace process in Angola.

The topic of preventive action is inextricably linked to
the problem of the uncontrolled proliferation of small arms
and light weapons in regions of crisis. Russia is interested
in stepping up the campaign against the unlawful spread of
such weapons. We support the involvement of the United
Nations in such efforts if relevant States agree and an
appeal for assistance is made to the Organization.

Also deserving of support is more effective
involvement on the part of the United Nations of a
civilian component of multifunctional peacekeeping
operations, in particular of civilian police, with a View to
monitoring observance of human rights, the maintenance
of order and the rule of law. At the same time, we
maintain a principled disagreement with the notion of
endowing such a component with enforcement powers.

An essential element for early warning is now the
multifaceted efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General
to enhance the preventive capabilities of the United
Nations. Regional organizations and subregional
structures are playing an important role in early warning
and in the prevention of conflicts. However, their
activities must comply strictly with the provisions of
Chapter VIII of the Charter. The recommendations of the
Secretary-General on a more rational and economical
division of labour between the United Nations and
regional organizations should be studied on the basis of
that Chapter of the Charter. Emphasis here should be
placed on the advantage of the use of political, diplomatic
and legal means.

The Russian Federation, with full recognition of its
responsibility as a permanent member of the Security
Council, is prepared to continue to promote a search for
ways to enhance the activities of the Security Council
with a view to preventing armed conflicts.

