Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): First of all, I wish to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for their briefings.

Today, I would like to focus my statement on
three major points. First, we welcome the new positive
momentum given by President Tshilombo Tshisekedi.
Nevertheless, the situation in the Democratic Republic
ofthe Congo continues to be complex. Belgium remains
concerned about the security situation, especially in the
two Kivus and Ituri. We strongly condemn the latest
attacks on the Ebola standby teams in North Kivu.
We are concerned about inter-ethnic violence in Ituri,
which has already displaced more than 300,000 people,
as the Special Representative informed us. We call on
all parties to reduce tensions and show respect for the
civilian population.

We also remain concerned about the humanitarian
situation. In addition to the Ebola epidemic, there have
already been more than 87,000 cases of measles since
the beginning of the year, and cholera continues to exact
a heavy toll. As the President stated, respect for human
rights and the restoration of the rule of law remain
crucial challenges. In this regard, it is troubling to note
that the Forces armees de la Republique democratique
du Congo and the Congolese National Police were able
to continue to commit human rights violations during
the period covered by the latest report of the Secretary-
General (S/2019/575). Security sector reform, which

involves the professionalization of the security forces,
must remain a priority.

Secondly, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the new sanctions
regime continue, and must continue, to contribute to
ensuring the protection of civilians and the restoration
of peace and State authority throughout the country.
By supporting the Congolese Government, MONUSCO
continues to play a key role. Therefore, within the
framework of the Mission's current independent
strategic review, Belgium expects the development
of benchmarks to clearly measure the capacity of
the Congolese authorities to take over the various
tasks currently being carried out by MONUSCO. The
adequate protection of civilians and respect for human
rights in all circumstances remain imperative.

Belgium also welcomes the renewal of the
sanctions regime and the new mechanism for updating
the sanctions list. While welcoming the positive
cooperation between the Congolese authorities with
the sanctions regime's Group of Experts and the
commitment of President Tshilombo Tshisekedi to
improve the human rights situation, we also hope that
the forthcoming renewal of the sanctions regime can be
used to make them more effective and better targeted.

Thirdly, as the future of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and that of the Great Lakes region remain
closely linked, we call on all stakeholders to take
advantage of the current positive momentum. After the
recent quadripartite presidential summit held in Luanda
and the latest initiatives to strengthen the National
Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the region and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, we hope that this
dynamic will prove to be sustainable and have tangible
effects. Improved regional cooperation could have
considerable benefits for the Congolese population, in
the contexts of the struggle against the various armed
groups, economic cooperation and the fight against the
illegal exploitation of natural resources.

