Mr. AlMutairi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to thank the South African
presidency for the convening of this meeting on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. I should also like to congratulate the new
non-permanent members of the Security Council.

We reaffirm and support the statements made on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, the Arab Group
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

There can be no doubt that a meeting on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, at this time is very opportune. It reflects the
importance that the international community gives to
the situation of the Palestinian people in the light of
Israel's violations in the occupied Palestinian
territories. The peoples and States of the region look to
the international community, in particular in the case of
the occupied Arab territories, to implement
international law and resolutions, since the region
continues to be unstable as a result of the disruption of
the peace process.

Israeli violations of international law,
international humanitarian law and human rights laws,
the blockade of Gaza, the collective punishment of the
Palestinian people, the refusal to release detainees, the
demolition of their properties and assets, the forced
deportation taking place and the demographic changes
in and judaization of Jerusalem continue. According to
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestinian Refugees in the Near East, more than 1,100
Palestinians are reported to have been displaced as a
result of the destruction in East Jerusalem - compared
to 606 people displaced in 2010.

The very difficult economic situation, the high
level of poverty and unemployment, the illegal
settlement activities and reports of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs stating that
attacks on civilians in Palestine grew in 2011, with an
increase of no less than 50 per cent over the previous
year, with the full knowledge of the Israeli authorities
- all these factors demonstrate that peace efforts are
threatened.

Since 1967, Israel has not ceased constructing
new settlements. Some 150 settlements have been built
in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. That undermines
the rights of Palestinians - the rights to self-
determination, equality, freedom of movement - and
is contrary to the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949,
the United Nations Charter and international law. That
is reflected in resolutions adopted under international
law that prohibit annexation and the construction of
settlements and provide that they must be dismantled.

Israel's continuation of those unlawful colonial
practices in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, and its aerial attacks on
unarmed civilians demonstrate its disregard for all the
agreements made with the Palestinian Authority and
for its international obligations. Such actions
undermine all efforts to resume the political peace
process on the basis of the two-State solution, the
4 June 1967 borders and the road map of the Quartet.

Given Israel's ongoing violations and practices
against Palestinians in the occupied territories and its
non-compliance with the Fourth Geneva Convention of
1949, the international community, particularly the
Security Council, must send a strong message, without
reservations, to the occupying Power that its illegal
acts and practices must stop. Otherwise, we will see a
further deterioration of the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories. That will lead to failing efforts
to restore mutual trust between the two parties and will
jeopardize a political solution on the basis of two
States. In addition, we are witnessing the Palestinians
trying to establish their State through the support of
international organizations and institutions and the
United Nations.

Kuwait reiterates that the international
community has the legal and moral responsibility to
protect Palestinians, whose territory is occupied, and to
uphold the United Nations Charter, and Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515
(2003) and 1860 (2009) in particular. It should
implement the Arab Peace Initiative, the road map and
the principle of land for peace. Recognition of the
Palestinian State would be the greatest investment in
peace in the region.

On 22 January 2012, the League of Arab States
adopted several resolutions with regard to Syria. The
Arab League reiterates the need for Syria to respect the
League's plan of action and to implement its provisions
in order to reaffirm the aspirations of the Syrian
people.

Here, we reiterate the importance of
implementing resolution 497 (1981), which states that
Israel must withdraw from the occupied Syrian Golan
to the 4 June 1967 line. We urge Israel to stop
threatening and violating Lebanese sovereignty and to
withdraw from all its occupied territories, in
accordance with resolution 1701 (2006), and to respect
the water rights and territorial integrity of Lebanon. In
this context, we welcome Israeli-Palestinian talks in
Jordan. Nevertheless, we reiterate that the Quartet
should give priority to putting an end to the Israeli
settlement policy. Otherwise, the peace process will
fail; it will not succeed in achieving a just,
comprehensive and lasting solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict.

