Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important briefing.
We would also like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Colombia and Head of the
United Nations Mission in Colombia, Mr. Jean Arnault,
for sharing with the Security Council the first progress
report (S/2016/1095) of the Mission under his charge.
Allow me also to welcome the presence of my sister
the Permanent Representative of Colombia and other
members of her Permanent Mission at this meeting of
the Security Council.

After over half a century of armed conflict, seven
attempts over 34 years to reach a peace agreement, six of
which were unsuccessful, a long path has been followed
by the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia - Ejercito del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) to arrive at the achievement of this
historic Final Peace Agreement in the brethren country
of Colombia. Today Colombia has become an example
for the world. Furthermore, this historic process has
given the Security Council an opportunity to fulfil
the main responsibility that the peoples of the world
have entrusted to it: maintaining international peace
and security.

The signing, on 24 November 2016 in Bogota, of
the Final Peace Agreement - with all of its necessary
ammendments so that all parties could commit to
a cessation of hostilities and an establishment of a
lasting peace - fills us with hope and satisfaction.
We acknowledge the important contributions of
the brotherly nations that supported the process of
dialogue between the Government of Colombia and the
FARC-EP. There is no doubt that regional cooperation
in resolving conflicts is essential in order to reach
understanding. The Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States (CELAC) has clearly expressed
that and endorsed the peace process. CELAC has also
underscored that

"a definitive end to the conflict in Colombia would

benefit the region, and we reaffirm the principles

agreed to by the Heads of State of CELAC in the

Declaration of Latin America and the Caribbean

as a Zone of Peace, which was adopted in Havana,

Cuba, on 28 and 29 January 2014".

As President Evo Morales Ayma said to his
counterpart His Excellency President Santos Calderon
of Colombia, everyone knows that the peace process
has not been easy, and sustaining the Agreement will
require as much effort as it took to achieve it. Sidelining
the enemies of peace and the warlords who stalk our
peoples will require an outsized effort, and in that
regard we make ourselves available with the greatest
humility. In that regard, and with the same humility, it
is an honour for me to point out that Bolivia is among
the countries contributing a significant number of
observers to the United Nations Mission in Colombia.

We would also like to highlight the importance of
the establishment of a national commission of security
guarantees and the establishment of the national council
of reintegration so that members of the FARC-EP can
lead normal lives within Colombian society. That will
be an important contribution to the objectives of the
cessation of hostilities and the establishment ofa lasting
peace. We encourage the United Nations Mission in
Colombia to work closely with both of those entities.

We also take note of the observations presented by
the Secretary-General in his report. We would like to
underscore a number of points that merit the Council's
attention. First, it is essential to establish conditions for
increasing the flow of information from the parties to
the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism. Secondly,
it is necessary to ensure the necessary logistical support
in order to facilitate the work of the Mechanism. Thirdly,
it is necessary to have support for the verification of the
destruction of dangerous materials and hidden caches
of FARC-EP weapons. Finally, as a third component
of the Mechanism, we should constantly encourage
the development of trust between the members of the
Armed Forces of Colombia and the FARC-EP.

I would like to conclude by congratulating the
Government of Colombia and the FARC-EP, as well
as the United Nations Mission in Colombia, for the
commitment that they have demonstrated in building a
society that can develop peaceful coexistence. As Evo
Morales Ayma has said,

"Dialogue and negotiations have triumphed in
Colombia. Peace has won, and we have all won
because of that. We extend congratulations
to Colombia".

