Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): It is
with real pleasure that my delegation welcomes
Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma to this public meeting
on the occasion of his presentation of the first six-
monthly report of the Secretary-General (S/2002/1223)
on the United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor (UNMISET). Cameroon wishes to tell the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General how
very much we appreciate the exceptional work
accomplished in such a brief period of time. I would
like at the same time to thank the Secretary-General for
the high calibre of this full, precise and most
informative report.

Since 20 May 2002, the Democratic Republic of
Timor-Leste has given evidence of extraordinary
dynamism both at the domestic level and in terms of
foreign policy. In the national sphere, the new
authorities of Timor-Leste are, above all, working to
assume their functions. This obviously entails
developing national capacities, in particular, in the
important justice, police and defence sectors. The
strengthening of human and institutional capacities in
Timor-Leste also relates to areas that are particularly
decisive for development, such as education and
training, health and agricultural development.

With the support of UNMISET and bilateral
donors, substantial progress has been made since 20
May 2002 in capacity-building in all areas. Cameroon
is particularly pleased to be participating in this
UNMISET success story, be it through coordination or
capacity-building in the legal, health, agricultural
development or communications fields.

My delegation shares the concerns expressed in
the report regarding the establishment of a competent
and independent judiciary in Timor-Leste, and we
endorse the relevant suggestions made in the report in
this regard.

The other topic that I would like to raise is that of
the police and defence. Cameroon notes with pleasure
that the new Timor-Leste Police Service is already
responsible for four out of the 13 districts. This leads
us to hope that by January 2004, as scheduled, the
maintenance of law and order will be fully in the hands
of the Timorese police. In the meantime, we welcome
the remarkable work being done on a daily basis by
UNMISET's civilian police component which is both
maintaining law and order and successfully fulfilling
its important role in advising and training the local
police.
Still on the questions of security, I would like to
emphasize the positive development regarding the
external security and the territorial integrity of Timor-
Leste. This, of course, is primarily the result of the
work done by the Timorese Government, but the results
also are to the credit of the military component of
UNMISET and of the Indonesian armed forces. The
triangular cooperation among these three structures has
undoubtedly made it possible to improve and to ensure
a climate of stability and security with West Timor. It is
clear that if this progress is further strengthened as
time goes by, the Security Council's goal of gradually
reducing the United Nations military presence within a
reasonable time period can be successful.

I would like, in conclusion, to refer to two aspects
that I believe are decisive to the future and to the
economic and social progress of the Democratic
Republic of Timor-Leste. In the international sphere,
four major initiatives should be emphasized in View of
their present and future impact on the political and
legal shape of Timor and on Timor's development.
These are, first, the admission of Timor-Leste to the
United Nations on 27 September 2002 - a symbolic
event but, above all, a major diplomatic act. My
country supported it, and we are preparing to establish
our own diplomatic relations with that country in the
coming weeks.

There is also the fact that Timor-Leste
participated in last July's Fiji Summit of the African,
Caribbean and Pacific Group of States. This is a
prelude to Timor-Leste's joining the Cotonou
Agreement with the European Union. We should also
emphasize the political judgement and insight of the
Timorese authorities that led them very quickly to
normalize their relations with their two neighbours
which cannot be ignored, Australia and Indonesia.
Those two countries and their Governments also
deserve, together with the Dili authorities, to be
commended and encouraged in the steps that they have
taken to maintain economic relations, friendship and
cooperation with Timor-Leste based on constructive
dialogue, trust and mutual benefit. It is, indeed,
indispensable to turn the page and to start again on a
new foundation.

Last but not least, the action of the international
community is essential to the promotion of Timor-
Leste's endogenous and sustained development.
Therefore, I should like to reiterate a pressing appeal to
the various donors - made explicitly by the Secretary-
General in his report - not only that they maintain
their support for this young nation, but also, and above
all, that they substantially increase their support for
Timor-Leste so that, very soon, the country will be able
to fly, surely and with dignity, on its own wings.

