Mr. Mukerji (India): At the outset, let me thank
you, Sir, for organizing this debate on the situation
in Afghanistan. I take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his statement. We also
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Jan Kubis for his briefing.

Let me begin by expressing our concern over
the attacks in Afghanistan's Uruzgan province on
26 November and in Faryab province on 27 November,
which resulted in the death of nine development
workers. We are pained that these attack have brought
the number of attacks against humanitarian personnel,
facilities and assets in Afghanistan to 237 so far this
year. All this points to the fact that the main threat
to security in Afghanistan is terrorism perpetrated
by those who do not want to see a strong, stable and
prosperous Afghanistan.

We note that progress has been made in the
finalization of the candidates for the presidential and
provincial elections due in 2014. This is a significant
step during a period of Afghanistan's transition
that encompasses security, political and economic
dimensions. I would like to reiterate that the key to
successful elections in 2014 is a process whose outcome
is acceptable to the people of Afghanistan.

The events preceding the presidential elections
are extremely important as they will bring to the
political discourse issues that are close to the heart of
the Afghan people. This will have an impact on the
political reconstruction effort in Afghanistan, which
must always remain Afghan-led, Afghan-owned and
Afghan-controlled. At this juncture, the support of the
international community for the Afghan authorities'
electoral preparations is critical. We must also be
vigilant to any effort to derail the process, and that
would certainly include strengthening the security
apparatus.

The security situation in Afghanistan remains
under threat from terrorism. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/20l3/721) mentions that during
the first 10 months of 2013, there were 7,394 civilian
casualties, which represents a 13 per cent increase
compared to the same period in 2012. Three-quarters
of these casualties were attributed to attacks by
anti-Government elements. It is also noteworthy that
the use of improvised explosive devices, including
in complex and suicide attacks, accounted for 49 per
cent of these casualties and remains the biggest threat
to civilians. There are forces active in derailing the
process of reconstruction. Here, I would like to reiterate
that India will be undeterred by these cowardly acts of
violence. We do not have an exit policy in Afghanistan,
and I would like to re-emphasize our commitment to
standing by the Afghan people and their servicemen,
who have shown exemplary courage in protecting the
Afghan people.

The internal security situation has been held
hostage to terrorist attacks originating from beyond
Afghanistan's border by groups closely allied to
Al-Qaida and their affiliates. We would like to reiterate
that we must be continuously watchful of the designs of
these terrorist organizations. In this regard, concerted
action is also needed to isolate and root out the
syndicate of terrorism, which includes elements of the
Taliban, Al-Qaida, Lashkar e Toiba and other terrorist
and extremist groups.

In order to have a smooth transition security plan, it
is therefore extremely important that the drawdown of
troops and its implications for the security arrangements
be carefully assessed and appropriate measures taken
to ensure the safety of the Afghan people. I note that the
Secretary-General has mentioned the twelfth annual
trilateral meeting of Foreign Ministers of Russia, India
and China on 10 November, which emphasized the
need for continuing international support to and greater
regional integration with Afghanistan.

We also note the recent announcement of record
levels of poppy cultivation and opium production.
The Secretary-General's report rightly mentions that
it is a critical hazard to the security, well-being and
development of Afghanistan and the wider region. This
aspect must not be neglected.

In view to the efforts of the international
community to ensure an Afghan-led process of
transition, the time has come for the international
community to reassess the role it wishes to play.
I would suggest that we need to discuss the issue of
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). Afghanistan has achieved a
considerable level of political maturity with the ongoing
political reconstruction efforts. There is no doubt that
UNAMA has played an exceptional role over the past
decade in the political, humanitarian and development
spheres in Afghanistan, along with other agencies of
the United Nations system. However, I would like to
mention that in view of the maturity of the process in
Afghanistan, the international community may wish to
define UNAMA's political mandate in the light of the
changed circumstances. The new mandate of UNAMA
should help to keep its focus on supporting the political
institutions rather than attempting to influence the
political process itself, which must be left entirely to
Afghanistan's own leaders.

Speaking of UNAMA's role, we also believe
that the Mission must step up its humanitarian
and developmental roIe through better delivery of
assistance in Afghanistan, since the United Nations
is uniquely placed with access to the most remote and
isolated communities in the country. We must also not
forget that it is not "capacity- substitution" but capacity-
building that we are seeking to achieve in Afghanistan.
The future role of UNAMA needs to be discussed
so that it plays an effective role, keeping in mind the
overall objective of the transition process. In doing so
we must take into account problems of coherence, the
duplication of effort and the resulting higher cost of
programmes.

In conclusion, I would like to say that, as we enter a
new year, we should be hopeful that Afghanistan will be
taking definite strides towards a new era of development
and progress. India sincerely believes that the huge
efforts of the Afghan people and the international
community that have gone into the process of transition
will provide a solid basis for a stable future. We would
like to assure the Council that India will stand by
the people of Afghanistan in all its endeavours. We
reiterate our support to the efforts of the international
community leading towards a peaceful, prosperous and
stable Afghanistan.

