The Secretary-General: Iwelcome this initiative to
focus on drug trafficking in West Africa and the Sahel.
Around the world, drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime threaten security, undermine respect
for the rule of law and jeopardize peace and stability.
In a growing number of countries, organized criminal
networks also fuel the activities of terrorist and
extremist groups. Corruption, porous borders and the
lack of resources and cooperation only compound the
problem.

Given the reach of drug-trafficking networks and
their rapidly evolving methods, we must constantly
refine our understanding to formulate the most effective
response.

We face a particular challenge in West Africa and the
Sahel. Our latest estimates have identified $1.25 billion
of cocaine transiting through West Africa each year. A
rising portion ofthe drugs reaching West African coasts
use the Sahel route on the way to the Mediterranean.
In a particularly disturbing development, West Africa
is no longer just a transit route for drug traffickers,
but a growing destination, with more than 1 million
users of illicit drugs. Rising consumption aggravates
an already-challenging public health environment and
threatens socioeconomic development.

Our work is guided by the Conventions against
organized crime, drug trafficking and corruption, as
well as the international instruments on terrorism,
which must be implemented in full compliance with
human rights standards and norms. I urge all Member
States to ratify and fully implement those conventions
and instruments without delay.

We also need to generate partnerships to support
victims. Engagement with civil society and community
groups is critical. There is also a need for a strong
transatlantic approach that combines efforts from Latin
America, West Africa and Europe. In too many places,
however, weak intergovernmental cooperation stands
in marked contrast to the closely networked structure of
transnational criminal groups. We must help countries
of the region strengthen their capacities to ensure public
safety and security. At the same time, we must act
against money-laundering and the use of illicit wealth
to commit additional crimes such as human trafficking
and arms smuggling.

The United Nations is taking action in all these areas
and supporting projects that offer technical advice and
build national capacities. These include initiatives to
analyse containers in ports, as well as the movement of
goods at airports. We are working with Member States to
stop the movement of precursor chemicals used to make
illegal drugs, while also boosting efforts to dismantle
criminal networks. We are also helping with drug

treatment, prevention and rehabilitation programmes.
Above all, we need a coordinated approach, and action
in this area is an important part of the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel. In the same vein, our
law enforcement and health efforts should fully support
the Economic Community of West African States
Regional Action Plan to Address the Growing Problem
of Illicit Drug Trafficking, Organized Crime, and Drug
Abuse in West Africa.

Drug trafficking presents an enormous challenge to
peace, stability and economic and social development
in West Africa and the Sahel. We must promote a
coherent, integrated and pragmatic international
response, rooted in sustainable development and full
respect for human rights. I encourage Member States to
actively engage in a broad and open discussion leading
up to the September 2016 General Assembly special
session on the world drug problem.

As we work to advance the post-2015 development
agenda, the challenges of organized crime must be a
fundamental part of the discussion. Our aim must be
not only to relieve citizens of the burden of crime,
but also to lift them out of the conditions that enable
crime to grow. That means addressing corruption,
poverty and the lack of essential services. It means
providing better education, promoting the rule of law
and expanding opportunities for women, young people
and marginalized groups.

Solutions are not easy and will take time. Let us
commit ourselves to working together for dignity and
a better sustainable future for all of the people of West
Africa and the Sahel.

