Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
should like to congratulate Chile on having organized
this open debate on the topic of inclusive development,
which is of fundamental importance to the maintenance
of international peace and security. The Secretary-
General, the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
and Ms. Leymah Gbowee, recipient of the Nobel
Peace Prize, have demonstrated this very well in their
briefings.

I fully associate myself with the statement of
the European Union. I should like to add several
observations in my national capacity.

As we approach the global summit of 2015, the
interdependence of the three pillars of the United
Nations - peace and security, sustainable development,
and human rights and the rule of law - is no longer in
doubt. During our recent term in the Security Council,
we sought to promote an integrated approach, faithful
to our strong conviction that peace and security cannot
be guaranteed without development, the protection of
human rights and democratic governance. My country
has long worke for lasting, sustainable development
that is also inclusive. We therefore continue to dedicate
1 per cent of our gross national income to development
cooperation by supporting cooperation programmes,
specifically in such areas as social education and health,
in order to assist our partner countries in favouring
inclusive development in their societies.

The international community is increasingly aware
of the need to address the root causes of conflicts:
poverty, discrimination, exclusion, and the lack of
the rule of law, to name just a few. We see it in this
debate today in the Security Council as we see it in
the intergovernmental work under way in the General
Assembly, which is seeking to establish a post-2015
sustainable development programme. We welcome that.
For my part, I should like to focus on two aspects ofthis
debate: post-conflict peacebuilding and addressing the
specific needs of women and young people.

Peacebuilding is a long-term effort that must
mobilize all the vital forces of the countries and regions
concerned and enjoy the coherent and long-term support
of the international community. Peacebuilding efforts
will have a lasting impact only if they contribute to the
establishment ofinclusive political processes and enable
the establishment of competent national institutions
that must also be accountable to their citizens. The
situations in the Central African Republic and South
Sudan, among others, have shown us that the risk of a
resurgence of conflict is unfortunately elevated if these
things are not done and ifthe root causes of conflict are
not adequately addressed.

As other speakers have already stated, it is also
essential to guarantee the participation of women,
young people and other groups in society that are too
often excluded from decision-making, not only because
women and young people are agents for change but also
because they are the most vulnerable in conflict and
post-conflict situations. It is important to give prospects
for the future to the young, who represent a growing
portion of the population in developing countries. The
marginalization of young people and the absence of
career prospects make them easy prey for hate-inciting
and extremist speeches. From being agents for peace
and development, they run the risk of becoming agents
ofinstability and violence.

To conclude, I should like to reiterate our support
for initiatives seeking to improve early earning, in
particular the Secretary-General's Rights Up Front
initiative, which should sound the alarm whenever
human rights violations and negative exclusion
movements are detected. We hope that this initiative
will enable the Security Council to better perceive the
signs that precede conflicts and to act before it is too
late.

The maintenance of international peace and security
and preventing conflict are two sides of the same coin.
History will judge the United Nations on our capacity
to work together for a future with dignity for all. We
are convinced that it is possible to get there, and that we
can conquer poverty and violence and adopt sustainable
development models that will enable future generations
to have better lives. That will require us to redouble our
efforts in all forums, including the Council, in order to
bring an end to exclusion and the inequalities that we
see in all their forms.

