Mr. Jurica (Croatia): I, too, would like to thank

you, Sir, for convening and presiding over this very

important meeting of the Security Council. I would like to

begin by welcoming Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,

the President of the Palestinian National Authority His

Excellency Mahmoud Abbas, Secretary-General of the

Arab League Amre Moussa, and all the ministers
present here today.

Croatia shares the sense of extreme urgency that
has brought us together. I would like to convey my
Government's deepest concerns at the suffering of
civilians in and around Gaza and to reiterate the need
to end all violence. We continue to appeal to the parties
to exercise maximum restraint, to adhere to the tenets
of international humanitarian law and to avoid civilian
casualties. We reiterate the call for unhindered access
to humanitarian assistance and supplies.

We understand that, in order to avoid an
escalation of violence and the further deterioration of
the humanitarian and security conditions on the
ground, it is essential to achieve an immediate and
permanent ceasefire that will be respected by all, put a
stop to the persistent rocket attacks targeting southern
Israel and end the suffering and deprivation in Gaza.

We are deeply disturbed by the latest reports of
military movements into Gaza. We also understand that
the Israeli military operations are not aimed at the
Palestinian population, but should be seen in the
context of the continuing threat coming from Hamas,
which denies Israel's right to exist and has intensified
the scope and frequency of its attacks on the population
of southern Israel. Israel has an inherent and legitimate
right to defend itself and the obligation to defend and
protect its citizens. However, it is vital that civilians in
Gaza be protected.

Our previous discussions have demonstrated that
we all share the conviction that an effective, permanent
and credible ceasefire is needed if we want to secure
permanent peace and lasting improvement in the
humanitarian, social and economic conditions in Gaza.
We appreciate the new initiative presented to us today,
which aims to secure the adoption of a Security
Council resolution on that matter. It is a timely call,
and my delegation is ready to work with others in
bringing that forward.

In the interests of a durable and credible
ceasefire, it is important that such steps not amount to
returning to the status quo. Only if the conditions on

the ground are such that they can guarantee a ceasefire
that will be fully respected by both sides, that Israel
can be assured that its population will not be exposed
to the continuing terror of rocket attacks and that the
smuggling of weapons by Hamas will not be tolerated
can we hope to reach a sustainable solution to the
cr1s1s.

In the interests of a lasting state of calm, it is
imperative that there be confidence in the mechanisms
on the ground. While reiterating the call on all parties
to adhere to an immediate and comprehensive
ceasefire, we should not forget that the political
dialogue and diplomatic efforts mean that Hamas must
recognize Israel and its right to exist, abide by the
commitments of the Palestine Liberation Organization
and, in particular, cease the terror of daily rocket
attacks that threaten the population of southern Israel.

Croatia continues to believe that a political
dialogue is the only way to achieve a lasting peace
based on the two-State solution. Resolution 1850
(2008), which was adopted only three weeks ago,
charts the way forward. We find it essential that the
Council remain guided by the objectives reaffirmed by
resolution 1850 (2008) in our efforts to find a solution
to this unfolding crisis.

