Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): First, I would like to thank the Belgian presidency for holding this very important meeting. I extend my warmest welcome to His Excellency Mr. Edi Rama, Prime Minister and Ministerfor Europe and Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Albania, and thank him for his very insightful briefing. We are pleased to note that the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) has played an important role in addressing a wide range of security-related concerns, which has helped improve security and humanitarian situations and has facilitated dialogue to reach solutions in various parts of Europe. We welcome and encourage the continued cooperation between the Security Council and regional arrangements, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. Last week a representative of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations briefed the Council (see S/PV.8711); today it is the OSCE, and later this month there will be a briefing on the European Union. This is a very timely series of briefings from regional organizations. We once again thank the Belgian presidency for a very well-designed programme this month. I would like to make three points on today's subject. First of all, regional organizations are in a very good position to help maintain international peace and security with ways and means and solutions suitable to the context in the region under consideration. They can play a crucial role in confliction prevention, good offices, mediation, conciliation and other peaceful means of dispute settlement. During the open debate last week (see S/PV.8711) we all heard strong commitments from Member States to that effect. Secondly, with regard to promoting cooperation between the Security Council and the OSCE, we strongly support the women and peace and security agenda as the top priority. This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. Even though extraordinary work has been done in transforming the perception of the role of women in peace processes, women are still underrepresented and remain vulnerable during and after conflicts. Women can play important and effective roles in other OSCE priority areas, such as combating the spread of hate speech, discrimination and human trafficking. Best practices and lessons learned on the role of women in all stages of peace processes, especially post-conflict peacebuilding, should be widely shared among regions, States and partners. Monitoring and measuring the progress of the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda can benefit from a comprehensive set of indicators, which can be universal as well as regional. Last but not least, we support the positive role of the OSCE in monitoring the implementation of the Minsk agreements, thereby contributing to the implementation of resolution 2202 (2015). We call on all parties to make every effort to that end, with a view to finding a peaceful solution for the peace, stability and development of the region. We would like to reiterate that all disputes must be settled by peaceful means, in accordance with international law and the United Nations Charter.
