Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We have carefully reviewed the reports of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) (see S/2016/670) and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals (see S/2016/669 and S/2016/975) from the past six months. We are
pleased to note that the ICTY report does not contain
information of further delays in the proceedings, which
will be completed by the end of 2017. The Tribunal,
despite being considerably behind the deadline set by
resolution 1966 (2010), will still complete its work.
There is still hope that planned time frames forjudiciary
proceedings will be reduced, in accordance with
what the Security Council urged in resolutions 2193
(2014) and 2256 (2015). We call on ICTY leadership
to make every efforts to ensure that proceedings are
finished expeditiously.

The Security Council continues to take measures to
ensure the smooth and uninterrupted work of the ICTY.
Recently in the Tribunal's statute, an ammendment was
introduced to allow it to involve a judge on the register
of the Residual Mechanism to work in the Appeals
Chamber. That concerns resolution 2306 (2016), which
was promptly adopted at the request of the Tribunal.

We believe that the Tribunal is adequately staffed
and has been provided with sufficient funding. Delays in
court proceedings, ofwhich the Council was previously
informed, were due to, according to our estimates, more
administrative failures, such as, for example, uneven
distribution of workload among judges, imprecise
legal assessment of the complexity of cases and the
unnecessarily long preparation of cases. We understand
the desire of the leadership of the Tribunal to retain
staff with institutional memory. However, we believe
that requests for all sorts of bonuses do not meet the
conditions of service of the United Nations. They make
us wonder to what extent the Tribunal's staff is actually
committed to its goals.

As for the case of contempt of court, initiated by
the Tribunal in connection with the concluded case of
Prosecutor v. Vojislav Seselj, we would like to refer to
a decision of the Security Council that approved the
strategy of completing the ICTY's work in 2002 and
2003, a well as resolution 1966 (2010), which states
that the Tribunal must focus its efforts on judicial
prosecution and bringing to justice high-level officials
who are suspected of being responsible for serious
violations of international humanitarian law committed
in the former territory of Yugoslavia starting in 1991.
Cases on contempt of court obviously do not apply.
Possible options to ensure the interests of justice in
this situation, including the transfer of minor cases
to national jurisdiction, are also given in the Council
resolutions to which I referred. In any case, this topic
should not have influence the strategy of closing down
the Tribunal.

It is clear that there is no relation to the task of
ensuring justice for the most serious crimes on which
the Tribunal is focused, and the identification of issues
such as the political climate and mentality in one
country or another, or the historical world View, staffing
solutions. We urge the officials of the Tribunal not to be
distracted by such trifles from the objectives set by the
Tribunal's statute and the decisions of the Council.

My delegation has for several years advocated
an initiative to conduct an independent review of the
work in the ICTY. At the final stage of the Tribunal's
mandate, the Office of Internal Oversight Services
(OIOS) conducted such an assessment, in accordance
with resolution 2256 (2015). As we expected, in some
cases, auditors found problems to which we have
repeatedly tried to alert the Council, including the
lack of clear and sound guidelines for the duration
of proceedings. We are grateful to the OIOS for its
work. Unfortunately, the Tribunal did not accept all
the recommendations addressed to it. We hope that
the analysis of the OIOS recommendations and their
implementation will continue.

We are closely watching the work of the Residual
Mechanism. We would like to recall that, in accordance
with resolution 1966 (2010), the Mechanism is a
temporary, compact structure established in order to
complete the process of closing down the ICTY and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. It is not a
new model of an international judicial authority. The
duration of the mandate of the Mechanism is limited and
conditioned by a biennial review cycle of its activities
undertaken by the Security Council.

The Mechanism's report does not give any
preliminary forecasts for the period of consideration of
certain cases, which have been on its register for almost
a year. We make a call to fix that problem in future
reports. We expect from that body strict adherence to
efficiency and transparency, including the timing of
proceedings. We hope that the Mechanism will use
all procedural opportunities inherent in its statute,
including in the event of unforeseen circumstances.

