Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow
me to welcome the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court to today's meeting and thank him for
his extensive briefing. I also wish to thank the
Prosecutor for preparing the report that has given us a
further overview of and insight into the situation in the
field. In no uncertain terms, it outlines the rather grave
and serious situation, providing facts that unfortunately
have been confirmed from briefing to briefing.

Unfortunately, the report of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) provides further
evidence of serious and constant violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law
and of the deterioration of the situation, including
systematic violence against the civilian population. We
strongly condemn such violence and find it to be
unacceptable.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is gravely concerned by
the reported crimes and the manner in which they have
been committed, which have only further reinforced
our conviction that the referral of the situation in Libya
to the ICC was true to our commitments and
obligations.

After only two months of investigation, the report
of the Prosecutor already contains evidence of
incidents constituting alleged war crimes and crimes
against humanity. We firmly believe that addressing
these crimes and punishing those responsible is,
beyond any doubt, the main precondition for
reconciliation, sustainable and long-lasting peace and
stability. Impunity is not an option, and I am certain
that all of us agree on that.

For those precise reasons, and on the basis of our
own strong and unwavering belief in the justice
system, we believe that the full implementation of
resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011) is of utmost
importance. Obligations derived from those resolutions
are not optional.

Finally, it is our firm belief that condemnation of
the grave atrocities and crimes under the Court's
jurisdiction is unanimous and unwavering. My country
remains committed to the ideas and goals of the ICC,
and to its own obligations. Furthermore, the Prosecutor
of the ICC has our full support for his work.

