Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank the Special
Envoy, Ms. Schraner Burgener, for the information she
provided and assure her of our full support for her work.

I would like to convey three messages: first, the
urgency of full humanitarian access; secondly, the
crucial importance of justice for lasting peace; and,
thirdly, the need to tackle the root causes ofthe conflict.

First, we urge the Myanmar authorities to grant
full humanitarian access to the relevant United Nations
agencies. Almost a year has passed since the signing
of the memorandum of understanding with the United
Nations Development Programme and the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the progress unfortunately remains too slow. We
call on the United Nations and other humanitarian
partners to pay particular attention to the specific
needs of women and girls in all assessments and in
the planning and delivery of humanitarian assistance
and to make specialized medical and psychosocial
services available to victims of sexual violence. We
commend the region for the initiatives undertaken.
Belgium congratulates the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) in particular for establishing
the ASEAN Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian
Assistance. That comprehensive mechanism builds
upon multilateral efforts, in particular those of the
Council and the specialized United Nations agencies. I
would also like to express my gratitude for the solidarity
shown by Bangladesh to the Rohingya refugees.

Secondly, with regard to the fight against impunity,
just a few months ago, the Chairperson of the independent
international fact-finding mission on Myanmar mission
in this Chamber described the situation in Rakhine
state as ongoing "genocide" (see S/PV.8381). The
disproportionate actions of the Tatmadaw in August
2017 could constitute the most serious crimes under
international law. Those crimes cannot go unpunished.
These events took place in a climate of extreme
discrimination against the Rohingya and should be
credibly investigated and prosecuted without delay by
the competent authorities of Myanmar. I wish to recall
the fact that the Council has the authority to refer these
events to the International Criminal Court. If justice
is not delivered, then sooner or later the matter will be
on our table. How can we expect refugees to return to
a region where criminals hold on to their positions and
enjoy total impunity?

Thirdly, Belgium stresses the need to tackle the
deep roots of the conflict so that refugees can return
in a safe, voluntary, dignified and sustainable manner.
The recommendations of Kofi Annan's report provide
clear guidance in that regard. We call for their urgent
implementation. A peaceful and fair situation is
one in which human rights are protected, without
discrimination, including the freedom of movement.
It is also a situation where access to basic services
is guaranteed.

Finally, it is also a situation where equal access to
full citizenship is upheld. We welcome the signing of
the joint communique on the prevention of conflict-
related sexual violence and call on the Government
to implement the commitments it has undertaken. I
would also like to stress the importance of the freedom
of expression and call for the release of the two
Reuters journalists.

Belgium will continue to closely monitor
developments on the ground. We encourage the
Myanmar authorities to take the actions expected of
them to facilitate peaceful coexistence in Myanmar.

(spoke in Spanish)

Before I conclude, I would also like to congratulate
and thank you, Mr. President, for your excellent
presidency of the Security Council this month.
