Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to reiterate France's condolences to
the Afghan people and to the families of the victims
of the attack committed 8 March in Kabul. France
categorically condemns these acts, which seek to
hinder Afghanistan's recovery and whose perpetrators
must not go unpunished.

Allow me also warmly to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Tadamichi
Yamamoto, and Ms. Sima Samar, for being with us
today and for their briefings. France aligns itself in
advance with the statement to be delivered on behalf of
the European Union.

The National Unity Government is in the third year
of its mandate, and its commitment and its efforts to
ensure a democratic, stable and prosperous Afghanistan
must be welcomed. The Brussels conference in
October 2016 showed once again its determination to
move forward with reforms, but also was a reminder
that the international community was still standing
by Afghanistan. France reiterates its full support to
the Government of Afghanistan and encourages it to
continue its efforts to promote the development and
stabilization of the country.

Unfortunately, the continued deterioration of the
security situation is extremely troubling, as reflected
in the sad list of civilian casualties for 2016. Despite
the brave efforts of the Afghan security forces with the
support of international partners, attacks by the Taliban
and Da'esh continue to unremittingly target the civilian
population. On top of this already overwhelming
human cost is another cost, which is the way in which
the situation of insecurity weighs on the economic
development of the country and its progress towards
stability. We must not falter in our efforts to combat
this violence and to protect civilians, especially women
and children, as my Swedish colleague pointed out.

With respect to the security situation, it is all the
more urgent that we relaunch our efforts for a peace
process led by and for Afghans. The resumption of
dialogue with the Taliban remains a crucial prospect.
France therefore calls on all regional actors, in
particular Pakistan, to use their influence to enable
an end to the fighting and a resumption of peace
negotiations. The establishment of a lasting peace in
the country is our collective responsibility as well as
that of all Afghan actors.

I turn now to the issue of drug trafficking, which
has been fuelling the Taliban insurgency. It poses
a threat to the health of the Afghan population and
must continue to mobilize the Afghan Government.
Here too, the Government can rely on the support of
the international community in the implementation
of its national plan of action, including through the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, which is
providing valuable technical cooperation. A high level
of ambition must at all costs be maintained on this
subject as well as in combating corruption, since both
are critical to bringing about positive changes in the
field of development and security.

Finally, the spike in 2016 in the number ofinternally
displaced persons and refugees also poses a major
challenge. As noted in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2017/189), the Afghan Government has committed
to absorbing this flow as best it can. We therefore
commend and encourage the coordination planned with
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) to respond to this migratory crisis, in
particular to provide assistance to undocumented
refugees, who are the most vulnerable group.

There is a still a long way to go in the transformation
decade, but the course charted by the Afghan
Government is the right one, as reflected in preparations
for electoral reform and parliamentary elections. On
this issue as well as on others, Afghanistan can rely
on the full support of France and the international
community. Renewing UNAMA's mandate, which is
due in the coming days, will be further proof of this.
In this still-fragile context, the full commitment of the
United Nations in support ofthe Afghan Government is
of crucial importance.

Let me conclude by commending the work done
on the ground by all United Nations personnel in
Afghanistan, who are dealing with particularly difficult
conditions, and we pay tribute to them all through the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

