Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Today is an important day for the people of Iraq and for
the United Nations. Resolution 1546 (2004), which the
Security Council has just adopted unanimously, is a
milestone marking the end of the past and the
beginning of the future. It will prove to be a historic
turning point in the Iraqi political process and turns a
new page in the relationship between the United
Nations and Iraq. It will help promote stability and
development in Iraq and will further strengthen the
authority and the role of the Security Council.

The people of Iraq are industrious and talented,
and they have made brilliant contributions to human
civilization. But for more than a decade they have
suffered from the misery of war, sanctions and
turbulence. They yearn for democracy, peace and a new
life, under restored sovereignty. There is no doubt that
the resolution the Security Council has adopted today
lays the foundation for the early fulfilment of those
aspirations of the Iraqi people. The resolution endorses
the formation of the interim Government of Iraq,
reaffirms the right of the Iraqi people freely to
determine their own political future and to exercise
control over their financial and natural resources, and
reaffirms the principle of Iraq's reassertion of full
sovereignty. It demonstrates the commitment of the
international community to assist in the completion of
the Iraqi political process.

With the adoption of this resolution, we look
forward to 30 June, when the Iraqi people will reassert
full sovereignty and when Iraq will return to the family
of nations. We sincerely hope that, with broad support
from the Iraqi people and with the unstinting help of
the international community, the Iraqi interim
Government, in keeping with its obligations, will
expeditiously take measures to stabilize the security
situation, promote national reconciliation and hold free
and fair elections on schedule. We are convinced that,
with the end of the occupation and the transfer of
sovereignty, the great Iraqi people will make
unremitting efforts to overcome all obstacles in their
way, return as soon as possible to their path to peace,
democracy and development and make new
contributions to regional peace and stability and to the
advancement of civilization.

For more than 10 years, Iraq has been a constant
focus of Security Council attention. The Council has
adopted more than 70 resolutions on that question. In
the process of reaching an appropriate settlement of the
question of Iraq, there have been times of close
cooperation, as well as times of deep division among
Council members. We are pleased that the Security
Council stands unified once again in response to the
appeals of the Iraqi people. The present resolution is
the result of joint efforts by all Council members, who
actively participated in the consultations and searched
for consensus in a constructive spirit and with a
pragmatic and cooperative approach.

China is gratified that many proposals offered by
members of the Council, including China, were taken
into account in the final text of the resolution - which,
in giving expression to the principles of Iraqi
sovereignty and of the need for the people of Iraq to
manage their own affairs, is a significant improvement
on previous versions. Moreover, the resolution will
transform the relationship between the United Nations
and Iraq into one between partners with shared
objectives. Iraq will resume its place in the United
Nations on an equal footing. For its part, the United
Nations will continue to make ever greater
contributions to the Iraqi people. I take this opportunity
to thank Secretary-General Annan, Ambassador
Brahimi and all the other United Nations staff members
who have worked assiduously to that end.

The debate on the question of Iraq and the way it
has been handled over the past year may have helped
us understand that, in the current complex international
situation, the resolution of major international issues
requires collective wisdom, enhanced international
cooperation and a role for the United Nations and the
Security Council. That is an imperative of history and
of reality, and it is the international community's only
viable option.

The Government and the people of China have
always closely followed developments in the Iraqi
situation. We have always advocated the maintenance
of the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Iraq and an appropriate resolution of the
question of Iraq on the basis of Security Council
resolutions and through political means. The hearts of
the peoples of China and Iraq have always been joined
together. We deeply sympathize with the people of Iraq
with regard to the suffering they have experienced as a
result of sanctions and war, and we have provided them
with assistance to the best of our ability.

As always, the Chinese Government will firmly
support the political process and the major role of the
United Nations, pursuant to the resolutions of the
Security Council. China looks forward to friendly
cooperation on all fronts with the Iraqi interim
Government and with the future elected Government.
We stand ready to participate actively in Iraq's
economic reconstruction, and to contribute to the
building of a better Iraq.

Resolution 1546 (2004) marks a new beginning
both for the Security Council and for Iraq. There is no
denying that implementation of the resolution will be
fraught with difficulties and challenges. The task
facing the Iraqi interim Government is demanding and
the road ahead is long. But China believes that, so long
as all parties put the Iraqi people's interests first and
truly respect Iraq's assumption and exercise of full
power, implementation of the resolution will
undoubtedly help improve the security situation in Iraq,
advance the Iraqi political process and promote post-
war reconstruction in Iraq.

