Mr. Lucas (Angola): First, let me assure you,
Mr. President, that I will be brief, in compliance with
your reiterated request. Let me stress the very valuable
contributions of a good number of speakers before me,
which greatly enriched our debate on this very
important issue.

Secondly, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for scheduling this meeting at the
request of the Non-Aligned Movement and the Arab
States. Your decision gives the whole membership of
the United Nations the opportunity to express its views
and to present proposals that might contribute to
resolving the grave situation that the world is facing
due to large-scale hostilities whose consequences will
surely be far-reaching for the peoples of Iraq, the
Middle East region and the international community in
its entirety.

The current situation in Iraq, which affects the
entire Middle East, is a source of great concern to us
all, since this is a vital region of the world where in the
last 100 years very high strategic stakes have been
played with far-reaching impact. The region's immense
wealth has in large measure shaped the model of
development that the world has today. Thus, it is
understandable that the entire world community
represented here at the United Nations feels deeply
concerned about what is happening in that vital region.
The contributions that we have been witnessing in this
debate by all countries - big and small - are
testimony of the seriousness of the current situation
and of the concern about the real danger of the
disruption of the present world order.

The fact that we in Angola have lived through
many years of war has been a source of inspiration to
us to genuinely join efforts in the Security Council to
strive for a peaceful solution to the conflict in Iraq.
Thus, we deplore that the efforts and the good will of
so many countries were uprooted by war, which puts us
all in the situation of trying to control the damage
inflicted on the Iraqi people and on international
relations. In that context, we urge the parties to the
conflict to strictly abide by international humanitarian
law and avoid, by all means, afflicting further suffering
on the civilian population.

Under the present circumstances, it is our duty to
do everything in our power to reduce the heavy plight
being endured by the Iraqi people and to deploy all
efforts to face the humanitarian situation in Iraq. The
Secretary-General presented to us a set of proposals
that we have all approved, and we should, therefore,
quickly move forward in order to make them
operational, assisting the Iraqi people in this very
difficult hour.

Besides assisting the Iraqi people in the
humanitarian field, it is our view that the international
community, and Arab countries in particular that share
with Iraq a common cultural, geographic and political
heritage, should assist the country in recuperating from
the wounds of war and help Iraq, with the advent of
peace, to occupy the place that it rightfully deserves in
the community of free nations.
In our view, we should avoid mutual
recriminations and avoid putting in doubt the
effectiveness and the role of the Security Council. To
the contrary, we believe that we will make a great
contribution to world peace and security if we deploy
collective efforts to enable the Security Council to
continue to play its role, however imperfect - as all
human beings are - as the international community's
guarantor of international peace and security, and, as
the hope of people, nations and institutions at times of
crises and disbelief.

It is possible to overcome critical times, and
times of crisis are particularly favourable for reflection
and assessment. We believe that events in Iraq and the
aftermath of the Security Council's failure to achieve a
peaceful solution to the crisis might constitute a very
favourable moment to engage in a great debate on the
future of the world and on the role of the United
Nations and the Security Council in shaping a world
that is more peaceful, just, equitable and secure.

