Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): 1 would like to
express our gratitude to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Abou Moussa, for his
comprehensive briefing. We commend the efforts of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) to contribute to peace and security in Central
Africa and its increased cooperation with regional and
subregional institutions.

The current political, security and humanitarian
crisis in the Central African Republic adversely
impacts the stability and security of the entire
Central African subregion. The rapidly deteriorating
humanitarian situation - due to the rising number of
refugees and internally displaced persons, an increase
in the availability and illegal circulation of weapons,
the potential of spillover of the conflict within the
subregion and its negatives effects on the various
subregional processes, including on the efforts to
address the threat posed by the Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA) - highlights the urgency ofrestoring the rule of
law and reinstating constitutional order in the country.

We appreciate the mediation efforts of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) to
resolve the crisis through dialogue and negotiations.
At the same time, we fully concur with the Secretary-
General's recommendation that the Council consider
sanctions and other measures against those who have
committed gross Violations of humanitarian and human
rights law during the conflict.

Complex political, security, socioeconomic and
humanitarian challenges in the Sahel region require a
comprehensive, integrated and radical response from
international and regional actors. In that regard, we
welcome the decision of the Community of Sahelo-
Saharan States to create a permanent council for
sustainable development in the fight against poverty
and a permanent security council to help rid the region
of terrorists and other threats to peace.

Maritime piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of
Guinea present another serious threat to the security
and economic development of the Central African
subregion. We commend the efforts of the regional
stakeholders to implement resolution 2018 (2011),
and stress the importance of the upcoming regional
summit of Heads of State and Government, to be held
in Cameroon in late June.

We note with concern a growing menace posed
by the spread of cross-border criminal activities, such
as poaching and the illegal ivory trade, to sustainable
peace and stability in Central Africa. The Secretary-
General's report (S/2013/297) also places a particular
focus on the high rates of youth unemployment as
a potential risk to the security of the subregion.
UNOCA's close interaction and coordination of efforts
with ECCAS and other relevant partner organizations
are requisite to the success of a proposed regional
forum on youth unemployment, political stability and
peacebuilding in Central Africa.

We welcome the strong macroeconomic development
registered in Central Africa for another consecutive
period, including significant growth rates in the non-oil-
producing countries. It is essential that economic
revenues be channeled into concrete strategies and
programmes, with the support and assistance of the
international community, in order to address the root
causes of chronic instability in the subregion, such as
poverty and unemployment.

Despite the progress achieved in combating
the Lord's Resistance Army and a decrease in the
direct threat of its attacks, the group continues to be
a source of insecurity in Central Africa. Given the
potential for the group's re-emergence, it is of utmost
necessity to ensure the uninterrupted implementation
of LRA-related initiatives and activities.

The LRA-affected countries should accelerate
their efforts to attain the goals set out in the United
Nations regional strategy and the African Union
Regional Cooperation Initiative against the LRA. We
welcome the finalization of the implementation plan
for the United Nations regional strategy, as well as the
concept of operations and other strategic documents
required for the operationalization of the African Union
Regional Task Force. We underline the importance of
the full implementation of those documents, as well as
the provision of the necessary funds for that purpose.

The attention of the Governments concerned and
international donor support should continue to be
focused on strengthening the response capacities of
the LRA-affected countries, addressing long-term
development needs, providing humanitarian assistance
and promoting return and recovery programmes in the
affected areas.

