Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): The three African
members of the Security Council - Cote d'Ivoire,
Equatorial Guinea and South Africa - welcome
the adoption of resolution 2502 (2019), extending
the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) for a 12-month period. The
MONUSCO mandate renewal for a 12-month period
will accompany President Felix Tshilombo Tshisekedi
and his Government in their journey towards peace and
stability for the development of the country and for the
good of their people.

We commend the penholder for its stewardship
of the negotiating process and for conducting the
negotiations in a transparent manner, in pursuit
of consensus. We would also like to extend our
appreciation to other members of the Security Council
for their constructive engagement.

We support the overall strengthening of the
MONUSCO mandate to protect civilians from the
threat of armed groups and welcome the indispensable
role played by the Force Intervention Brigade in this
regard. We commend MONUSCO for the valuable
and important role it has played in the security of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in support of
the positive political developments in that country.
The security situation in the east of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, however, underscores the need
for the Government to strengthen the capacity of State
institutions, with the support of MONUSCO.

The three African members therefore view the
maintenance of the dual priority tasks set out in
the resolution as vital to addressing the situation.
Furthermore, the resolution epitomizes the
pronouncements made by President Tshisekedi on his
vision for MONUSCO in addressing the challenges
facing his country, in particular the security situation
pertaining to the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

The three African members welcome the request
for the Secretary-General to work with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo Government to develop
benchmarks that are to be met for the successful and
responsible hand-over of MONUSCO tasks to the
Government. It is vital that, in this regard, the withdrawal
of MONUSCO be based on the positive evolution of the
situation on the ground and the successful meeting of
these benchmarks.

In closing, we look forward to further engagement
with all members of the Security Council and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo Government on
the future of MONUSCO, taking into account that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo needs to advance its
national security programme towards the development
of the country.

