Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish): In May 1991, the Security Council established
the United Nations Observer Mission in El Salvador
(ONUSAL) to monitor the agreements between the
Government of El Salvador and the Frente Farabundo
Marti para la Liberacion Nacional (FMLN); ONUSAL's
initial mandate was to verify the parties' fulfilment of the
provisions of the San Jose Agreement on Human Rights.
Subsequently, the Council, on the eve of the Chapultepec
peace agreement at the beginning of 1992, decided to
extend ONUSAL's mandate to include the whole
verification process for the Chapultepec agreement too. At
the same time, it terminated the mandate of the United
Nations Observer Group in Central America, a large part

 

of whose personnel moved seamlessly over into ONUSAL.

The day after tomorrow, ONUSAL's presence in
El Salvador will be over, after almost four years. However,
this will not mean an end to the United Nations presence
there as ONUSAL will be replaced by a United Nations
office to continue verifying the elements in the peace
agreements that remain to be fulfilled, in accordance with
the undertaking to verify the complete implementation of
the agreements reiterated on many occasions by the
principal organs of the United Nations. Also, the national
institution for verifying implementation of the peace
accords, the National Commission for the Consolidation of
Peace (COPAZ), will continue carrying out its mandate.

The withdrawal of ONUSAL, which has been a key
part of the transition in El Salvador from a situation of
conflict to one of peace and reconciliation, is a corollary of
the progress that has been made in that country. All of us
who have been involved in the Salvadoran process in one
way or another can look back and wonder at the profound
differences between El Salvador of a few years ago and
El Salvador today. The transformations are legion, and
some of them are visible at a glance: the old National
Police, which was bound up with the Armed Forces and a
military concept of public order, has been replaced - albeit
not without problems and delays - by a new National
Civil Police, which the United Nations helped set up; the
FMLN, the former guerilla force, is now a political force
that is fully integrated into the political and institutional life
of El Salvador; and a new system to protect human rights
and fundamental freedoms has been set up, with institutions
such as the National Counsel for the Defence of Human
Rights and a reformed Supreme Court, within a process of
building and consolidating the rule of law and in
conformity with the recommendations of the Commission
on the Truth.

None of this means that there are no aspects that still
warrant the international community's attention, if not its
concern. Central amongst these elements are the land
transfers and ex-combatant reintegration programmes as set
out in the peace agreements, which are to be implemented
fully and as quickly as possible so as not to compromise
the irreversibility of the progress made. Also, the electoral
reform process must be continued and completed, as must
strengthening the institutions for the protection of human
rights.

It is first and foremost up to the Salvadoran political
and social forces, and the Salvadoran people themselves, to
see to it that this process continues to a successful
conclusion, and here the clear positions adopted by the
President of the Republic and all the Salvadoran political
forces represented in the Parliament are extraordinarily
reassuring.

In their turn, the United Nations system and the
international community must go on lending their efforts.
Other countries, including countries in the region, have
seen how the efforts made in their national reconciliation
processes have meant that the international community
would deem it possible to cut back the degree and scope
of its assistance: this is the so-called amnesia syndrome,
which can have very adverse consequences in these types
of situation. We hope that this will not be the case, and
that the success of the process we have gone through in
El Salvador will not become the drop-off point for a slide
back down into the evils that 14 years ago brought about
the beginning of the conflict. As I mentioned earlier, this
is basically up to the Salvadoran people and their
representatives, but it does also depend in some wise on
the support and attendance the Salvadorans receive from
the international community.

Spain has been a member of the Group of Friends of
the Secretary-General on the question of El Salvador and
will continue to be so. Within the Group in previous
years, as a member of the Security Council and also
bilaterally, my country has been at the forefront in
El Salvador, just as El Salvador has been at the forefront
of the Spanish people's political awareness.

I should like to pay a special tribute to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, to his
predecessor, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, and to his
representatives in the peace process, firstly Mr. de Soto
and Mr. Goulding and then his representatives who have
headed ONUSAL - Mr. Riza, Mr. Ramirez Ocampo and
now Mr. ter Horst - along with all the United Nations
personnel at Headquarters on in the field, who have
carried out a very positive task to the benefit of
El Salvador and also to the United Nations itself.

Amongst the personnel seconded to ONUSAL there
has been a marked Spanish participation right from the
outset of the operation through to its end. Since five
military and eight police observers from Spain were
deployed in El Salvador in December 1991, Spain has
maintained a presence that peaked in 1992 with a total of
124 military and 113 police observers, or half the total
number of military observers and a third of the police.
Also, the presence of civilian observers in the Division of

 

Human Rights and in the election supervision process bear
witness to Spain's commitment to this peace process.

We have turned over a page in the book of
El Salvador's political history, and also one in the activities
of the United Nations in favour of peace in the world. But
political history and United Nations activities continue, and
the book is still open for the next page. The reconciliation
process in El Salvador is also a milestone of crucial
importance in establishing a stable and lasting peace in
Central America and on the road towards forming a region
of peace, liberty, democracy and development. The agencies
in the United Nations system, other international institutions
and the international community as a whole must contribute
now, with the same intensity with which they contributed
to re-establishing peace in El Salvador, to consolidating the
peace and the development of El Salvador and the region
as a whole.

I should not like to finish, Mr. President, without
expressing to you and your country our great satisfaction at
seeing you preside over this meeting, and for welcoming
the presence of my and other delegations in our own
language. Nor must I fail to reiterate my delegation's
complete readiness to cooperate in the tasks of this
principal organ of the Organization.

