Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
We would like to express our strongest condemnation
of the terrorist attack that took place on 9 May in
Grozny, Chechnya, in the Russian Federation. We
convey our condolences to the bereaved families of the
victims and express our sympathy to the wounded.

I should like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report on the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET). I wish also to welcome the
supplementary briefing by Mr. Sharma.

In a few days, the people of East Timor will be
celebrating the second anniversary of their
independence. We are pleased to see that, with the
support of the international community, the people of
East Timor, through their creativity and hard work,
have achieved considerable progress in all areas in the
process of nation-building. The Government of East
Timor has been effectively fulfilling its national
administrative functions, and the social and economic
development of East Timor has taken an encouraging
first step. Its relationship with its neighbours is
continuing to improve and develop. Indeed, the people
of East Timor can justly be proud of their remarkable
achievements.

At this stage, the Government of East Timor is
actively preparing for local elections throughout the
country and will further develop its civil service,
judicial and law-enforcement systems. We believe that
those measures will have a positive impact on the
future development of East Timor.

As a nascent State, East Timor continues to face a
host of challenges in its quest for national stability and
for economic and social development. The functions of
the Government of East Timor need to be further
strengthened. Indeed, the building of its infrastructure,
as well as electoral preparations, are being hampered
by financial difficulties. The administrative and
judicial capacity of regions beyond Dili remains weak.
In order fully to achieve social stability and sustainable
economic development, the Government and the
people of East Timor must make even greater efforts,
and the continued support of the international
community remains indispensable.

We appreciate the active role played by
UNMISET in the development and construction of East
Timor. We endorse the Secretary-General's
recommendation to extend UNMISET and to adjust its
size and mandate appropriately. We hope that the
Security Council will adopt the relevant draft
resolution as soon as possible.

We appeal to the international community to
continue to provide assistance for the development of
East Timor. China will, as always, support and
participate in the economic reconstruction of East
Timor. We are confident that the people of East Timor
will achieve even greater accomplishments in future in
the building of their nation.

