Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation thanks
Mr. Vieira de Mello for the candid, focused and
comprehensive briefing he has given us just now.
Malaysia values greatly the progress made so far
by the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET) and congratulates the Special
Representative for his leadership and tireless efforts in
spite of the many challenges that he faces. We also pay
tribute to all of his colleagues and to the entire staff of
UNTAET.

As a member of the Council's recent mission to
East Timor, led by Ambassador Martin Andjaba, to
whom I pay tribute, I am impressed with the positive
results achieved thus far by UNTAET. These include
the increased involvement of the East Timorese in
creating and building institutions of governance, the
cooperation which has been developed between
UNTAET and the Government of Indonesia, and the
commitments received from the international
community in support of East Timor's reconstruction
and rehabilitation process.

As we heard from Mr. Vieira de Mello this
morning, UNTAET is Timorizing its administration,
working with the East Timorese leadership to develop a
timetable for the drafting of a constitution, the setting
up of elections, and the achievement of independence.
However, as has been indicated by Mr. Vieira de Mello
himself, this progress has not always been smooth. We
do not underestimate either the current difficulties in
areas such as reconstruction and administration of
justice, or the enormity of the challenges that remain
before independence, which is currently projected for
the latter half of 2001. The active involvement of the
international community, including the Council,
remains indispensable.

Like other Council members, we remain
concerned at the plight of refugees still living in the
camps in West Timor. We are appreciative of the efforts
made thus far, which will allow the speedy return of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other agencies to camps in
West Timor. In this regard, we welcome the
commitment made by the Government of Indonesia to
cooperate with the United Nations and other
international agencies, which will enable UNHCR and
other humanitarian workers to return to West Timor.

We look forward to the early evaluation of the
security situation, so as to expedite the early return of
these international workers. We also agree that all
stages of the recent process must be carried out in
safety and security, and that the process of registering
remaining East Timor refugees should begin
expeditiously.
Malaysia continues to place a high priority on the
emergence of a future independent East Timor that is
stable and secure and has good relations with Indonesia
and its other neighbours. We believe that the future
peace and stability of East Timor will depend on full
and early reconciliation, not only among the people of
East Timor themselves but also between East Timor
and its immediate and important neighbour, Indonesia.
We therefore welcome the efforts being made by the
Special Representative in this direction. We also
acknowledge the positive and constructive efforts and
role of Indonesia in this regard.

In the context of national reconciliation - that is,
reconciliation among the East Timorese themselves -
the issue ofjustice must be appropriately addressed, as
there will be no genuine or lasting reconciliation
without justice. This issue will most probably be fully
addressed by the leadership of an independent East
Timor, but UNTAET can play an important role in
paving the way for that process. My delegation is
pleased to note that UNTAET has, in fact, initiated
important steps in that direction, in terms of both
facilitating reconciliation talks and strengthening East
Timor's capacity to deal with the issue of meting out
justice. The international community and the Council
must continue to support these efforts as well as other
efforts undertaken by UNTAET.

We share the Council's resolute tone in
condemning the crimes committed against United
Nations personnel. In this regard, we welcome the
serious efforts being made by the Indonesian
Government, including the recent passage of an
important human rights law to address this issue in a
more expeditious fashion.

Last week, the Council heard from the leader of
the Council mission, Ambassador Andjaba, who
apprised us of the results of the mission's trip to the
region. The observations and findings of the mission
are clear and unambiguous and give us hope that
progress can be made on the speedy implementation of
resolution 1272 (1999) and 1319 (2000), respectively.
We are gratified that the visit of the mission has had an
overall positive impact, particularly as concerns the
issue of refugee return to East Timor. We are pleased to
note that last Wednesday, more than 400 refugees
returned to East Timor, the first to do so since the
6 September Atambua incident. It is our hope that this
will mark a turning point.

Our efforts to overcome the immediate challenges
that we have stressed today must lead to our long-term
goal of successful and peaceful nation-building in East
Timor. We urge the international community to
continue to support UNTAET, so that the progress
achieved over the past 13 months will be sustained. In
this respect, Malaysia would like to reiterate its
continued commitment to cooperate to the best of its
ability with UNTAET and the people of East Timor in
their efforts to build a peaceful and democratic nation.

Finally, my delegation is favourably disposed
towards many of the proposals and suggestions made
by Mr. Vieira de Mello during his presentation this
morning. As in the past, we wish to assure him of our
continuing and sustained support for all of his efforts.

