I make this statement on behalf of Belgium and Germany, the humanitarian co-penholders on Syria. We want to thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Special Envoy Pedersen for their briefings today. We wish to extend our gratitude to all humanitarian and medical workers in Syria. They are at the forefront of every humanitarian disaster; they are on the front lines in the fight against the pandemic; and they deserve all our respect, assistance and protection. We all hope that this year will end without another meeting on humanitarian issues in Syria. We all hope that conditions on the ground will not require the Security Council to hold emergency meetings under the agenda item "Any other business" on the humanitarian situation in Syria in the foreseeable future. Belgium and Germany have worked on the Syrian file during their membership in the Council since January 2019. The penholdership was joined by our friends from Kuwait in the first year. What has the Council achieved for the people of Syria in the past 24 months? How has the humanitarian situation developed over the past two years? Allow me to quote the latest report of the Secretary-General: "IT remain gravely concerned by the complete absence of respite for civilians in the country ... None of the metrics point to improvement; on the contrary, humanitarian needs are deepening ... Wasting among children is expected to increase significantly in 2021 ... [T]he number of people in need of humanitarian assistance in the Syrian Arab Republic is expected to rise by 1.9 million, reaching a staggering 13 million people in 2021" (S/2020/1195, p. 14). That is three quarters of the total population of Syria. Those figures tell us that, in spite of what the Syrian Government and its allies contend, the crisis is far from over or getting better. The situation is far from normal, and 2021 will bring huge additional challenges. As co-penholders, we lobbied for a humanitarian ceasefire in September 2019. We made a compelling humanitarian case for maintaining cross-border humanitarian access to north-east Syria exactly one year ago, and an equally compelling case for keeping two border crossings in north-west Syria in July. We followed the humanitarian imperative, we listened to the advice of the United Nations and its humanitarian agencies and we tried to create circumstances on the ground that were conducive to helping humanitarian actors help people in need. But apparently others prefer to adhere to their political narrative and their veto power. We have experienced that extensively during the past two years. In a nutshell, two permanent members of the Council have consistently disregarded humanitarian principles and limited humanitarian cross-border access to one last choke point. They have prioritized their support for the Syrian authorities over the humanitarian imperative. The co-penholders do not wish to use this final opportunity to speak in the Council to repeat ourselves by making the same appeals we have always made in our common statements. Instead, we prefer to give the floor to voices from the ground - voices that members should listen to carefully and remember when the Council has to draft new decisions on the humanitarian situation in Syria. Rose, a 13-year-old girl who lives in north-west Syria, told Save the Children: "T used to go to a school at the southern end of my town, but it was destroyed during the ongoing conflict. I moved to another school that was in a basement, but it also was attacked and damaged and is no longer a place where we can learn. I have been displaced again, and now I go to a new school. I never told anyone I was afraid, but our teacher told us that it is OK to be afraid. Now I can tell you I am afraid that my school will be hit again." Layla Hasso, from Hurras Network, the Syrian Child Protection Network, stated: "W hat we need today is to hope for a better future for the hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of children out of education. We need the repetitive attacks on education to stop, to allow our children to learn safely and stay alive. For that, we need to maintain access. We need to make sure humanitarian organizations stay, or else we worry that we are forgotten about, left to fend for ourselves and children, and suffer the consequences of violence on our own." The Union of Syrian Medical Relief Organizations stated: "Tn the conflict areas in north-west Syria, where local and displaced populations were exposed to heavy shelling, especially in the western countryside of Aleppo and all areas of Idlib governorate, in addition to the high number of internally displaced persons, the resources available are limited as compared to the high population density and the inability to meet the basic needs of the population with the near-complete destruction of basic infrastructure such as schools, hospitals and other social services. Ensuring unfettered access to these populations remains essential and life-saving." Those are the voices of people in need. Over two years, we have done everything to make those voices heard in the Council. Some people we contacted in preparing this statement, in fact, all of them in regime-held areas, asked us not to be quoted in the Council for fear of repercussions for their daily work. That is the sad reality of Syria in 2020. There is no doubt the humanitarian situation is extremely worrisome throughout the country. Finally, only a political settlement in line with resolution 2254 (2015) can put Syria back on track towards peace. Germany and Belgium will remain committed to this file in New York, Geneva and other forums. We will remain committed to the people of Syria, fulfil our humanitarian pledges and closely follow the decisions of the Council in 2021. The eyes of the world, in particular of Syrians who are suffering in Syria and beyond, are on the Council. It must live up to its responsibilities.
