Mr. Hunter (United States of America): We
thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and the Force
Commanders for their briefings, as well as for their
service. Today I will focus on the two issues of host-
country cooperation and peacekeeping performance.

The consent of the parties is indeed one of the core
principles of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
but underlying that principle is the parties' commitment
to a political process. We have seen an inextricable link
between the two, as reflected both in the Secretary-
General's Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative
and the United States' own peacekeeping principles.
Peacekeeping operations must support the achievement
of political solutions, and peacekeeping missions
must have host-country cooperation. The two go hand
in hand. For peacekeeping missions to effectively
implement their mandates and successfully support
political efforts to achieve stability and a durable
peace, they must have the full cooperation of the host
countries, and mission personnel must have complete
freedom of movement within their area of operations.
While the Security Council must not renounce its role
in the maintenance of international peace and security
mandated by the Charter of the United Nations, we have
seen that missions face a significantly larger number
of challenges in achieving their mandates when host
Governments choose to obstruct them.

The United States has championed peacekeeping
performance in the A4P initiative and through the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2436 (2018). A
key aspect of ensuring good performance is the
accountability of peacekeeping missions. More
accountable missions deliver better on their mandates
and increase the credibility of United Nations Blue
Helmets around the world. Resolution 2436 (2018)
makes it very clear that the Security Council needs
better information on peacekeeping performance
in order to make better decisions. From training and
capacity-building to ensuring accountability for
underperformance, we cannot fix what we do not know
about. We can no longer accept a business-as-usual
approach of not talking openly and honestly about
our own shortcomings. We welcome the Secretary-
General's commitment to implementing an integrated
performance policy, but much more must be done. We
will continue to work with our partners towards the full
and speedy implementation of resolution 2436 (2018).

Separately, host countries must embrace the
strategic goals of the United Nations, the peacekeeping
missions and the work of the United Nations
country teams. Without the host country's understanding
and acceptance of the goals and assistance provided
by the United Nations, the completion of a Security
Council mandate cannot be achieved. Host countries
must cooperate with the United Nations and the
peacekeeping missions deployed in their country.
Without that cooperation, peacekeeping missions
will never achieve their goals or the Security Council
mandates contained in our resolutions.

With all of this in mind, I would like to ask a couple
of questions. First, what are the ways in which host
countries have rebuffed the good offices of the United
Nations country team and attempted to restrict freedom
of movement and access that our briefers might like to
highlight for the Council today?

Looking at the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), the
Transitional Military Council recently stated its
intention to withdraw all armed forces from team
sites formerly operated by UNAMID. To whom will
these sites transition, and how would this transition be
expected to take place, logistically?

For the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus, we know that the leaders of the Greek Cypriot
and Turkish Cypriot communities have different views
on the issue of host country consent. What types of
challenges has the mission faced that stem from that
issue directly?

Finally, the United States expresses our appreciation
to all the Force Commanders and for the continuing
service and sacrifice of their teams around the world.

