Mr. Ryan (Ireland): We are very grateful to
Under-Secretary-General Oshima for providing us with
such a detailed briefing on the humanitarian situation
in Angola. It is very timely. Much of the focus of the
Council's recent discussions on the situation in Angola
has been on political developments. Ireland is very
mindful that, even in the event of a much-hoped-for
positive political development in the coming months,
the humanitarian conditions in the country will remain
at a crisis level. We should therefore ensure that too
much time does not elapse before members again
discuss the crucial humanitarian issue.

We are very grateful also to hear of planned
action by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs over the coming months.

We welcome to the Council today the Vice-
Minister for External Affairs of Angola, Mr. Georges
Chikoti, and the delegation that has travelled with him
from Luanda. The Minister is the latest high
representative of his Government to attend a meeting
of the Security Council. His presence further
demonstrates the strong relations that exist between
Angola and the United Nations. This fourth meeting of
the Council on Angola in a period of six months also
highlights the great concern there is here for the
situation in his country. I very much agree with
Minister Chikoti that the humanitarian crisis is at the
centre of our concerns.

The facts outlined by Mr. Oshima are truly bleak
and distressing. This is all the more so given that we
had expected measurable improvement in the
humanitarian crisis in 2001. Instead, it deteriorated.
Primary responsibility for this continuing tragedy rests
squarely on the shoulders of Savimbi's UNITA. Over
the past year, the predicted improvements in access to
the enormous at-risk population and in relation to the
resettlement of displaced persons failed to materialize.
In fact, the internally displaced population increased
well beyond projected levels, thereby preventing any
large-scale resettlement programmes. All this has been
taking place against the backdrop of the Government's
establishing control over wider territory and
increasingly effective application of the Security
Council's sanctions against UNITA. Concerned
observers suggest that increased military and state
control should result in increased humanitarian reach
and they can only be disappointed with the direction of
events.

It would be ungracious not to recognize the steps
made and the promises undertaken by the Government
of Angola. We are fully aware that the conditions in
which it operates are far from ideal for the normal
implementation of economic and social policies that
will improve the lives of the citizens of Angola. We
also acknowledge that there is on its part a growing
awareness of and, importantly, an increasing
willingness to discuss the responsibilities of the
Government of Angola towards its people.

When the Council met here in September with the
Minister of the Interior of Angola, Mr. Dias dos Santos,
Ireland was very struck by his acknowledgement that
his Government had to do more in support of the
civilian population and by his expressed concern
regarding a perception that international donor fatigue
might set in with regard to Angola. In this respect, we
also noted his comment that the Angolan Government
could not fairly be expected to cope alone with the
humanitarian challenges which it is facing. We are
pleased to have heard Minister Chikoti's description
today of the recently announced immediate efforts his
Government is making to address the very most urgent
dimensions of the humanitarian emergency. We would
welcome a future opportunity for the Council to
examine and to measure with the Government of
Angola the effectiveness of those measures.

Some of the problems outlined by Mr. Oshima are
particularly worrying. Access to the at-risk population
has not improved in the past year. If anything, it seems
to have deteriorated. The circumstances facing the
authorities in Angola are, without doubt, very difficult,
given the tactics employed by UNITA. However, every
effort must be made to ensure effective and sustained
access for those seeking to alleviate the crisis faced by
the Angolan people. When it proves impossible to
provide safe access for the international community to
provide assistance, the Government must do everything
possible to provide the assistance itself. Each and every
Angolan must be treated equally in this regard and all
efforts must be made to reach everyone everywhere.

We are also concerned about the additional
displacement arising from military actions. We would
be grateful to hear more about how the affected people
are being assisted and whether other measures are
being planned for those who might be displaced in the
future. We would also be grateful to learn more about
the composition of these displaced populations, given
worrying reports that a low proportion of young males
appears to be among them.

We understand very well the call by Minister
Chikoti and Mr. Oshima for the international donor
community to remain engaged in Angola. Ireland's
emergency and rehabilitation assistance to Angola has
increased steadily over recent years and Angola has
been consistently among the largest recipients of such
aid from Ireland. Many of our humanitarian non-
governmental organizations are also present on the
ground. I mention this to underline that Ireland is
deeply conscious of and engaged with the plight of the
Angolan people and the conflict they have endured for
far too long.

There is an enormous humanitarian deficit in
Angola which cannot be bridged without the assistance
of the international community. In this regard, the
donor community is not avoiding its responsibilities.
However, it can be encouraged to do more. There is
also a major opportunity and responsibility for the
Government of Angola to play its own central role in
addressing the humanitarian deficit. The donor
community can reasonably be expected to further
support humanitarian action if it sees the systematic
diversion of greatly increasing state revenues from
natural resources into programmes to rebuild Angola
for the people of Angola, who are the natural owners of
those resources. We make the case that this should be
done not only for the welfare of the people - the clear
and absolute first priority - but also to strengthen the
perceived legitimacy of Angola's institutions and state
structures.

We cannot address the humanitarian crisis in
Angola without reference to the violent conflict that
underlies it. Ireland fully supports the mediating efforts
of the Secretary-General and of his Adviser for Special
Assignments in Africa, Ibrahim Gambari, to establish a
process of political dialogue. We very much hope that
these efforts will lead to progress soon. We also want
to record our strong support for the work of the United
Nations Office in Angola.

The ending of the conflict in Angola would not in
itself bring about the end of the immense economic and
social obstacles facing the country. However, increased
confidence on the part of the Angolan people that the
arrival of peace holds out the promise of greater
economic and social progress will surely contribute to
the creation and endurance of stability. That is why
Ireland believes that the Government of Angola, the
United Nations and the international community must
continue our work to improve greatly the humanitarian
situation in Angola. That agenda must be asserted
systematically by all concerned, and now, despite the
continuing conflict situation. It is an agenda that cannot
await the hoped-for end to the conflict. It is an agenda
to be addressed now by all of us together.
