Mr. Arnault: I would like to thank the Security
Council for allowing me to provide an update on
developments in the implementation of the Colombia
Final Peace Agreement and the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Colombia since the period covered
by the Secretary-General's report (S/2017/252).

At the outset, however, I would like to convey to
Ambassador Maria Emma Mejia Velez the deepest
sympathy of the United Nations in the wake of the
tragedy in Mocoa, in the Putumayo department. I
would also like to commend the quick and effective
response of the national disaster management system,
under the leadership of President Santos Calderon, and
to reaffirm the willingness of the United Nations to
support the national efforts to rescue and rebuild.

Several significant developments have taken place
in the past two weeks. On 22 March the legislation on
an integral justice, truth, reparation and non-repetition
system was passed. It is of course a critical part of the
Peace Agreement and at the core of efforts to reconcile
the rights of the victims with the requirements of the
transition from war to peace. A ceremony took place
in Bogota today at which the President signed decrees
establishing a Truth Commission, a special unit to
search for persons who disappeared as a result of the
conflict and a selection committee for designating
the magistrates of the Special Peace Jurisdiction, the
members of the Truth Commission and the head of the
special unit. The day before yesterday, a law intended
to contribute to the legal security and stability of the
implementation process was also passed. It commits
Government officials to complying effectively with the
provisions of the Peace Agreement.

A number of other steps that are provided for
in the Agreement were also taken, including the
transmittal of the Final Peace Agreement to the Council
and the appointment of Felipe Gonzalez Marquez,
former Prime Minister of Spain, and Jose Mujica,
former President of Uruguay, who will constitute the
international verification component of the Peace
Implementation Commission. They are supported by a
secretariat made up of two very competent Colombian
non-governmental organizations and backed by the
Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies of the
University of Notre Dame.

There has been some progress, which we expect will
continue, on the separation of minors from the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC). As
of 2 April, according to the International Committee
of the Red Cross, 57 minors had been separated, in
compliance with the commitment made by the group
in May 2016. Yesterday the Government announced
that the FARC had formally presented it with a list of
its armed members gathered in the zones, who number
6,804, as well as a first list of 1,541 militia members.

I should make special mention of developments
relating to the agreement concluded between the
Government of Colombia and the FARC on the control
of illegal drugs. I should recall here that the drug
economy helped to sustain the Colombia conflict for
decades, and that in turn the peace process has real
potential for helping to combat it. In that context,
the Colombian Government and the FARC agreed
in January on a package of incentives to farmers
willing to proceed with voluntary eradication. To date,
through negotiations with communities, more than
55,000 families have volunteered to enter the crop-
substitution programme. The Government is currently
working on putting together the two-year package of
incentives, including monthly payments to farmers;
food security; productive projects; and technical
support and monitoring. Delivery of the package is to
begin in June.

Another significant development is the assumption
of the vice-presidency by retired National Police of
Colombia General Oscar Naranjo, who was also a
member of the Government's peace negotiating team.
His stated focus will be on the implementation of the
peace agreement, security, counter-narcotics and the
protection of community leaders and human rights
defenders who have been victims of a pattern of killings
and threats - a trend that has seen an increase in recent
months. All of these issues are clearly interlinked and
deserve this kind of sustained attention at the highest
level of Government.

In direct relation to the Mission's mandate, the
weapons laydown process has moved forward in
the past 15 days. Since 24 March, the Mission has
identified, marked and registered the weapons that
FARC combatants brought to the camps. This exercise
is nearly completed. In addition, we expect to store
very shortly in the Mission's containers the weapons
of all those FARC members that will participate in the
implementation of the peace agreement. Numbering
about 1,000, those members are involved in the tripartite
Monitoring and Verification Mechanism, training for
security functions, crop substitution, humanitarian
demining, and peace education.

The next step for the Mission is the collection of
weapons and the destruction of unstable armaments in
a considerable number of arms and ammunition caches
spread throughout vast, difficult-to-access areas.
Several such caches have already been visited, and
some explosives have been destroyed. However, now
that FARC combatants are assembled in the 26 zones,
that operation can be carried out at full scale. The
Mission met with the FARC today in Bogota to work on
a detailed plan for systematic access to the caches, and
in meetings this week the Colombian army has pledged
its full support for this endeavour.

While these developments confirm that the
implementation of the peace agreement is a very
dynamic process, there have been concerns with
regard to the slow pace of implementation in a number
of sensitive areas mentioned in the report of the
Secretary-General. These concerns relate in particular
to the construction and equipment of FARC camps, the
implementation of the amnesty law, the implementation
of security guarantees and the plans for the reintegration
of FARC combatants.
In that respect, at a meeting on 25 and 26 March
in Cartagena to take stock of implementation 100
days after the signing of the peace agreement, the
parties made important and detailed commitments to
accelerating implementation precisely in those areas
and in the adoption of the legislative agenda of the
peace agreement. We welcome those commitments.
Like the parties themselves, we believe that while the
consolidation ofpeace will be a long-term process, there
is a relatively small window of opportunity to establish
solid foundations for it through the laying down of
weapons, the reintegration of FARC combatants, and
the delivery of peace dividends to the most affected
people and areas.

Let me end by expressing our full support for the
planned visit of the Security Council to Colombia
next month. Since the beginning of its involvement
in January of last year, the unanimous support of the
Security Council has been perceived in Colombia as
a guarantee of success. Its visit will provide further
assurance to that effect. Indeed, this is precisely the
juncture at which the international community, and
this Council in particular, should voice its interest, its
encouragement, and its support for the efforts of the
parties and all those involved in the building of peace
in Colombia.

