Mr. Basit (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): It is my
pleasure to make a few remarks on the report of the
Government of Iraq that is before the Security
Council(see S/2010/365, annex). Pursuant with
paragraph 5 of resolution 1905 (2009), the Government
of Iraq submitted its second quarterly report to the
Security Council. The report adopts the same
methodology of the first quarterly report (see S/2010/308, annex).

The Government of Iraq has affirmed in its
previous and current reports its intention to adopt the
same mechanism currently in use for the Development
Fund for Iraq (DFI) in maintaining an account in which
to deposit all receipts of export sales of Iraqi oil, and a
sub-account in which the percentage for compensation
will be transferred automatically. To fulfil the
requirements of resolution 1905 (2009), the
Government of Iraq has taken a number of actions
concerning which we would like to state the following.

First, the ministerial committee charged with
implementing resolution 1905 (2009) studied and
reviewed the remaining letters of credit from the
3

United Nations oil-for-food programme as of
31 December 2009 and decided to pay 26. The relevant
documents will be sent to the United Nations to make
the payments. The Committee of Financial Experts
followed up the reasons presented by the State entities
relating to these controversial letters of credit, as their
defences were focused on the lack of documentation
related to the receipt of goods subject to the letters, in
accordance with paragraph 25 of the memorandum of
understanding signed with the United Nations in 1996
pursuant to resolution 986 (1995). The Board of
Supreme Audit is still auditing the ministries in case
any official documents related to the remaining letters
of credit are available.

Secondly, with regard to debts inherited from the
previous regime, the Minister of Finance of the
Government of Iraq sent confirmation letters to his
counterparts in the States outside the Paris Club that
had not yet responded to calls for debt settlement.
Since the Ministry of Finance sent the report of the
Government of Iraq to the Council, it has received a
positive response from the Government of Pakistan
expressing its desire to discuss the restructuring of
Iraq's debt. Negotiations held with Brazil in June are
continuing and are expected to take some time due to
several reasons, including the presidential elections
scheduled for October. Initial negotiations were also
held with Poland in June. Since the bulk of the
remaining debt is owed to the Gulf Cooperation
Council States, the Committee of Financial Experts
believes that the assistance of the brotherly and
friendly States may have a positive impact on
implementation of the resolutions of the Arab summits
issued in this regard.

With respect to commercial creditors, three
British companies have responded to Iraq's call to
purchase their debt. The Government of Iraq has
demonstrated its serious intention to finalize those
issues related to commercial creditors that have not yet
registered claims, as well as the compensation issues it
anticipates will be filed after immunities are removed
from Iraqi funds. These will be finalized through legal
contracts yet to be drafted, which will be drawn up as
complete packages to settle these claims after scrutiny
by Iraqi legal authorities and which the Government of
Iraq intends to sign.

Regarding financial and administrative control
over the current DFI, the Committee of Financial
Experts found that the Government of Iraq took the
following steps. First, based on a recommendation
from the Committee, the Government of Iraq has
signed a contract with PricewaterhouseCoopers for the
2010 DFI audit. The Committee of Financial Experts
will continue to use the same methodology to audit the
cash flows of successor accounts of the DFI in
subsequent fiscal years. In this regard, we would
stipulate that the number of ministries and entities
unrelated to the ministries is 41, each of which has
prepared a structural chart to submit to the legislative
authorities for their consideration and adoption.

Secondly, the Committee of Financial Experts is
following up implementation of the oil metering and
calibration system by the Ministry of Oil on a quarterly
basis, as shown in attachment 2 of the second quarterly
report of the Government of Iraq (see S/2010/365, annex), where a positive diversion appears in the
export area and a negative diversion appears in the
internal distribution area. This internal distribution
network is not relevant to resolution 1483 (2003). The
Committee of Financial Experts requested the DFI
2010 auditors, PricewaterhouseCoopers, to conduct a
special field audit to assess implementation of the
metering system and to present a report to the
International Advisory and Monitoring Board (IAMB)
and the Committee during the next IAMB meeting to
be held in October.

Thirdly, relating to frozen Iraqi assets abroad, in
addition to the endeavours of the Ministry of Finance
to establish records and a database on those assets, the
ministerial committee charged with this task managed
to obtain a verdict to recover $300 million in assets
from Switzerland and €25 million in France, in
addition to other fixed assets. The follow-up continues
to recover assets through legal means, including resort
to the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1518 (2003).

The follow-up of the Committee of Financial
Experts on the contacts made by the Government of
Iraq with international agencies and advisors has
shown that the protection provided so far by external
parties has not achieved the level of the immunities
provided by a Security Council resolution. As noted in
resolution 1483 (2003) and subsequent resolutions, the
purpose of establishing the DFI and immunities for
Iraqi funds was to ensure the use of the oil export sales
funds for the benefit of the Iraqi people. Such
immunities granted by the Council have played an
important role in ensuring the use of those funds in the
10-44502
interest of the Iraqi people, as confirmed in paragraph
18 of the minutes of the IAMB's most recent meeting
in 2010.

Despite the determination of the Iraqi
Government authorities and relevant parties to
implement resolution 1905 (2009), the Committee of
Financial Experts found that the Council's support
through the adoption of a resolution to extend the
immunities for a further period of one year or less in
order to accompany the establishment of the new
successor mechanism to the DFI would help the
Government of Iraq to implement that mechanism.
Without that support, the Government may be unable
to fulfil its internal or external obligations should a
case arise by which Iraqi commercial or sovereign
funds become attached through a court order resulting
from a claim filed against the conduct of the previous
regime.
10-44502

At the same time, such an extension would assist
the Committee of Financial Experts in completing its
assigned tasks relating to successor arrangements for
the DFI and the IAMB, and in ensuring that future
mechanisms maintain this level of transparency and
accountability in the sources and use of Iraqi public
funds for the benefit of the Iraqi people. The extension
would also coincide with the meetings to decide the
successor arrangements for the DFI and the IAMB.

