Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): At the outset,
let me welcome Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Jan
Eliasson, and Assistant Secretary-General for Human
Rights, Mr. Andrew Gilmour, back to the Council and
thank them for their briefings. In case this is my final
opportunity in this Chamber, allow me to commend and
congratulate Mr. Eliasson personally for everything
that he has done through his distinguished career on
human rights and other aspects of the Charter of the
United Nations.

We have heard some members argue today that
we should not be focusing on human rights in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea - that this
is not a matter for the Council. I have to respectfully
disagree. When a regime chooses to spend its resources
on reckless nuclear policies and not on its people, peace
and security are threatened. When a State violates the
sovereignty of its neighbours and abducts their citizens,
regional stability is jeopardized. When a regime shuts
off its people from the world, denying them their
most basic rights, the Charter of the United Nations
is ignored. So it is entirely right that we are holding
this session today. Human rights violations are like
the canary in the coal mine, warning us of threats to
international peace and security.

I want to focus my statement on a very specific
human rights concern in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea: the use of forced labour. The word
"concern" does not do the issue justice. Forced labour in
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea is a travesty
and a tragedy that has led to the deaths of hundreds of
thousands of North Koreans. In truth, my words cannot
convey the horror so let me use those of Hyuk Kim,
who was held in the Jungeori Labour Camp. He said,

"At Jungiori, there was no sense ofbeing human You
do the labour you were ordered to do. No thinking.
No free will. Just fear."
His testimony speaks of unimaginable hunger and
cruelty. He would supplement his meager diet with rats
eaten raw because, as he stated: "If you tried to cook
the rats, the guards would smell the meat or fire, catch
you and beat you mercilessly."

Such cruelty has been experienced by so many
North Koreans. That cruelty has served only one
purpose: to generate income for the regime. The regime
has chosen to spend that income on its illicit nuclear
and ballistic missile programmes, which violate so
many resolutions of this Council. That is only one part
of the story. Beyond North Korea's borders, there lies
another travesty, another tragedy. That is the tragedy
of tens of thousands of North Koreans forced to work
abroad to raise money for the regime in circumvention
of United Nations sanctions. It is estimated that that
practice raises as much $2 billion in foreign currency
each year. That money is made by putting North Korean
in unscrupulous mines, factories and construction sites,
often at great risk and often without any protection. For
those workers, being abroad offers no escape from the
cruelty that I described earlier. They live their lives
under constant surveillance by their gang masters, to
whom they lose most of their meager pay. They work
up to 20 hours per day without sufficient food. They
are forcibly separated from their loved ones, unsure of
when or whether they will see them again.

We should call this what it really is. Whether inside
or outside the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
it is modern slavery. The Government of the United
Kingdom is committed to ridding the world of such
a scourge. It is a personal priority of British Prime
Minister, Ms. Theresa May, and the United Kingdom
is galvanzing international efforts to bring an end to
modern slavery globally. We cannot underestimate
the scale of the challenge in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. To date, the regime has refused
to engage in any meaningful dialogue with the
international community on human rights. The Special
Rapporteur and international observers are still denied
full and unhindered access to the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. The previous Foreign Minister
said in March that the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea would no longer participate in international
discussions on the issue. That is a shameful rejection
of the international norms and principles that underpin
the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. It is also a rejection of the views of the majority
of United Nations Members. Over 100 countries
spoke loudly and clearly when the Third Committee
adopted draft resolution A/C.3/7l/L.23, calling on the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to respect the
rights of its people.

Today, let us all urge the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to re-engage with the international
community and start a process of dialogue - one
that leads to credible, concrete steps to improve the
human rights of its own people. The United Kingdom
believes in such a dialogue. It is why we continue to
have diplomatic relations. It is why we build people
to people links through the sponsorship of education
and humanitarian projects. Moreover, it is why our
Embassy in Pyongyang will continue to deliver strong
messages on human rights directly to the regime. We
will not let up in our efforts to convey the international
community's concern. We urge the Government of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to take action.
The Council must follow suit.

