Mr. Kazykhanov (Kazakhstan): First of all, I
would like to express our appreciation to you, Mr.
President, for organizing this debate, which provides
an opportunity to review the progress made in the fight
against terrorism and to identify priorities for the
Counter-Terrorism Committee's (CTC) activities in the
future. My delegation would like to pay tribute to
Ambassador Andrey Denisov for his effective and
inspiring stewardship of the activities of the CTC, as
well as to thank him for his presentation of the CTC's
work programme for the next 90-day period and his
briefing on the Committee's work during the last three
months. I would also like to take this opportunity to
express our appreciation to the Executive Director of
the Committee's Executive Directorate (CTED),
Ambassador Javier Ruperez, for his commendable
efforts.

My delegation has a positive assessment of the
CTC's work during the reporting period. It is
encouraging to note that, despite the existing
difficulties in getting the Executive Directorate up and
running, the Committee has been able to make
considerable progress in the revitalization of its
activities. We note with great satisfaction that the
Committee is finalizing preparations to begin its visits
to several Member States, in compliance with
resolutions 1535 (2004) and 1566 (2004), the first of
which is planned for March 2005. Such visits represent
a qualitatively new and practical instrument designed
to develop cooperation and dialogue with Member
States and to provide much-needed technical and
expert assistance in the fight against terrorism.

A new element in the Committee's work has been
the analytical work to assess the requirements of
Member States in the context of preparing their reports
on the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and to
develop an integrated assistance matrix. The
Committee's record during the reporting period
indicates that it is actively applying new approaches to
the coordination of technical cooperation with States,
closely linking that mission with efforts to reinforce
interaction with international and regional
organizations.

As indicated in the report by the Chairman of the
CTC, that Committee, in cooperation with the
Commonwealth of Independent States, will hold its
fourth special meeting with international, regional and
subregional organizations in Almaty, Kazakhstan. On
behalf of my Government, I would like to express our
deep gratitude to the Security Council and its Counter-
Terrorism Committee for the high honour and privilege
of hosting such a significant event.

We consider it very important that the CTC
meeting will be convened jointly with the
Commonwealth of Independent States, in the heart of
the Eurasian continent. Counter-terrorism activities in
our region are closely linked with efforts to prevent the
trafficking of drugs, arms and human beings. Most of
the region's organizations pay special attention to the
development of cooperation in counter-terrorism
activities. In particular, in addition to carrying out
other meaningful activities, the Commonwealth of
Independent States and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization have set up, and quite successfully
operated, specialized antiterrorist centres. We believe
that the experience we have acquired in the process
might prove useful to the CTC.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that
Kazakhstan has been cooperating fully with the CTC
since its inception and intends to provide to that
important body all the necessary assistance, exerting
every effort to combat terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations.

