Mr. Baldeh: On behalf ofthe African Development
Bank Group President, Mr. Akinwumi Adesina,
we thank the Security Council for the opportunity
to participate in today's briefing. We extend our
congratulations to the Security Council, especially the
Peruvian Mission, on having organized this briefing
session, and laud the dedication of the United Nations to
strengthening peacebuilding efforts across the African
continent and globally.

Peace can be built and sustained only if the
underlying drivers of conflict - whether political,
economic, social, environmental or otherwise - are
effectively addressed. Most of the fragile situations
in the world are in African countries. Those are our
shareholders. That is our neighbourhood. Therefore,
empowering African nations to transition out of
fragility is a core part of our mission.

Over the past several years, our institution has
focused on identifying the root causes of fragility and
conflict, and addressing those through building more
resilient economies, institutions and communities
across Africa. Our 2014-2019 Strategy for Addressing
Fragility and Building Resilience in Africa has
been central to guiding those efforts. The Strategy
contributes to peacebuilding and sustainability by
focusing on three main areas: first, strengthening
State capacity and establishing effective institutions;
secondly, promoting equitable access to employment
and basic services; and thirdly, encouraging direct
policy dialogue on fragility issues, advocating for
actions that foster resilience and build partnerships to
achieve them. All of those are critical to achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

At the operational level, we have focused our
actions on two key pillars: first, increasing the resources
available to address situations of fragility across the
continent, and secondly, strengthening our intervention
approach to be more flexible and responsive to
fragile situations.

In terms of financial resources, we have created
a dedicated financing mechanism, which we call the
Transition Support Facility. That is an earmarked
concessional financing source within the African
Development Fund, with three funding windows. The
first window provides supplemental support to national
Governments facing specific fragility challenges. The
second window clears arrears to help Governments to
re-engage, as was successfully done with Liberia in
2007 and Cote d'Ivoire in 2009. We are now working
on Somalia's arrears. The third window targets
technical assistance programmes to strengthen the
delivery capacity of national and regional institutions.
The Transition Support Facility's resources have been
critical to addressing the vast and evolving needs of
fragile situations at the national and regional levels.

As the African Development Bank Group President,
Mr. Akinwumi Adesina, said recently in Madagascar,
fragility must not be seen as an end state. Nations may
go through fragility, but they can exit and become
stable, dynamic, prosperous and resilient to shocks.
That optimism towards building resilience through
nationally led transitions out of fragility is at the core
of the Bank's approach.

In the case of cote d'Ivoire, for example, we played
a central role, alongside other partners, including the
United Nations and the World Bank, in helping them
to make a successful transition over the past decade.
From 2008 to 2017, Cote d'Ivoire benefited from the
resources of all three windows ofthe Transition Support
Facility, alongside the other African Development
Bank Group financing instruments. That provided
both the financial and the technical support that the
country needed to emerge from two civil crises that
devastated its economy, infrastructure, institutions and
social cohesion. It was through strong complementarity
between partners, especially the United Nations
Operation in cote d'Ivoire, that we were able to work
together to support the successful nationally led
transition of cote d'Ivoire.

In the Gambia, a successful nationally led transition
of power was supported by political mediation and
regional peacekeeping efforts in 2017, after two decades
of structural vulnerabilities and marginalization.

However, that transition revealed the need for long-term
resilience building of institutions, services, justice and
national unity. The African Development Bank Group
has worked since then with United Nations agencies,
the World Bank and other partners to help the Gambian
Government rebuild an inclusive economy, restore faith
in justice and governance institutions and strengthen
regional integration.

We will continue to learn from those experiences
as we look at current and future transitions across the
continent. Most importantly, identifying opportunities
for early intervention and coordinating effectively with
communities, Government and international partners
are crucial to avoiding cycles of fragility.

It is not enough to just look at sources of fragility,
however. We must also look at how, as a Bank and as a
development community, we can more systematically
identify and strengthen sources of resilience to better
mitigate local, national and regional vulnerabilities.

To that end, our interventions are guided by a new
data-driven analytical framework, which we call the
Country Resilience and Fragility Assessment Tool.
The Tool identifies national and regional pressures
and capacities to manage risks and external shocks.
This framework represents a multisectoral and
multidimensional approach to identifying targeted
entry points for addressing fragility, building resilience
and consolidating peace in Africa. The Country
Resilience and Fragility Assessment builds upon the
Bank Group's work on fragility assessments, which
have helped to generate deeper analysis, informing
fragility-sensitive design of national and regional
strategies and operations. Several of the assessments
have been undertaken in coordination with partners,
such as the World Bank Group. We need to continue
to enhance our information-sharing and coordination
efforts as development actors, leveraging our tools
and analysis towards collective impact in fragile and
conflict-affected situations.

Just last week, as my colleague Franck Bousquet
said, we worked with the Burkina Faso Government,
alongside the European Union, the UnitedNations and the
World Bank, to undertake a comprehensive prevention
and peacebuilding assessment. Those findings will help
address emerging security threats within the country
and across its borders. Our interventions will focus on
reaching the most vulnerable communities to enhance
economic and social inclusion.

We cannot talk about addressing fragility and
building resilience within national borders alone.
Increasingly, fragility is regional. Spillover effects
are a major source of vulnerability on the African
continent and beyond. Factors, such as a lack of
economic opportunities for growing youth populations,
communal conflict and extremism, political instability
and climate change can accelerate forced displacement
and irregular migration, with destabilizing effects
across regions.

Partnerships between national, regional and
international actors within the humanitarian-
peace-development nexus are critical to addressing
regional fragility drivers. In the case of the Group of
Five for the Sahel region, for example, we worked with
international organizations and development partners
to establish an alliance in 2017 to promote stability and
resilience in the region. That is an important example
of how we can work towards collective development
outcomes by enhancing information-sharing and
leveraging the comparative advantage of different
actors to implement targeted interventions. As part
of those efforts, the African Development Bank
Group's projects have focused on building resilience
in key areas, such as agriculture, water and sanitation,
energy and climate change, youth employment and
entrepreneurship and regional integration.

Building more integrated and resilient regional
economies is an important part of addressing regional
vulnerability. The African Development Bank Group
is able to use its convening power for policy dialogue,
in complement to partners who have extensive field
presence in fragile and conflict-affected environments,
such as the United Nations and the World Bank
Group. Bringing together Governments, regional
actors and development partners to harness inclusive
and sustainable economic growth reduces the risk of
cross-border polarization and regional instability. That
includes the need for flexible solutions to encourage
private sector investment in fragile situations, with a
focus on including women and youth in economics.

As the Bank looks forward to its fragility agenda
in 2020 and beyond, we reflect on some of the broader
lessons that we have learned from working in fragile
and conflict-affected situations. First, we note the
importance of adopting a State-building approach
that is focused on inclusive politics, citizen security
and justice, in addition to more traditional human and
economic development needs. Secondly, we need long-
term programming to build capable and legitimate
institutions that can effectively manage the challenges
of fragility. Thirdly, there is a need for the generation
of sustainable employment and the improvement
of livelihoods through private sector development.
Fourthly, good governance, especially through
improving public financial management, enhancing
natural resources management and combating
corruption, is key to strengthening State legitimacy.

The African Development Bank Group looks
forward to deepening partnerships at the national,
regional and continental levels with development
partners, including United Nations agencies, with a
view to harnessing collective development outcomes
and building resilience across Africa. That includes
conducting joint analytical work on conflict, fragility
and peacebuilding; expanding operations aimed
at promoting and consolidating good governance;
leveraging public and private solutions to maximize
development impact on the ground; consolidating
cooperation and partnerships in dealing with regional
challenges; and deepening complementarity for a
greater division of labour among institutions in specific
fragile contexts, relative to our areas of comparative
advantages and mandates.

Let me reaffirm that the African Development
Bank Group remains committed to working as part of
the humanitarian, peace and development community
to support nationally led transitions and build
regional resilience.

