I thank Mr. Geir Pedersen for his briefing. I would like once again to express our appreciation to him for his tireless efforts to bring together the stakeholders in the Syrian conflict, including the Women's Advisory Board and civil society organizations in the search for a lasting solution to this crisis. I would also like to welcome the representatives of Syria and Turkey. On Syria, a question that the Security Council considers regularly in its three aspects, everything or almost everything has already been said. Mr Pedersen has on occasion shown optimism when indications warrant, but he has often expressed his pessimism to us as the political process in Syria struggles to get on the right track. Again today, we have listened to him with great attention, leading me to make the following remarks. First, my delegation welcomes the resumption of the work of the Constitutional Committee, with the holding of its third meeting after several months of hiatus. We hope that this time, all members of the Committee will engage in negotiating in good faith and make the compromises necessary to give Syria momentum towards peace and security. In this regard, it is also important that the United Nations provide all the necessary support to this process, in accordance with the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015). Secondly, my delegation supports the calls of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for an immediate national ceasefire in Syria. That will help, on the one hand, to create the conditions for the success of the political process that I mentioned earlier and, on the other, to enable an effective fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Obviously, like any other State, in the exercise of its sovereignty Syria must relentlessly pursue the fight against terrorism, all the more so as criminal groups are trying to exploit of the current health crisis to rebuild themselves and resume control. lost ground. However, it is also evident, as everywhere else, that the fight against terrorism must be undertaken with respect for humanitarian rights. Thirdly, the Niger remains concerned about the fate of the many detainees in both camps, and reiterates the need for the belligerents to heed the Secretary- General's call to share information on the fate of those detained and to guarantee respect for their rights. Likewise, my delegation supports Special Envoy Pedersen's appeal of 18 May, encouraging a massive and unilateral release of detainees, as well as meaningful action on missing persons cases. That would undoubtedly help ease the overall situation and thereby promote the progress we all expect on this complex Syrian issue. To conclude, my country, the Niger, recalls that in dealing with this issue, we must be sure to respect the sovereignty of Syria and the interests of its people, because, ultimately, it is the interests of the Syrians that we are discussing, and they should benefit from the decisions we make here. In addition, despite the differences of view that exist on the issue within the Security Council, we remain of the opinion, alongside the Secretary-General, that the sanctions imposed on Syria, the consequences of which are more damaging to innocent Syrians innocent than to the authorities in place, should be suspended. In this time of the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic, all countries, including Syria, must be able to access basic necessities and essential medical supplies, the lack of which aggravates the already extreme situation facing these populations.
