Mr. Wolff (United States of America): The
United States delegation wishes to express our
appreciation for Ambassador Verbeke's continued
leadership as the Chairman of the Security Council's
Iran sanctions Committee and for his report to the
Council today. Mr. Verbeke's efforts have been
essential in the Committee's execution of its mandate,
particularly in encouraging States to submit reports
detailing their efforts to implement the Chapter VII
sanctions imposed by the Council on Iran in
resolutions 1737 (2006) and 1747 (2007).

While the number of reports received continues
to rise, many remain outstanding. We urge all States
that have not yet submitted their implementation
reports to the Committee to do so as soon as possible.
Resolution 1803 (2008), adopted two weeks ago,
includes a similar reporting request, and we encourage
all States to submit reports detailing their efforts to
implement it.

The Council adopted resolution 1803 (2008)
because Iran's Violations of Council resolutions not
only have continued, but are deepening. As the most
recent report of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
Mr. ElBaradei, of 22 February 2008, made clear, Iran is
continuing with enrichment- and heavy water-related
activities, is dramatically expanding the number of
operating centrifuges and has even begun developing a
08-27224
new generation of centrifuges, testing one of them with
nuclear fuel.

Moreover, Director General ElBaradei's report,
the IAEA secretariat's technical briefing on
25 February and the IAEA Board of Governors meeting
on 5 March presented troubling indications of Iran's
weaponization efforts. We stand firmly behind the
IAEA requirement that Iran must fully disclose any
weapons-related work and facilitate IAEA verification
that all such work has ceased.

The international community has good reason to
be concerned about Iran's activities to acquire nuclear
weapons capability. At stake is the security of a vital
region of the world and the credibility of the Security
Council and the IAEA. The Council has made clear its
sincere intention to resolve this issue diplomatically.
That is a goal that the United States strongly shares.
Absent Iranian cooperation, however, we must
continue to implement each of the Security Council's
decisions and pursue our dual-track strategy of
increasing pressure on Iran while offering a path to
negotiations.

Our delegation looks forward to continuing to
work with others here to execute the Committee's
mandate to ensure the most robust and comprehensive
implementation possible of these resolutions, and we
call on Iran to engage in constructive negotiations over
the future of its nuclear programme. Such negotiations,
if successful, would have profound benefits for Iran
and the Iranian people.

