Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): France welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2513 (2020). This text welcomes the recent progress made on the path towards peace in Afghanistan. The priority going forward will be implementation of the commitments undertaken by the various parties. Intra-Afghan negotiations must now get under way as soon as possible. France will continue support Afghanistan as it seeks lasting peace, which must translate into the full implementation of the commitments made by the Taliban to reducing violence and fighting terrorism. Moreover, it will also mean - and this is indispensable - safeguarding and building on all the gains achieved since 2001 in terms of democracy, the rule of law and respect for human rights, in particular women's and minority rights, as the resolution we have just adopted recalls. In that regard, it is crucial to ensure inclusive representation in the intra-Afghan talks that guarantees the participation of women. There can be no lasting peace if half the population is not represented at the negotiating table. I would like, in that regard, to welcome the initiative of the Permanent Representatives of Afghanistan of the United Kingdom, Mrs. Adela Raz and Ms. Karen Pierce, to establish a Group of Friends of Women in Afghanistan, which met this morning to underscore the essential role of women in the peace process, in keeping with the women and peace and security agenda, whose twentieth anniversary we mark this year. The participation of women must effective, duly seated at negotiating table on all matters under discussion. The concept of an Afghan-led peace process is more relevant than ever, and the international community must stand ready to support Afghan efforts in that regard. France will play its role and calls on all countries in the region to actively and unambiguously support the stabilization of Afghanistan and help achieve lasting peace in the country. In conclusion, I would like to commend the essential role played by the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and the United Nations in Afghanistan.
