Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): If I
may, I will adopt the same approach as Ambassador
Negroponte has. I begin by expressing appreciation for
the comments, the questions and the tonality of the
questions.

As far as the security situation is concerned, we
are trying to tackle it with particular determination,
while bearing in mind that, increasingly, it will be for
the Iraqis to assume responsibility for their own
security. Developing the indigenous capacity is thus
very much part of the policy.

I agree with those who have argued that security
cannot be tackled in isolation from the political aspect,
but there is no simple answer as to whether we must
tackle the political aspect before the security aspect or
vice versa. The answer is that both processes have to
be tackled.

As Ambassador Negroponte said, a better-
coordinated approach to intelligence throughout the
country is basic. I do not think the criteria for
determining who is responsible for the actions is
actually the issue. More importantly, we must identify
the threat and then act to neutralize it. Frankly, it does
not matter where the threat comes from, we have got to
get better at prevention on the basis of good
intelligence.

We have sought today to give a briefing on the
basis of an agreement that everybody has seen, that is
on a web site and that is wholly consistent with
resolution 1511 (2003). The primary ownership of that
agreement is with the Iraqis, so it is for them to
communicate formally. But we have sought, in our
explanations, to give our understanding of it. There
will be a time to consider exactly what it entails and
what it constitutes when we have had a formal
transmission. But, as I understand it, the Iraqi
Governing Council is fully aware of and is working to
address the need to meet a deadline and to have that
transmission take place quickly.

We recognize, as, again, I hope do all the
members of the Iraqi Governing Council, the need to
maximize the basis of participation in the caucus
elections for the transitional assembly, to ensure that it
is actually as representative as possible. It is worth
bearing in mind that the caucus election is itself a form
of national conference. How, where and when that
should be held, again, are matters for the Iraqis, so it is
premature for us to try to answer that. But it is clear
that the Iraqi Governing Council will have a role -
but not a controlling position - in how that assembly
is put together.

As far as the United Nations role is concerned,
the United Kingdom very much agrees with What

Sll'V.4869

 

Ambassador Negroponte has said. I can separate out
three distinct roles: the humanitarian, the
developmental and the political. Two of those roles are
now being pursued very actively by the United
Nations. If we can go beyond that, so much the better
and the sooner the better, bearing in mind the capacity
that is available and, in the phrasing of resolution 1511
(2003), the "as circumstances permit" clause, which is
crucial. But as far as the United Kingdom is concerned,
the sooner the United Nations role is enhanced and the
sooner we can take advantage of the many
opportunities there are now to interpose the United
Nations in a political process, so much the better.

The importance of the relationship with
neighbours has been stressed quite rightly. The
Governing Council has embarked on visits to some of
the neighbours. Can I just add, from the view of the
Coalition Provisional Authority, that Jeremy
Greenstock, late of this parish, has visited three of the
neighbouring capitals for discussion at the highest
possible level. But what there is not, at the moment, is
a formal machinery to bring together all the
neighbours.

Much was said about the military agreement. The
practical issue is how and when one can begin to
discuss what security arrangements should apply when
the transitional Government is in place. And that is
why those discussions will take place shortly, because
of the military deployments. In terms of being
responsible, you have to have those discussions. Our
assumption, and, more importantly, an assumption of
the Iraqis, is that an international security presence will
be available and will be necessary after a transitional
Government is put in place.

So the question is, on what basis should that force
then be constituted? It will not be the multinational
force envisaged in resolution 1511 (2003), it will be
something else. But it will operate at the invitation of
an Iraqi Government. I hope that it will be recognized
in some way by a resolution of the Security Council.

But the technical problems are there to be
addressed, not least that of timing, because the
multinational force will have come to an end, before
there technically is a transitional Government in place.
So that phasing needs to be sorted out, but it is not
actually all that difficult. The Coalition Provisional
Authority's formal role will come to an end with the
creation of the transitional Government. The
occupation, technically, will come to an end at the
same time. But, as President Bush and Prime Minister
Blair said earlier this week, our commitment to the
long term in Iraq is clear. The United Kingdom is
prepared to continue to provide assistance as part of
the international support effort to that provisional
transitional Government. But it will be that
Government that will have the primary responsibility
and obligation to ensure the security of Iraq. We will
need to sort out the details, all of us, with the Iraqi
ministries and with the arrangements in place. But as
far as the United Kingdom is concerned, we again
anticipate that bilateral assistance after 30 June will be
funnelled through an embassy or a bilateral assistance
office.

I would just like to stress one thing about dates.
Discussions as to whether some of the dates envisaged
in the agreement are too soon or too late actually miss
the point. They are indicative dates. What remains to
be seen is how the Iraqis themselves actually fit in
their wishes against the calendar. But, for the most
part, it must be for them to determine how they should
work.

In conclusion, despite the problems and the
challenges, much is being done. I hope we have
persuaded the audience today that, in fact, the effort to
produce new facts on the ground has been successful:
we have done a lot notwithstanding the security
problems, but, of course, a huge amount of additional
work needs to be done. Such progress will merit - and
indeed will require - continuing commitment by the
international community. But we owe it to Iraq to stay
the course and see it done.

