Mr. Chikoti (Angola): It is with great honour and
pleasure that An participates in this special meeting of
the Security Council dedicated to the situation in
Africa. I would like to thank the Council for having
taken time from its busy schedule to undertake this
important dialogue.

May I recognize the presence here of the Deputy
Secretary-General of the United Nations and the head
of the African Union, to whom I address my warmest
regards. The presence in this Chamber of the Secretary-
General of the African Union is in itself sound
testimony of the importance of this debate, and we are
very honoured to have Secretary-General Amara Essy
with us here today.

Let me congratulate Mauritius on presiding over
this meeting and on this initiative. We also extend our
congratulations to Mali and Guinea and the other
members that joined the Council at the beginning of
this year. Finally, we congratulate the former members
who just completed their mandate and thank all for
their continued support.

With the end of cold war in the early 19905, most
African countries entered a new era of multiparty
democracy, which has allowed large participation of
civil society in the African political arena, thus giving
new hope for overall stability and economic
development. However, this hope was shattered in
many cases by the resurgence of new conflicts, ranging
from intra-State, inter-State and cross-border conflicts
to ethnic, religious and electoral or post-electoral ones,
resulting in an increase in instability and the
consequent rise in numbers of refugees and internally
displaced people. This characterized the situation in
our continent in the 1990s.

My country, Angola, is one that endures the
effects of a long-lasting conflict. Conflict in Angola
started first as resistance to colonial rule. Then it
became an extension of the cold war. It later became a
post-electoral conflict. Today, conflict in Angola has
become acts of terrorism perpetrated by those, like Mr.
Savimbi, who do not want to abide by democratic
principles in a pluralistic society. These acts of
terrorism have resulted in the deterioration of
Government structures and heavy human suffering.

In this context, we welcome all initiatives taken
by the United Nations, with which we have worked
very closely, by the African Union and by the
international community at large to respond not only to
the conflict resolution itself but also to the
humanitarian situation, the peace-building that we are
engaged in today and national reconciliation.

This context of conflict raises a major problem in
Africa. The challenges facing African Governments
today are how to reduce and prevent the potential for
conflict through sustainable political measures while at
the same time implementing policies which can
enhance economic development and reduce poverty.

This is how my Government, my country, has
been responding to this crisis situation in an
environment where the challenge of poverty and the
potential for conflict is so great. But our own efforts as
a Government are not enough, and unless there is a
collective and comprehensive strategy that focuses on
poverty, stability and peace-building in our subregion,
there is very little chance that we will succeed.

That is why, on this specific point, we welcome in
this regard the New Partnership for Africa's
Development, which, in our view, represents a new hope
and to which we pledge our full support. We call upon the
international community to support this initiative.

May I also recall that the Millennium Summit
adopted specific recommendations for the African
continent which were not reviewed due to the sad
events of 11 September. I expect that this year some of
these recommendations will be reviewed by the
General Assembly.

The response of the international community,
under the leadership of the United Nations, to the
events of 11 September is a clear demonstration of the
world's capacity to stand firm before the scourge of
terrorism and other conflicts which have plagued the
globe, particularly the African continent.

I should like to recall how political transition has
been taking place in my subregion. Political transition
in southern and Central Africa over the past 12 years
has brought important changes. We have seen the end
of apartheid and the emergence of democratically
elected Governments in both Namibia and South
Africa. While political transition has also brought a
new conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
we have to recognize the important efforts of the
United Nations, which have now led to a Ceasefire
Agreement, the establishment of a peacekeeping force
and the beginning of inter-Congolese dialogue. On this
point we hope that these efforts and the dialogue to be
held in South Africa for the next few weeks will
continue to bring peace to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We hope that the dialogue will reach
positive conclusions that will bring peace to that
sisterly country, because unless we have peace globally
and in our region, it is very difficult to build
sustainable development.

In our region, as far as conflicts are concerned,
the heads of State of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) have expressed
concern over the situation in Zimbabwe. As a follow-
up to the Summit in Blantyre, I think that it is
important for the international community to note the
importance of the communique issued there by the
SADC heads of State appealing to the international
community to support the Government of Zimbabwe's
efforts aimed at strengthening democracy in order to
ensure the efficient and effective management of the
elections. In addition, the SADC countries called for
the cessation of all foreign interference by Western
countries that would undermine the sovereignty of that
sister country and exacerbate the difficult situation that
it is facing.

In regard to Angola, we welcome the efforts of
the Secretary-General to keep the country at the centre
of United Nations attention and on the Security
Council's agenda.

The recent visits to Angola by Mr. Gambari,
Under-Secretary-General and the Secretary-General's
Special Adviser on Africa, and by the monitoring
mechanism team have reinforced the importance of
sanctions against UNITA and Jonas Savimbi as a
means to bring them to stop the war and embrace the
terms of the Lusaka Protocol.

In this connection, we reiterate our sincere
request to the Secretary-General to continue to engage
in all initiatives towards these goals and to bring
lasting peace to our subregion, and particularly to
Angola.

