Mr. Locsin (Philippines): The Philippines aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Indonesia on behalf of Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN), and thanks the Netherlands for
convening this high-level open debate. We are gathered
to show our collective commitment to sustaining
peace as a goal and as a process to reinvigorate the
Organization's mandate for peace as a core principle
across the United Nations system, with the aim of
restoring to the United Nations the lustre it had at its
creation as the world's pre-eminent keeper and maker
of peace.

During 50 years of peacekeeping operations, the
Philippines has never faltered in its commitment to
answering calls from the United Nations for peace
and investment in peace, even as they have evolved in
a changing world. We therefore signed the Voluntary
Compact against Sexual Exploitation and Abuse,
which concerns issues that have put to shame what
should be held up and honoured - the United Nations
peacekeeping mission. We renewed our pledge at the
second Chiefs of Defence Conference to provide more
military officers as observers and staff and to deploy
more women peacekeepers, based on our conviction,
grounded in experience, that the gender that binds the
wounds of war, comforts the widows of war and shelters
the children of conflict has the strongest motivation
and the wisest approaches to preventing its outbreak
and restoring peace that is broken.

Together with ASEAN, we reaffirm peacekeeping
as a key element of ASEAN's political and security
cooperation, as highlighted in the Plan of Action to
Implement the Joint Declaration on Comprehensive
Partnership between ASEAN and the United Nations
(2016-2020). Currently, 4,500 police, military advisers
and troops from ASEAN countries are in 12 United
Nations peacekeeping missions. The Philippines
has scaled down its contributions because of local
exigencies, but in the wake of victories at home, we
are determined to bring our numbers up again and keep
them growing in peacekeeping missions abroad. Iwould
now like to present the Philippines" recommendations
for our collective action to improve United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

We repeat our support for calls to invest more in
local political solutions to conflicts, which United
Nations peacekeeping must reinforce and not supplant.
People in conflict situations must feel that they own the
peace that we merely help to bring about and keep. It is
they who must configure the peace and the approaches
to it, and no one else.

In complex and high-risk environments, success
in peacekeeping operations must be measured by the
mandate to protect civilians as the core criterion of
success, with child protection and combating sexual
abuse as key elements. Predeployment training
efforts should be tailored to respond to particular,
country-specific challenges with regard to protecting
civilians, with clear definitions of the responsibilities,
opportunities and constraints that peacekeepers will
face in the field.

We join Indonesia in making ensuring the safety of
peacekeepers an equally high priority, principally by
enhancing the capacity of contributing countries and
drawing as much hardware from developing countries
as lessons from their generally satisfactory experience
in the field. We do not recall ever having abandoned
or abused those who sought our protection. Surely we
have something to say on that score.

Concerning the responsibility to improve
peacekeeping operations, we support the call for
sustained triangular consultations and cooperation
among the Security Council, the Secretariat and
contributing countries. Without them, it is impossible
to have a shared understanding of appropriate policy
and of operational responses and their implications for
the mandate and conduct of an operation.

With regard to strengthening the whole-of-mission
approach, we repeat our support for relevant United
Nations resolutions on the peacebuilding architecture,
which underscore the importance of prioritizing
intervention, addressing the root causes of conflict
and devising long-term peacebuilding strategies, with
adequate and sustainable financial resources that
translate into concrete measures at the country level,
but absolutely without any political coloration. If the
politics of peacekeeping is not national, it is foreign
interference. That used to be called peacekeeping
by janissaries.

In order to revive a sense of shared responsibility
for the success of peacekeeping, we support
intergovernmental platforms that enable peer-learning

on building resilience and encouraging constructive
dialogue on the challenges of sustaining peace.

