Mr. Danon (Israel): Today, the United Nations has
taken another step backwards. It has taken another step
away from advocating for truth and justice.

Almost exactly one year ago, in this very Chamber,
the Council adopted the shameful resolution 2334
(2016). It was a resolution that had the audacity to
attempt to designate Israel's presence at the Western
Wall - Judaism's holiest site in Jerusalem - as a
flagrant violation of international law. Those words
pierced the hearts of Jews everywhere. They mocked
generations of Jews who prayed towards Jerusalem
for thousands of years. They belittled the ancient
declaration of the Jewish people that states, "next year
in Jerusalem".

Yet here we are again. We find ourselves fighting
the same battle for truth and morality. Those who voted
for today's resolution have only reaffirmed the United
Nations decades-long double standard when it comes to
Israel and are guilty of blatant hypocrisy. Every other
country in the world has the right to designate its own
capital city. But when it comes to Israel, somehow this
most basic national right is questioned and condemned.
We thank the United States for staying loyal to the truth
and vetoing today's absurd draft resolution. President
Trump, Vice-President Pence, Ambassador Haley and
the entire Administration proved that the United States
does not back down from what is right. They continue
to advocate for real dialogue and the hope for peace in
our region.

The Palestinians, however, have once again
displayed a disturbing trend. Every time the prospects
for meaningful negotiations emerge, the Palestinians
run away. Every time there is a chance for hope, the
Palestinians sabotage the effort. All too often, the
international community only makes it worse. In 1947,
the Palestinians rejected resolution 181 (II). In 2000,
they walked out of the Camp David talks and began
a war of terror against Israelis. In reply to Prime
Minister Netanyahu's repeated offers to negotiate,
the Palestinians have just one response: give in to our
demands or suffer the consequences of incitement
and violence.

The American Administration is now working
tirelessly to revive negotiations. Like us, it is eager
to spark new hopes for peace. By declaring the
obvious a that Jerusalem is the capital of the State of
Israel - President Trump was simply stating a fact.
He hoped to encourage both sides to move forward at
the negotiating table. But, once again, the Palestinians
respond with endless rockets fired at our civilians.

Let me be clear. We will continue to stand strong.
When it comes to Jerusalem, we do not back down.
Some 3,000 years ago, King David declared the city
of Jerusalem to be the capital of the Jewish people.
Jerusalem has been Israel's capital for almost 70 years.
Our nation has never given up when faced with an
adversary. We will not allow others, including the
United Nations, to determine our fate, in particular
when it comes to Jerusalem: not then and not now.

This week Jews all over the world are celebrating
the holiday of Hanukkah. We welcome the good
wishes sent from so many nations, many of whom are
represented at the table today. But it seems that some
of those who wish us well have forgotten exactly why
we celebrate Hanukkah. Hannukah is not about gifts.
It is not about food. Hannukah is about the liberation
of Jerusalem. In the year 167 B.C.E., a Hellenist king
attempted to outlaw Jewish practice and desecrate
our Temple in Jerusalem, but he failed. A small group
of brave fighters - the Maccabees - drove out the
Hellenists and reclaimed Jerusalem. That is what we
are celebrating. That is why we light the candles. We
are honouring our brave ancestors who reinstated
Jewish sovereignty over our capital, Jerusalem, more
than 2,000 years ago.

History did not always turn out that way for our
people. Just a hundred years after the miracle of
Hannukah, our Temple in Jerusalem was destroyed.
The Jewish people were exiled from Jerusalem but the
connection between Jerusalem and the Jewish people
was never broken. It will never be broken - not by the
Romans, not by the Babylonians, not by the Ottoman
Turks, not by the British Empire and not by the United
Nations. Today, even as our adversaries once again seek
to delegitimize our presence in Jerusalem, the Jewish
people will prevail, as it always has.

We have heard hateful statements from some
world leaders over the past few days. We have heard
statements from countries that continue to be hostile
to the Jewish people and to Israel, and from leaders
of nations that, throughout history, restricted Jewish
prayer at the Western Wall. Even as late as 50 years
ago, Jews were denied access to the Western Wall. Let
me therefore be very clear. The leaders of countries
that oppress minorities, jail journalists and quash all
opposition have no right to lecture Israel. The leaders
of countries poisoned by violent anti-Semitism cannot
condemn Israel for the so-called lack of tolerance
and acceptance.

Let me repeat what we have said time and again.
Jerusalem, under a sovereign Israel, is more free and
open to people of all religions than at any other time
in history. We pledge to ensure that all people, of all
religions, will continue to be able to freely practice their
faith - in Jerusalem and throughout our entire country.

Last year, as the Security Council voted on
resolution 2334 (2016), I held up a Bible and reminded
members of the thousands of years of Jewish history
and presence in Jerusalem. This year, facing another
resolution attempting to deny the truth, we will fight
back once more. The members of the Council can
vote again and again - hundreds and hundreds more
times - to denounce our presence in Jerusalem, but
they will never succeed in changing the Bible. The
Council cannot rewrite history.

Not long ago, the Lubavitcher Rebbe, a wise Jewish
leader, called the United Nations a house of darkness
and lies. But he also noted that with just one small
candle of truth, one could turn the darkness into light.
We will continue to light the candle of truth.

Tonight, millions ofJews around the world will light
the seventh candle of Hanukkah. They will celebrate
the unbreakable bond between the Jewish people and
our eternal capital, Jerusalem. Now is the time for all
countries to finally recognize that Jerusalem is, always
has been and always will be the capital of the Jewish
people and the State of Israel.

