Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): It is
my pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I also congratulate the Ambassador of
Mali, your predecessor, on presiding over the Council
last month. May I furthermore express our sincere
thanks to you, Sir, for convening this meeting, which
returns to the questions of Al-Quds Al-Sharif and the
occupied Arab territories in the Security Council once
again. Whatever efforts are made to find a solution to
the Arab-Israeli dispute outside the United Nations, the
resolutions of the Security Council remain the only
international legitimacy that must not be violated.

Israel's challenge to the Security Council,
through a law annexing Jerusalem, Al-Quds, planted
the seeds of the violence raging today. The provocative
visit by Ariel Sharon to Al-Haram Al-Sharif was
directly responsible for the eruption of violence.
However, the acts of war waged by Israeli forces
against defenceless Palestinians, including children,
have gone beyond anything imaginable. More than 50
Palestinians have been slain through the use by the
Israeli forces of live ammunition, heavy weaponry and
helicopters. This is undoubtedly a flagrant violation of
the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.

In this regard, Mr. Abdul-Qader Ba-Jammal,
Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of the
Republic of Yemen, has declared:

"The Government of Yemen has followed
with deep concern the bloody confrontations in
the courtyard of Al-Aqsa Al-Sharif following the
provocative visit by Ariel Sharon to the site with
the objective of exploding the situation in the
occupied territories and preventing the
continuation of the peace process as well as the
implementation of all international resolutions
obligating Israel to withdraw from all Arab
occupied territories."

The Government of Yemen believes that the
reluctance shown by the Barak Administration and its
continuous reneging on its obligations was the reason
for the aggressive behaviour by the Israeli extremist
right and these acts of provocation and aggression
vis-a-Vis the Palestinian people and Islamic shrines.
The Republic of Yemen, while roundly condemning the
barbaric massacre by the Israeli armed forces, places
squarely on the shoulders of Israel and the Barak
Administration the responsibility for the deteriorating
situation and the escalating feelings of frustration and
despair among the Palestinian people. We call on the
Security Council to put an end to the aggressive
military acts by Israel. We call on the Security Council
to reaffirm the need for a comprehensive solution,
including a solution to the status of the city of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif.

Finally, despite the seriousness of these most
regrettable events, we must continue to make efforts
for peace. We must strive towards a just,
comprehensive and durable peace, a peace that takes
into consideration the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people and promotes peace and security,
both regionally and internationally.

