Mr. Ndong Ella (Gabon) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes your initiative, Mr. President, to
organize this high-level debate on the important issue
of the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.

Gabon fully appreciates the untiring commitment
and mobilization of the Security Council and the efforts
and determination on the part of the Secretary-General,
which amply demonstrate the particular interest that
they accord to that matter. I take this opportunity to pay
heartfelt tribute to the Blue Helmets and humanitarian
organizations, including the International Committee
of the Red Cross, who work every day and risk their
lives to protect and provide for the needs of civilians in
situations of very complicated conflicts.

As the Council is aware, civilians, especially
women and children, are the main targets of the
abuses committed in armed conflict situations.
They are particularly subject to violence, sexual
slavery, hostage-taking, discrimination and other
forms of abuse that constitute serious violations of
international law and human rights. Gabon therefore
endorses the recommendations of the latest report of
the Secretary-General (S/2015/453), published in June
2015, which highlights the fact that civilian populations
are increasingly becoming the targets of attacks in
armed conflicts. The same endorsement applies to
the recommendations contained in the report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(see S/2015/446), which underscores the limits of
humanitarian action with regard to the intensity and
complexity of conflicts. Gabon, under the leadership of
His Excellency Mr. Ali Bongo Ondimba, President of
the Republic and Head of State, attaches high priority
at all times and in all circumstances to the protection
of vulnerable populations, especially women, children,
the disabled and the elderly.

As we recalled during the debate on the question
woman and peace and security (see S/PV.7534), the
protection of civilians is the primary responsibility
of states themselves, in times of peace and during
armed conflict. Beyond the responsibility of States,
the protection of civilians must be exercised within
conflict zones and at the very heart of peace operations.
Concerning the first point, it is important to provide
peacekeeping missions with a robust mandate to protect
civilians in line with the realities on the ground. That
is already the case in the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic must reach full
operational capacity through a robust mandate, as well.
Moreover, that reflects one of the recommendations
adopted by the Heads of State and Government at the
Extraordinary Summit of the Economic Community of
Central African States held in Gabon on 25 November
2015. Similarly, it is necessary for the Security Council
to strengthen its own sanctions mechanisms against
State and non-State actors guilty of abuses against
civilians.
We regret the increasing number of cases of sexual
abuse and exploitation perpetrated by the very people
who are supposed to ensure the protection civilians.
Gabon reiterates its full support of the Secretary-
General's new policy of zero tolerance. The protection
of civilians goes hand-in-hand withjustice. In that light,
soldiers and officers guilty of such heinous crimes must
be punished to set an example.

Prevention also requires that civilians can enjoy
effective protection. To that end, human rights must be at
the heart of prevention mechanisms more than ever. The
particular offices of peacekeeping operations devoted
to human rights, gender equality and the protection of
civilian populations must anticipate potential threats by
sounding the alarm to avoid any further degradation of
the situation. It is also in that context that the increased
participation of women in peacekeeping operations can
promote a climate of trust between peacekeepers and
local communities. Women's contribution could consist
of working with communities to provide psychological
support the victims ofviolence and seeing them through
to their full reintegration into their communities.

My delegation has the highest appreciation
for the role played by the United Nations via the
deploymnet of peacekeeping operations in war-torn
countries. Yet we must recognize that such missions
are dangerous and often unfortunately result in the
loss of numerous peacekeeping soldiers' lives. I take
this opportunity to condemn all attacks against Blue
Helmets, humanitarian workers and journalists, as
they constitute serious violations of the principles and
provisions of international humanitarian law.

In conclusioon, Gabon supports the call of the
Secretary-General call aimed at promoting the political
settlement of conflicts and ensuring the promotion of
human rights, the rule oflaw and good governance .

