Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We thank the Polish
presidency of the Council for organizing this high-level
open debate and appreciate the information and insights
shared by our briefers. We acknowledge the depth of
the statements delivered today and generally align
ourselves with most of the recurring themes that other
delegations have dwelled on. The importance of our
deliberations has been brought home once again by the
violence recently committed in the State of Palestine
and in other conflict situations around the world.

As a responsible, committed and contributing State
Member ofthe United Nations, Bangladesh underscores
the values and principles embedded in multilateralism
and international law in the promotion and maintenance
of international peace and security. In his address to
the General Assembly in 1974, the father of our nation,
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, said, "Peace
is an imperative for the survival of mankind... Peace
to endure must, however, be peace based upon justice"
(A/PV2243, para. 15).

Echoing his words, our Prime Minister, Sheikh
Hasina, speaking in 2012 at the high-level meeting of
the General Assembly on the rule of law at the national
and international levels, recognized

"the need to reaffirm humankind's faith in the just,
equitable and fair application of the rule of law, the
Charter of the United Nations and its principles
of justice and international law and the Statute of
the International Court of Justice for the peaceful
settlement of disputes." (A/67/PV3, p32)

She then reiterated a fundamental premise of our
advocacy for a rules-based multilateral system.
"To have ajust world order based on the rule oflaw,
powerful nations must respect international legal
systems and multilateral treaties and support the
fair and just application of customary international
law in the multilateral decision-making process.
A greater voice and representation for developing
countries in major global institutions are vital
to ensuring the principle of equity." (ibid., p33)

In keeping with our leadership's commitment to the
promotion of international law, we have consistently
had recourse to international legal and dispute
settlement mechanisms to resolve outstanding political
or trade-related issues with our neighbours and other
countries. Our initiative to settle our long-standing
maritime boundary delimitation issue with India and
Myanmar through legal, peaceful means is a particular
case in point.

It has been generally acknowledged that in
fulfilling its primary mandate for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council
has a mixed record ofusing the tools available to it under
the Charter of the United Nations and international law
for promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes. The
Council has set a number of useful precedents during
its long history, but it has failed to replicate those in
other, comparable situations owing to a number of
factors. We have reason to believe that while there is
indeed scope for innovative approaches, the Council
may find it useful to take a closer look into its own
annals in order to examine the context and efficacy of
its use of the various tools and resources at its disposal
in specific circumstances.

Bangladesh is currently dealing with the
overwhelming Rohingya humanitarian crisis, which
Council members recently had the occasion to witness
first-hand. The forcibly displaced Rohingya had a
coherent and consistent narrative to share about the
atrocity crimes they were subjected to at the hands
of Myanmar's security forces and local extremist
elements. They made a strong plea for justice and
accountability to Council members. Since the renewed
eruption of violence against the Rohingya last year,
nearly eight months on, a culture of impunity seems
to be taking hold in Myanmar yet again. Beyond some
lip service about bringing the perpetrators of violence
to justice, the Myanmar authorities have conducted
no credible independent investigation or prosecution.
On the contrary, any incidence of large-scale violence
or persecution has been repeatedly denied by the
responsible quarters.

It is now widely recognized that the question of
justice and accountability for the crimes committed
against the Rohingya, including what the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights has termed a
textbook case of ethnic cleansing, is inextricably linked
to the issue of creating a situation that is conducive to
their safe, dignified and voluntary return to Rakhine
state. Probably in order to deny that fundamental reality,
the Myanmar authorities have resorted to one of their
long-standing methods, which is shifting the onus onto
Bangladesh, this time for our alleged non-cooperation
in the resumption of repatriation. We urge all Council
members to also seriously consider the Rohingya crisis
in the context of accountability and justice. For the first
time, the Secretary-General's report on conflict-related
sexual violence (S/2018/250) cited the Myanmar Armed
Forces for the alleged crimes documented by his Special
Representative. The Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court has requested a ruling by the Court on
its jurisdiction with regard to the forced deportation of
the Rohingya to Bangladesh, which is a State party to
the Rome Statute.

Regrettably, the Human Rights Council's fact-
finding mission continues to be denied access to
Myanmar, including Rakhine state. In line with the
Human Rights Council, many Member States, including
some Security Council members, are interested in
exploring the possibility of setting up an international,
impartial and independent mechanism for investigating
and documenting the crimes committed against the
Rohingya. Against that backdrop, we want to once again
remind the Council about the range of tools and options
available to it for effectively pursuing the question
of accountability with the Myanmar authorities. The
inhumane suffering of the Rohingya should ensure
that no Member State considers a culture of impunity
acceptable in the absence of effective, demonstrable
action by the Council in response to gross violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.

