Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): We
welcome Mr. Jan Kubis to the Security Council once
again and thank him for his briefing. We also thank
Ambassador Tanin for his remarks today.

To begin, I want to extend my Government's
condolences to the families and friends of the United
Nations personnel who, on 17 January, were killed by
a suicide bomber at a restaurant in Kabul. That attack
also claimed the lives of three United States citizens
and the local representative of the International
Monetary Fund. The tragedy reminds us of the need
to recognize and support the many dedicated men and
women from the United Nations and other international
organizations, international civil society and coalition
military forces who work every day to support the
Afghan people as they strive to build a more peaceful,
democratic and prosperous homeland.

On 5 April, Afghan citizens will head to the
polls, at a time of both rising promise and ongoing
challenges. That historic balloting can pave the way for
Afghanistan's first peaceful and democratic transfer of
political authority from one Head of State to another.

One of the best ways to ensure the credibility of the
elections is through independent monitoring. To that
end, more than 12,000 Afghan observers are expected
to have a role in verifying the integrity of the process.
The Independent Election Commission (IEC) is also
inviting international observers. We encourage the IEC
and the Afghan National Security Forces to do all they
can to ensure access for voters, observers and party
representatives to all polling centres, including those in
remote and high-risk areas.

In particular, we call on all authorities to ensure
that women are able to participate as voters, candidates,
observers and election officials in a meaningful way.
Credible, transparent and inclusive elections will
pave the way to democratic progress in Afghanistan.
A successful transfer of presidential power this year
following democratic elections will solidify the gains
made over the past 12 years and contribute much to the
country's future development and stability. It will also
show all Afghans, including the Taliban, that the rule
of law matters and that Afghanistan's constitutional
system is resilient enough to overcome grave obstacles.

For its part, the United States Government will
provide nearly $100 million to facilitate the April
elections through a variety of programmes, including
monitoring and observation. I emphasize that my
Government strongly supports the democratic process
but that we neither favour nor oppose any particular
candidate. It is up to the Afghan people, and only the
Afghan people, to choose their leaders.

This morning, the United States was pleased to join
the Security Council in extending the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for
another year, with its core mandate intact. That renewal
will enable the Mission to meet the challenges of the
ongoing transition period, particularly through support
for the political process and regional diplomacy,
coordinating humanitarian and other assistance, human
rights monitoring, institution-building and capacity
development.

Of course, UNAMA's support alone cannot
guarantee success. The international community
as a whole has made a long-term commitment to
Afghanistan. My Government welcomes the engagement
of the Heart of Asia countries, including their effort to
further integrate Afghanistan's economy through the
Istanbul Process. Regional support will also be critical
in supporting Afghanistan's democratic transition and
Afghan-led efforts at internal reconciliation.

We should be under no illusions. Serious security
threats remain in Afghanistan, including attacks by
extremist elements against humanitarian aid workers
and other Afghan and international civilian personnel.
We deplore such attacks, which are wholly destructive
in purpose and clearly contrary to the well-being of
the Afghan people. We call upon all parties to join
in condemning those crimes, seeking accountability
for them and striving to prevent them. The citizens
of Afghanistan deserve to live in safety, with full
and unimpeded access to humanitarian assistance,
including food, shelter, health services and emergency
trauma care.

Over the past dozen years, Afghanistan has been
the scene of incredible turbulence, a drama touched by
tragedy but held aloft by hope. The country now stands
on the threshold of a historic election, facing great
challenges and yet bolstered by the productive energy
of a population that is eager to build a more democratic
and prosperous future. The United Nations should be
proud of the role it has played in helping the Afghan
people to lay the groundwork for such a future, and we
should be determined to continue that vital effort in the
months and years to come.

