Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
Once again for the record, let me just say that United
States actions in this particular case are consistent with
international law as well as with our domestic legal
framework, which provides for due process and various
constitutional safeguards. As in democracies around
the world that follow the rule of law, these safeguards
provide that an individual cannot be brought to trial or
extradited unless sufficient evidence has established
that he committed the offence charged. In the United
States, this standard is described as probable cause.

I should like to give the Council a brief overview
of the steps the United States has taken with respect to
Posada within this legal framework.

Posada entered the United States illegally in early
2005. Posada was detained by United States
immigration authorities on 17 May 2005 and placed in
removal proceedings in accordance with United States
law. The immigration judge who handled the removal
proceedings ordered that Posada be removed from the
United States on 27 September 2005. This order remains
in effect. The United States has been seeking ways to
carry out the terms of the order, consistent with United
States regulations that implement our obligations under
the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.

Moreover, the United States sought and obtained
a criminal indictment charging Posada with violations
of our immigration laws. On 8 April 2009, the new
criminal charges were brought against Posada in that
case, accusing him of lying about his involvement in
certain terrorist bombings in Havana. Trial in the case
is currently pending.

In the meantime, Posada remains subject to the
order of removal issued by the immigration judge and
is without legal status in the United States. He is also
subject to an order of supervision from the Department
of Homeland Security, Immigration and Customs
Enforcement, which imposes certain restrictions on
Posada, including reporting and monitoring
requirements.

In sum, with respect to Posada, the United States
continues to be engaged in an ongoing series of actions
consistent with our legal requirements and due process.

