Mr. Koncke (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me, first of all, to convey my delegation's satisfaction
to see the Permanent Representative of Spain in the
presidency of the Security Council. I would also like
to extend my condolences to the United Nations and
the Government of Brazil on the passing of Lieutenant
General Jaborandy.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Haiti, which includes Argentina, Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, France, Guatemala, Peru,
United States of America, Venezuela and my country,
Uruguay. I commend you, Mr. President, for organizing
this debate to discuss the recent report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) (S/2015/667). The Group of
Friends welcomes the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honore, and
thanks her for her comprehensive briefing and for all
her hard work.

Strengthening the rule of law and democratic
institutions, establishing a political culture conducive
to democratic stability and improving socioeconomic
conditions are the key elements needed to achieve
greater stability and prosperity in Haiti. In that regard,
the Group of Friends welcomes the organization of the
first round of legislative elections that took place on
9 August 2015 in a relatively peaceful environment.
We acknowledge the steps taken by the Haitian
institutions to take corrective measures to address the
irregularities identified and to improve the upcoming
rounds of elections. We also note the important role
that the Government of Haiti, the Electoral Council
and the political parties must play in ensuring that the
upcoming round of elections are conducted in a free,
fair, peaceful and democratic manner and in accordance
with the electoral law.

The Group of Friends calls on all Haitian
stakeholders to engage constructively, exercise
maximum restraint and work peacefully together in
order to maintain confidence in the electoral process.
It also welcomes the efforts carried out by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in that regard.
The Group also welcomes Ms. Honore's efforts to
promote an ongoing dialogue among all national
stakeholders aimed at strengthening the ongoing
political process and mitigating the risk to Haitian
democratic institutions. We thank her also for her
efforts to convince the diplomatic and international
community to continue contributing in a coordinated
manner so as to encourage political dialogue.

The Group ofFriends recalls the Security Council's
mission to Haiti in January 2015, which was conducted
in accordance with the provisions of its terms of
reference (S/2015/40) and whose primary objective
was to reaffirm the continued support of the Council
for the Government and people of Haiti, highlighting
the importance of an inclusive and constructive climate
for political stability, democratic governance and
development, and urging all political parties to work
cooperatively.

The Group of Friends recognizes that the security
situation in Haiti is generally stable and underscores
the importance of condition-based security-related
decisions about the future ofMINUSTAH. We also note
that incidents of sporadic violence occurred during the
first round of elections, although no increase was noted
in the levels of insecurity or violence in the departments
from which the military component had withdrawn.

The Group recognizes the increased capacity of the
Haitian National Police, and believes that the presence
of MINUSTAH remains important for ensuring
security and stability in Haiti. In the light of Haiti's
current security challenges, including those related
to the current elections, the Secretary-General should
continue to closely monitor the situation on the ground.
In accordance with his latest report, the Secretary-
General should conduct a strategic assessment
mission to Haiti, preferably within 90 days after the
inauguration of the new President and ideally after the
formation of a new Government, so as to be able to
present recommendations to the Council on the future
presence and role of the United Nations in Haiti.

The Group of Friends reiterates the importance of
the commitment on the part of the Government of the
Haiti to strengthen the rule of law and to make further
progress in strengthening the judiciary and security
sectors. In that regard, the Group would like to welcome
the ongoing strengthening, professionalization and
reform of the Haitian National Police, and we reiterate
that capacity-building in the form of police training
should remain the most critical task for MINUSTAH.
We also note the partial progress in the implementation
of the five-year Haitian National Police Development
Plan (2012-2016). The Group of Friends acknowledges
the progress in the judicial sector. However, it is urgently
necessary to reduce lengthy pretrial detentions and to
eliminate inhumane conditions of detention. We have to
achieve accountability and end impunity, including for
past human rights violations. The Group ofFriends also
calls on the Ministry of Justice to continue its efforts
to deal with the issue of prolonged pretrial detention.
In that connection, the Group of Friends welcomes
Operation "Coup de Poing".

Despite the willingness shown by the Haitian
authorities to engage with international human rights
mechanisms, the limited national capacity for human
rights protection remains a concern, as well as the fact
that the new Government no longer includes a Minister/
Delegate for Human Rights and Extreme Poverty. The
Group of Friends notes the launching of the national
policy of the Haitian Government on equality between
women and men.

The Group of Friends notes the continuing work
done by the Government of Haiti, MINUSTAH and
others to protect members of vulnerable groups,
and calls for greater attention by all stakeholders
to the prevention of and reduction in violent crimes,
particularly against women and children, including
rape and other crimes of sexual violence. The Group
of Friends notes with concern the increasing number
of reported rapes in the past two reporting periods. We
also urge Haitian citizens to continue reporting such
crimes so that the allegations can be investigated and
those responsible can be held to account. In that sense,
the Group also supports ongoing efforts to reduce
violence by promoting the well-being of at-risk youth
and vulnerable communities. The Group of Friends
continues to support the attention accorded to gender
issues and to child protection.

The Group of Friends also expresses concerns
about the continuing humanitarian challenges,
including living conditions in the remaining camps
for internally displaced persons (IDPs). The Group of
Friends welcomes the significant progress made during
2015 regarding the resettlement of people displaced by
the 2010 earthquake, but it should be underscored that
the funding to provide basic services and relocation
subsidies for the remaining IDPs is no longer available.
The Group of Friends notes with concern that food
insecurity as a result of the drought and the resulting
decrease in the harvest during the period from March
to June could impact the humanitarian situation and
stability.

The ongoing efforts to eliminate the cholera
epidemic remind us of the importance of sustaining
cooperation between the international community and
the Government of Haiti so as to meet the needs of the
Haitian people. In this regard, the Group recalls the
United Nations two-year plan focused on short-term
actions in support of the lO-year national plan for the
elimination of cholera in Haiti. Likewise, the Group of
Friends of Haiti acknowledges the efforts of the donor
community and calls upon donors to fulfil without
delay the pledges made.

The Group of Friends welcomes the first meeting of
the High-level Committee on Cholera since the change
of Government that took place in January, co-chaired by
Prime Minister Evans Paul and Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Sandra Honore', and notes that
the increase in cholera cases reported at the end of 2014
and in the first four months of 2015 began showing
signs of reversal in May. Unfortunately, the situation
remains of concern in the departments of Quest, Centre,
Artibonite and Nord, which accounted for more than
80 per cent of the total number of cases between March
and August.

The Group of Friends of Haiti reiterates its
commitment to the United Nations zero-tolerance
policy of sexual exploitation and abuse, and in this
regard expects all United Nations personnel to adhere
to the highest standards of conduct. The Group urges
all actors involved to assume their responsibilities in
order to prevent such cases, investigate allegations and
hold those responsible accountable.

The Group notes with concern that the International
Monetary Fund reports that the reduction of international
cooperation could put growth in Haiti significantly at
risk. The Group is also concerned about alarming and
persistent food insecurity in the country and the limited
capacity of the State to generate revenues, which greatly
affects the public finances.

The Group stresses that there can be no genuine
stability or sustainable development in Haiti without
strengthened democratic institutions and credible
democratic processes. In that context, the Group
emphasizes the importance of promoting the rule of
law through the strengthening of Haitian institutions,
and further reaffirms the responsibility of MINUSTAH
for supporting the Haitian State by promoting improved
governance structures, the extension of State authority
and the promotion and protection of human rights, in
accordance with its mandate.

The Group of Friends reaffirms its solidarity
with and commitment to the people and Government
of Haiti in their pursuit of stability, reconstruction,
recovery, socioeconomic development and democratic
consolidation.

The Group of Friends of Haiti acknowledges the
important role of MINUSTAH in ensuring stability
and security in Haiti, and expresses its support for and
recognition to the women and men of MINUSTAH for
their dedication and tireless efforts to support recovery
and stability in Haiti.
