Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
the risk that non-State actors, in particular terrorist
groups, could gain access to such weapons constitute
one of the most serious threats of our time. Switzerland
believes that there is an urgent need to contain that
threat, which concerns the entire international
community.

In principle, legislative obligations, such as those
foreseen in the draft resolution under discussion,
should be established through multilateral treaties, in
whose elaboration all States can participate. It is
acceptable for the Security Council to assume such a
legislative role only in exceptional circumstances and
in response to an urgent need.

As the draft resolution under discussion contains
obligations that affect all Member States, it must be
drafted with the greatest possible transparency. It is
this concern for transparency that has led Switzerland
to support the request for an open debate. Given the
nature and scope of the draft resolution, the measures
provided for should be understood as a provisional
regime, and thus be subject to review after a certain
period of time, in light of the experience gained. In
addition, from the outset, there needs to be maximum
clarity with respect to the scope of the obligations
imposed on Member States. In this respect, Switzerland
is of the opinion that a number of concepts contained in
the draft resolution are not sufficiently precise. This is
the case for example in the operative paragraph 2 of the
draft resolution, where reference is made to
"appropriate and effective laws".

As for the monitoring of the implementation of
the resolution, it must also be clearly defined. In our
view, the fact that the draft resolution is based on
Chapter VII of the Charter cannot be understood as a
pre-authorization for States to resort to unilateral
sanctions. In other words, the monitoring of the
implementation must be carried out within a
multilateral framework. In this respect, Switzerland
welcomes the establishment of a committee of the
Security Council. It is important therefore that the
committee and the Security Council work closely with
existing competent organizations in this area.

Moreover, there needs to be consideration as to
whether the subject matter dealt with in the draft
resolution should not, at least in the medium term, be
contained in an international instrument, which would
be developed in a broader framework. This would
allow all interested States to participate, on an equal
footing, in defining and monitoring this non-
proliferation regime.

In the future, efforts to counter the proliferation
of WMD must also focus more closely on
strengthening verification procedures and instruments.
It would be therefore be positive to see this aspect be
given greater consideration in the draft resolution.

Finally, Switzerland welcomes the fact that the
preambular portion of the draft resolution explicitly
reminds Member States of their obligations concerning
arms control and disarmament. In our view, this aspect
merits even greater attention. The long-term aim is, and
must remain, the complete elimination of WMD. To
achieve this aim, all States must fully meet their
obligations under the relevant conventions.

