Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2166 (2014). We commend Australia, and
more specifically my colleague Julie Bishop, for having
taken the initiative to prepare this important decision of
the Council.

Luxembourg voted in favour of the resolution and
co-sponsored it for three reasons: to condemn in the
strongest terms the downing of a civilian aircraft of
Malaysia Airlines above Donetsk oblast, Ukraine, on
17 July; to express our solidarity with the families and
friends of the victims who were on board of Flight
MH-l7, as well as with their countries of origin; and
finally, to express our support for the ongoing efforts to
shed light on this catastrophe through a full, thorough
and independent international investigation in
accordance with international civil aviation guidelines.
Such an investigation is the only way to determine who
is responsible for this unspeakable act.

Despite everything that divides us on the crisis
concerning Ukraine, the Security Council was finally
able to reach a consensus on the resolution. That was
the least we could do to honour the memory of the 298
victims of this catastrophe - 298 lives lost to a crisis
for which they bore no responsibility whatsoever and
that has gone on for too long.

On behalf of the people and the Government of
Luxembourg, I would like to express our most sincere
condolences to the families and friends of the 298
individuals who were on board of Flight MH-17. Among
the victims was a family living in Luxembourg - an
Anglo-Dutch couple and two of their sons, aged 12 and
14. We share the grief of the people and Governments
of the Netherlands, Malaysia, Australia, Indonesia, the
United Kingdom, Germany, Belgium, the Philippines,
Canada, New Zealand, South Africa, the United States,
Ireland and Viet Nam. Allow me to express a special
thought for the Netherlands, a country with which
we have close ties and which has been struck in a
particularly cruel manner by this catastrophe. I salute
my colleague and friend, Minister of Foreign Affairs
Frans Timmermans, who is with us today, and I assure
him of our fraternal support in this difficult time.

Everything must now be done for the full
implementation of the resolution we have just adopted.
We must support the efforts being undertaken by
Ukraine - in coordination with the International
Civil Aviation Organization and international
experts, including representatives of States that have
lost nationals on board the aircraft - to institute an
international investigation into the downing of Flight
MH-17.

The behaviour of illegal armed groups present
on the scene of the disaster is unacceptable. Those
groups must comply with the demands of the Security
Council and immediately provide safe, secure,
full and unrestricted access to the crash site near
the village of Grabovo, in eastern Ukraine, to the
appropriate investigating authorities, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
special monitoring mission, and representatives of
other relevant international organizations. The illegal
armed groups must refrain from any further action
that could compromise the integrity of the crash site,
and immediately cease all military activities in the
immediate area surrounding it. We welcome in this
regard the decision by President Poroshenko to declare,
with immediate effect, a unilateral ceasefire in a radius
of 40 kilometres around the scene of the tragedy.

Resolution 2166 (2014) clearly underscores
that the bodies of the victims must be treated in a
dignified, respectful and professional manner. All
parties concerned must ensure that that requirement is
immediately observed.
We call on the Russian Federation to actively and
unremittingly use its influence on the illegal armed
groups so that they cease their actions and despicable
manoeuvres to prevent a genuine and appropriate
investigation. The Russian Federation must immediately
bring its full weight to bear on those groups so that
they cease to obstruct the investigation and to remove
compelling evidence, in particular the remains of the
missile used to bring down the plane. The bodies of the
victims must be returned to their families and the black
boxes must be handed over to the competent authorities.

The international investigation into the tragic
incident of 17 July must establish the facts and
responsibilities. In the resolution just adopted, the
Council rightly demands that those responsible for the
incident be held to account for that heinous act and that
all States fully cooperate with the efforts to establish
responsibility. The Security Council must remain
vigilant in that regard on the basis of the reports on the
investigation made to it by the Secretary-General. We
owe it to the victims and their families that justice be
done and that the perpetrators of that criminal act be
held accountable.

The deaths of 298 innocent human beings leave a
huge void. That disaster cruelly reminds us of the urgent
need to achieve a de-escalation of tensions in eastern
Ukraine. The crisis has lasted too long. Its toll in terms
of the loss of human lives is mounting every day. We
must step up diplomatic efforts to find a solution to the
crisis. The first priority is to establish a true and lasting
ceasefire that is observed by all parties in order to
create the necessary conditions for the implementation
of President Poroshenko's peace plan.

In that regard, we welcome the efforts of France
and Germany, as well as the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, to promote dialogue
between Russia and Ukraine. It is high time that all
stakeholders, in particular the Russian Federation,
cooperate in good faith in order to put an end to the
crisis and so that 17 July appears in the history books
as a day marked not only by the tragic deaths of 298
innocent people but also as a decisive turning point in
settling the Ukrainian crisis.

