Mr. Fulci (Italy): At the outset I wish to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of December. I am sure that
under your skilful and experienced guidance our work this
month will be smooth and fruitful. I also wish to assure you
of the full cooperation of the whole Italian delegation.

At the same time, I should like to thank very warmly
Ambassador Salim Al-Khussaiby, the Permanent
Representative of Oman, for a most successful and
prestigious presidency for the month of November.

Like other members of the Council, I should like to
underline that it is very important that today the Security
Council was able to adopt a resolution to renew the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Rwanda (UNAMIR) for three months. Failure to do so
could have jeopardized the prospect of further normalization
and increased stability in the Great Lakes region.

In the past 12 months, the situation in Rwanda has
steadily normalized. Significant progress has been made in
many sectors of the country's life, with the resumption of
productive activity, the first steps towards re-establishing
the judiciary and improvement in the humanitarian
situation. The Rwandese Government deserves credit for
these results.

On the other hand, many serious problems remain
unresolved. They are, first, the question of refugee

 

repatriation; secondly, bringing to justice those
responsible for the genocide - although we welcome the
fact that today a first order was issued for the arrest of
one of the guilty; thirdly, conditions of life in the prisons,
which are barely at the subsistence level; and, fourthly,
the urgent need to fully reactivate the judicial system.

All these issues must be addressed. Ending the
United Nations Mission to Rwanda would certainly not
have helped the United Nations to mobilize the support
and the international assistance needed to address the
foregoing issues and to rebuild the country or ease the
growing tension in the Great Lakes region.

Moreover, to achieve the common goal of the
voluntary repatriation of refugees, which, let us recall,
Rwanda and other interested countries solemnly pledged
to do at the Cairo conference, a climate of trust and
confidence must prevail in the country and throughout the
region. The authorities and people of Rwanda are
undertaking the difficult job of reconstruction and
development after the devastation and horror of the
genocide. However, efforts in this direction cannot
produce any long-term effects until stability has been
assured both inside the country and on its borders. There
can be no development without peace, reconciliation and
stability.

We further wish to express our hope that in the next
three months a new relationship will be forged between
Rwanda, the United Nations and the international
community. Distrust and suspicion are certainly not the
ingredients that will help foster international cooperation
in the area, and the statement of our colleague from
Canada, Ambassador Robert Fowler, could not have been
more eloquent in this regard. Indeed, dialogue always
pays much more than confrontation, in all areas and in all
questions.

Italy remains convinced that the root causes of the
instability afflicting the Great Lakes region must be
radically addressed. While we welcomed the conference
in Cairo, we reiterate the need to convene a broad-ranging
conference on peace, stability and development in the
area, under the auspices of the United Nations and other
international organizations - and the sooner it takes
place, the better.

