Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): It gives me great pleasure to
report on the activities of the Ad Hoc Working Group
of the Security Council on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa. This briefing covers the period
from 1 January to 31 December. My predecessor
served as Chair of the Ad Hoc Working Group from
January 2017 until September 2018, when I took over
from him. The representative of Cote d'Ivoire served
as Vice-Chair throughout the reporting period. I would
like to commend both of them for their excellent work.

I should also note that my briefing has been
circulated to the members of the Ad Hoc Working
Group, who approve of it. For the sake of brevity, I will
highlight only some of its most important elements.

The Ad Hoc Working Group met on 9 February to
consider its activities for this year. Several members
expressed their support for holding meetings on
country-specific items. It was suggested that the Ad
Hoc Working Group could be guided by presidential
statement S/PRST/2018/1, which maps out a regional
approach to conflict prevention and resolution.
Members also suggested enhanced interaction between
the Ad Hoc Working Group and the Peacebuilding
Commission as a way to approach conflict prevention.
There was also a related suggestion for greater
interaction with representatives of regional and
subregional organizations. In the spirit of its mandate
to examine prevention, early warning and early action,
another recommendation was for the Working Group
to be flexible enough to take up items that are not
necessarily included in its provisional programme of
work. But others cautioned against the repetition of
meetings on the same topic. The members consequently
agreed to the provisional programme of work proposed
by the Chair.

In addition to its ongoing practice of dealing with
thematic issues raised by Member States, during the
reporting period the Ad Hoc Working Group held
useful discussions on three conflict-specific situations.
First, on 11 January, the Working Group held a meeting
on the challenges and the way forward concerning
the situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo.
Secondly, on 2 April, it discussed the challenges and
the way forward concerning the situation in Guinea-
Bissau. Thirdly, on 31 May, it considered how to avoid a
reversal ofthe gains made and sustain peace concerning
the situation in the Central African Republic. Those
discussions gave Member States a platform outside of
the Security Council to exchange their views frankly.
I can also say with confidence that those discussions
generated useful information to be provided for the
consideration of the Security Council.

The Working Group held a meeting on 8 June on
the way forward concerning cooperation between the
United Nations Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union (AU). That was
convened in connection with a visit to New York by
the Committee of Experts of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union for a workshop on
Security Council working methods, the United Nations
peace and security architecture and related issues
and cooperation between the Security Council and
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union.
Other attendees at the meeting included representatives
of the peace and security secretariat of the AU and the
United Nations Office to the African Union.

It was the first meeting of its kind and offered an
opportunity for useful exchanges between expert-level
representatives of member States of both Councils on
ways and means to strengthen their cooperation on
peace and security issues in Africa. Representatives
welcomed the meeting and stressed the importance of
continuing to improve cooperation. They underlined the
need to work towards a common understanding ofissues,
including the root causes of conflict, and suggested
enhanced information-sharing and cooperation
between the AU and the United Nations. They drew
attention to the need for cooperation with regard to the
timing of briefings and decision-making. Speakers also
suggested an institutionalization of exchanges between
the Chair of the Peace and Security Council of the
AU and the President of the United Nations Security
Council, possibly via video-teleconference, and a
harmonization of the programmes of work of the two
Councils. Speakers also emphasized the value of the
role of the African members of the Security Council in
conveying information to other members of the Council
about the work of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union.

Another important suggestion was to convene joint
consultative meetings between the members of the two
Councils in order to establish clearly defined topics
and be results-oriented. Exchanges on proposed agenda
items and draft joint communiques well ahead of the
meetings would allow representatives to concentrate on
their deliberations. Another proposal was for the two
Councils to hold more frequent meetings, including
via video-teleconference. Speakers also shared their
views on the twelfth annual joint consultative meeting
to be held the next month, calling for a slimmed-down
agenda, encouraging joint field visits and discussing
the modalities of such visits.

The Ad Hoc Working Group held a joint meeting
in July with the Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations on the theme "Institutional
reform of the African Union and its contribution in
enhancing Africa's capacity in the area of peace and
security". The meeting included a statement from
Mr. Donald Kaberuka, AU High Representative for
Financing of the African Union and the Peace Fund. He
outlined the ongoing reform processes at the African
Union and the Peace Fund - including its objectives
and financing - and highlighted the efforts to establish
a continental free trade area in Africa. Mr. Kaberuka
also emphasized the advantage of regional organizations
and their value for regional legitimacy, their experience
and local knowledge and their ability to act fast. He
pointed out the need to ensure that the African Union
had the capacity to benefit from those advantages,
adding that military means and financial resources
were not enough to build peace and stability. Economic
prosperity, job creation and development projects are
also needed. In the course of the discussion, members
commended reform efforts and identified areas that
should be highlighted and stressed the need to enhance
cooperation and improve the distribution of tasks
between the United Nations and the African Union.
They also underlined the difficulties presented by the
lack of sustained financial support for African Union
peace support operations.

In November, a joint meeting of experts from the
Ad Hoc Working Group and the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations considered the progress
of the African Union's human rights compliance
framework for AU peace support operations. They
were briefed by the Deputy Head of the Institutional
Reforms Unit and the Chief of the Policy Development
Unit of the Peace Support Operations Division
of the African Union Commission, as well as by
representatives of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Department of Field Support and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights. They provided updates on the African
Union's efforts with regard to the Peace Fund, financial
rules and regulations, predeployment training and the
compliance framework related to human rights and
sexual exploitation and abuse, as well as cooperation
between the African Union Commission and the United
Nations Secretariat. That meeting offered members an
opportunity to exchange views on those and related
issues, including the important question of financing
African Union peace support operations.

Throughout my own tenure in the Working Group,
as well as that of my predecessor, the significance of
country-specific discussions has been underscored.
In addition to thematic discussions, we have both
been clear about our hope that this would revitalize
the work of the Working Group. Our assessment is
that the country-specific meetings held into 2018
allowed for rich and constructive discussions. They
proved particularly useful when held prior to relevant
decision-making deliberations in the Security Council
or other bodies. The Chair strongly recommended that
the Working Group also continue to include country-
specific issues in the future programme of work. There
is no doubt that the Working Group continues to play an
essential role in facilitating preparation and exchanges
on joint consultative meetings and other activities of
the members of the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union.

The Chair of the Working Group would recall
that, in paragraph 18 of its resolution 2033 (2012),
the Security Council decided to follow up on the
communique' of the annual consultative meetings of the
two Councils, including through the Working Group.
The Chair strongly recommended that the Working
Group should continue to exercise that mandate. The
Chair also notes, in that respect, that the discussion
held with the members of the Committee of Experts of
the African Union Peace and Security Council in 2018
was indeed a valuable contribution to strengthening
cooperation between the two Councils on peace and
security issues in Africa. It specifically helped to
prepare for the twelfth joint consultative meeting, which
took place on 19 July this year. The Chair recommends
that opportunities to hold similar exchanges should be
encouraged in the future.

As we finish our term and hand over the
chairmanship of the ad hoc Working Group to South
Africa, I would like to wish Ambassador Jerry Matjila
of South Africa and his team all the best in the effective
discharge of their responsibilities. As I think our report
has made clear, the Ad Hoc Working Group is of
particular importance to Africa and to the relationship
between the United Nations Security Council and the
AU Peace and Security Council. I am confident that
Ambassador Matjila and his team will do everything
possible to enhance the role of the Working Group and
contribute to the further strengthening of cooperation
between the two Councils in the promotion and
maintenance of peace and security in Africa.

