Mr. Oshima: Before responding to the questions
raised, I would like to make a few observations.

First of all, I would like to thank the members of
the Council for the fact that the Council's attention has
been drawn afresh to the humanitarian situation and the
plight of the people in Angola, and to the urgent need
to take action to address that situation. That is very
important. I was also very heartened by the clear and
strong message that we heard in this Chamber - a
message that encourages the donor community to be
yet more generous in providing assistance to the
vulnerable population in Angola.

I also welcome the call by a number of Council
members on the Government to do more and to
implement the goals and strategies to which it is
attached, while acknowledging the actions it has
already taken to make more resources available for
humanitarian action.

A number of questions were asked about issues
that touch upon the daily humanitarian activities in
Angola. I would like to ask the Humanitarian
Coordinator for Angola, Erick de Mul, to answer some
of those questions. I would like first to say that my
planned mission to Angola, as well as that planned by
my deputy and, possibly, that of Under-Secretary-
General Gambari in the near future, will be coordinated
so as to take up priority issues with the Government of
Angola. Such questions will include access to the
vulnerable population; days of tranquillity, which have
been under consideration and discussion as a means of
addressing some specific requirements for polio
immunization; the issue of funding for projects and
programmes; the problem of infrastructure, which has
been explained; and the question of resettlement of
internally displaced persons, among other issues.

Another comment I would like to make is in
response to a specific question raised by the
Ambassador of Colombia relating to the position the
Government of Angola has taken with respect to the
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement. In
Angola, the Guiding Principles became the basis for
minimum standards for the resettlement of internally
displaced persons developed by the Government in
cooperation with United Nations agencies. In October
2000, the standards were adopted, in a decree of the
Council of Ministers signed by President dos Santos, as
norms for the resettlement of internally displaced
persons. A preambular paragraph states the that
Guiding Principles establish general principles
governing the treatment of internally displaced
persons. So they have been clearly incorporated in part
of the national legislation.

I would also like to touch on the question about
the way in which the Security Council might be useful
to the work of humanitarians. I think that the fact that
this meeting is being held today is in itself very
important, as I said earlier. The clearly enunciated
message from the Council about the need to do much
more in Angola for humanitarian purposes is surely
welcome. I would also like to think that the fact that
the Council is interested in keeping this issue under
review in a constant and sustained manner, rather than
just holding a hearing on it - and, indeed, its interest
in other severe emergencies in Africa and elsewhere -
is, in itself, very important for us humanitarians and, I
am sure, for the donor communities.

My office, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, stands ready to provide any
information or update that the Council may request in
this regard. As I indicated, my office will be working
very closely with Ambassador Gambari's office on the
Angolan situation.

Having made those comments, may I, with your
permission, Mr. President, ask Erick de Mul to speak.
He is a dedicated humanitarian with a long record of
distinguished service in a number of countries,
including Afghanistan, where -until very recently
when he moved to Angola- he was the United
Nations Humanitarian Coordinator.

