Mr. Tshibanda N'tungamulongo (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I would first
like to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for this month of March, and to
tell you how honoured we are to see France, a friendly
country, guiding the Council's deliberations today.
I thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak
before the Council at this meeting on the situation in
the Democratic Republic of Congo, an issue that is of
paramount importance to my country.

Allow me to take this opportunity to express once
again to the Council the gratitude of the people and
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for the efforts undertaken by the United Nations in order
to maintain the sovereignty and territorial integrity our
country and to guarantee its peace and stability. Finally,
I would like to pay a heartfelt tribute to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for the tireless concern he has
always demonstrated and for his personal involvement
in seeking and consolidating peace in my country.

Relations between the United Nations and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo go back to when
my country gained international sovereignty nearly
55 years ago, since when the United Nations and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have achieved so
many memorable things together. We are convinced
that history will show this much better than we are
able to do in just a few minutes today. These relations
have almost always been good, often excellent, if not
exemplary. Unfortunately, today we must recognize
that they are going through some difficulties. Our
greatest wish is that this difficult period should pass as
quickly as possible. The history of our country and our
common political will do not allow us to take any path
other than that of conciliation.

How could we not be convinced of this when we
know that it is specifically due to the partnership
between the United Nations and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo that the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of my country have been safeguarded, in
spite of all the covetousness and aggressions, be they
direct or by proxy? We see that peace, which is often
interrupted, has each time been re-established and then
consolidated, both in my country and throughout the
African Great Lakes region. We see each day a greater
consolidation of the State's authority and respect
for human rights in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, while free elections, the guarantors of strong
and credible institutions, are closer to becoming a
reality each day as the only way to access and preserve
public authority in my country. All the while, the
United Nations has reminded Member States of their
obligations under the terms of its Charter, including full
respect for democratic principles and the sanctity of the
principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of
other States.

We believe that in order to consolidate these gains,
we, the United Nations and the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, have the duty to
continue to work as a team and, to that end, to perpetuate
the spirit that has always characterized this partnership
and been a key factor of its effectiveness. It is a spirit
of dialogue and mutual respect, in accordance with the
principles of the Charter, including respect at all times
and in all circumstances of the intangible sovereignty
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. For its part,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo affirms loud and
clear it has always been and will always remain true to
that spirit.

There are four current sticking points in the
relations between the United Nations and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. They are, first, the
strategic review and the logical consequences following
therefrom, especially with regard to the transfer of
responsibilities from the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and the pace of the drawdown
of United Nations troops in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo; secondly, the forced disarmament of
the Rwandan rebels of the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda (FDLR); thirdly, the development
of the presence of Ugandan rebels of the Allied
Democratic Forces-National Army for the Liberation
of Uganda (ADF-NALU) in the north-east of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; and, fourthly, the
political consequences of the end of the Mouvement du
23 mars (M-23) rebellion.

In order to inform Council members, please
allow me to clarify the viewpoint of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo on these points in view of recent
developments in the security, political and economic
situations in the field. I note that the current situation
on the ground is improving daily. In terms of the
strategic review, I recall that the Organization has been
present in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, at our
request, since 1999, first in the form of a peacekeeping
mission and then as a stabilization mission. It has
deployed there and maintains about 20,000 troops,
including 3,000 of the Force Intervention Brigade,
which is specifically charged with supporting the
Forces armees de la Republique democratique du Congo
(FARDC) in neutralizing the negative forces in the east
of the country. We would also like to recall that, since
the very beginning, it has been agreed that the United
Nations contribution would be progressively reviewed
in View of a reduction as and when the security threats
were diminished and the FARDC achieved a level of
performance that enabled it to ensure the country's
security themselves.

When the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo arrived, almost
half of the country was living in insecurity and was
outside the effective control of the national authorities.
The country was divided into as many semi-autonomous
territories, administrations and armies as there were
rebel groups. Given the almost complete disintegration
of the State, the massive violations of human
rights - in particular the recruitment of child soldiers,
rape and other sexual violence - had reached a level
that shocked the human conscience.

Today, there are certainly still some pockets of
insecurity maintained by the Ugandan terrorists in
and around the town of Beni and North Kivu and by
Rwandan rebels of the FDLR in certain small areas of
North Kivu and South Kivu. However, everywhere else
in the country peace and security reign, including in
Ituri and to the north of Katanga. The few incidents
of disorder that have sporadically caused concern for
citizens, brought about by the activism of some lost
sheep, are law-and-order issues that have been brought
into line in one way or another.

Moreover, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
today there is a functioning State whose authority is
effectively exercised throughout almost all the national
territory. There are legitimate and effective institutions,
as evidenced by our economic performance, which
includes a 9.5 per cent growth in our gross domestic
product in 2014, which, in the opinion of credible
institutions such as the International Monetary Fund,
could reach 10 per cent in 2015; an inflation rate close
to zero; a stable exchange rate for the national currency;
steadily increasing international reserves and foreign
direct investment; the implementation of several
important reforms, as a result of which the country
has been ranked one of the top 10 reformer countries
in the world by the World Bank; and the rehabilitation
and construction, in less than 5 years, of more schools,
hospitals and kilometres of roads than over the previous
50 years.

There is an army that is actively being rebuilt and
whose continued increase in power is unquestionable.
The defeat of the M-23, the almost complete
neutralization of ADF-NALU and the ongoing
military operations against the FDLR are just some
of the irrefutable pieces of evidence to that effect.
Democracy is being established, with the first truly
free and democratic elections in our history held in
2006, legislative and presidential elections held on
time in 2011, the effective implementation of measures
for decentralization and local, municipal, urban,
provincial, senatorial, parliamentary and presidential
elections planned to be held in 2015 and 2016.

In View of this non-exhaustive list, any objective
observer must acknowledge that enormous work has
been done. The Democratic Republic of the Congo
is grateful to the United Nations for its invaluable
support in the pursuit and achievement of those results.
However, it also believes that the time has come for
it to fully shoulder its responsibilities with respect to
its security and that of its people. It therefore calls for
the Council to respond to this legitimate aspiration,
which is inseparable from the very notion of national
sovereignty.
In that regard, I wish to bring to the attention of
Council members the considerable efforts made by my
Government in terms of security sector reform. Those
efforts extend beyond officially defining a military
doctrine; developing a comprehensive reform plan;
Parliament adopting and the Head of State promulgating
all laws required for the army and national police;
appointing to command positions, in line with the new
architecture of both elements; and creating a quick
reaction force, which the Council wants and expects
and is already well under way.

It is in that context that one must view the
training and equiping of the following three brigades:
the 11th Brigade, which is famous for its victorious
operations against M-23 rebels and the ADF, under
the command of the late General Mamadou Ndala.
That Brigade is made up of three battalions that were
trained under a Chinese cooperation programme; the
21st Brigade, which is made up of three battalions
trained by South Africa and currently deployed in
Katanga; and the 31st Brigade, which is made up of
three battalions and whose soldiers were trained under
a Belgian cooperation programme, served in earlier
pacification operations in North Kivu and will soon be
deployed as part of the efforts to pursue the FDLR in
the Congolese forest.

In terms of the implementation of resolution 2147
(2014), on the forced disarmament of Rwandan FDLR
rebels, I would start by deploring the incident that
caused MONUSCO to not participate directly in that
disarmament, even though that was among the tasks that
our Organization was to accomplish in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. On this subject, I would like
to state that this situation did not arise because of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which did nothing
but note MONUSCO'S decision to suspend its support.
What is more, the Congolese authorities were not
informed, before their nomination to their posts, of the
fact that the officers in question were designated "red"
by the MONUSCO service.

I would like to further state that our country is
involved in all United Nations efforts for the promotion
and respect of human rights, so that is not at issue
here. Eloquent proof of that is the fact that at least a
third of the population in prisons in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is made up of elements from
the defence and security forces, officers and enlisted
men alike. That would not have been the case if we had
been complacent about them. That said, like any United
Nations Member State and in accordance with the
Charter, the Democratic Republic of the Congo wants
to maintain full autonomy in appointing its civilian
and military cadres. Only obstacles that have actually
been documented can, in full sovereignty, be taken into
account when appointments are made.

Despite MONUSCO's withdrawal of support, and
as it cannot Shirk its responsibilities, the FARDC has
launchedandiscurrentlycarryingoutmilitaryoperations
against the FDLR. To date, significant progress has
been made. Almost 200 combatants - including,
unfortunately, 91 child soldiers - have been arrested
or have given themselves up. Former strongholds such
as Mulenge, Kitoga, Kigogo, Kangova and Kashindaba
in South Kivu, and Kahumbu, Katemba, Kisoro and
Mulembe in North Kivu have been liberated. The
remaining rebel troops have plunged into the deep forest,
thus getting further from the Rwandan border, where
they sought to create insecurity in that neighbouring
country. Our troops are hot on their heels, and our
determination to eradicate that harmful force is such
that we will not cease operations until we achieve that
final result, whatever the cost in time and resources,
whether human, financial or material.

Regarding the evolution of the presence of Ugandan
ADF-NALU rebels in the north-east of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, I would like to state that
MONUSCO and FARDC have cooperated positively
since the rebels scattered and became lawless terrorists
with no other strategy than surprise attacks on isolated
villages, where they burn down huts and decapitate
their inhabitants before fleeing. We are currently in
the search stage. Everyone recognizes that Congolese
troops behave so as to bring honour to our country in
those operations.

I now come to the subject of the elimination of the
M-23 rebellion. That rebellion came to an end under
the Addis Ababa Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region and the conclusions of the Nairobi talks.
In accordance with the Framework agreement and the
conclusions of Nairobi, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has begun a process of political dialogue
through national consultations and has, in this respect
and following those consultations, declared amnesty
for acts of war, in particular those committed by former
M-23 rebels. Indeed, ofthe 1,678 former rebels who are
on the run and have taken refuge in Uganda and the
453 other refugees in Rwanda, 777 have at this stage
taken advantage of the amnesty law and 182 of those
have voluntarily returned to the country. Those who
remain in the two neighbouring countries are not there
because the Democratic Republic of the Congo will not
receive them or has not facilitated that process enough,
but rather because, as this repatriation is voluntary, that
decision must be made by the former M-23 combatants
themselves. Some of them, at this point, seem to prefer
to stay where they are. We are actively seeking to
convince them to return to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and we are counting on the international
community, and in particular the special envoys, to
help us achieve that.

To give the full picture of the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, I would like to
reiterate my Government's determination to adhere
more strongly than ever to the culture of democracy.
Therefore, after an open and rich debate, the national
independent electoral commission published a
comprehensive timetable for the upcoming elections.
At the same time, it set the budget necessary to hold
all elections in the election cycle. This demonstrates
our commitment to holding transparent, credible
and peaceful elections. We are confident that the
friends of the Democratic Republic of the Congo will
support us in this exercise in learning and deepening
of democracy in a climate of peace by avoiding any
interference that could add fuel to the fire. Their
financial support - offered in a timely manner and not
at the last minute i will contribute equally to that end.

In conclusion, we are ready to launch a strategic
dialogue with the United Nations on all the issues I have
raised today, with a view to achieving consensus before
the Council makes its decision. I wish to reiterate that
the FARDC's current high level of performance offers
an objective demonstration of our desire to negotiate
the gradual reduction of MONUSCO troops. We know
that our concept for this drawdown is shared by the
Organization and that it is only its scope and pace that
are up for discussion. We are convinced that when we
return on Monday, as scheduled, we will undoubtedly
be able to reach agreement and offer a consensual
proposal to the Council.

Finally, I reaffirm that the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has always enjoyed exemplary cooperation
with the United Nations and that it shall continue to do
so. We count on the United Nations to do its share to
that end.

