Mr. Neewor (Mauritius): We very much
appreciate the comprehensive briefing by Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno. We take note that
important progress has been made under the leadership
of Mr. Haekkerup to finalize the legal framework for
substantial autonomy for Kosovo within the mandate of
resolution 1244 (1999).

We welcome the talks between Mr. Haekkerup
and President Kostunica, who has agreed to urge
Kosovo Serbs to participate in the preparation of the
legal framework and in the elections. We regard such
dialogue as extremely important for proper
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).

Heeding the President's appeal to be brief, I will
comment very briefly on the elections. We believe that
for elections to be credible they must not only be free
and fair, but all communities must be able to
participate in them. That can happen only if conditions
of safety and security exist in which minority groups
can exercise their franchise freely and without fear or
hindrance. To that end, we consider the following
extremely important.

First, all refugees and internally displaced
persons should be encouraged to return to their homes.
Secondly, the voter registration process should take
care to access every potential voter, and the voter list
should be as thorough as possible. Thirdly, the legal
framework must be such that minority communities
feel assured that they will have full rights to adequate
representation from the very beginning, not only in the
legislature but also in the administration.

Taking into account that the elections in Kosovo
will undoubtedly have implications for the whole
region is another reason why we have to ensure that the
outcome of the Kosovo elections is fully credible by
any standard. There are other places where there are
multi-ethnic communities and in which democratic
elections do take place. I do believe that examples
available outside can be looked at by the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo in
working out the legal framework for Kosovo.

Finally, I hope that the Security Council will have
the opportunity to discuss the legal framework when
the draft is ready.

