Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): Last
Friday morning, the Security Council members
gathered in this Chamber for a briefing by the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process to brief us on the recent meeting of the Quartet
at United Nations Headquarters last week. Members of
the Council expressed their support for the statement
issued by the Quartet on 17 September 2002. That
statement described some of the concrete, practical and
forward-looking steps Quartet members, including
United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan, Russian
Foreign Minister Ivanov, European Union High
Representative Solana and Secretary of State Powell,
are taking with the parties to end violence and to
advance political negotiations aimed at realizing
President Bush's vision of two States, Israel and an
independent, viable and democratic Palestine, living
side by side in peace and security. The parties and key
regional Arab States also participated in the Quartet
meetings, which contributed to restoring confidence
and trust in the Middle East. The Quartet meeting
coincided with what appeared to be a terrorist bombing
at a Palestinian school near Hebron that wounded five
Palestinian children. The Quartet deplored and
condemned morally repugnant violence and terror.

Palestinian extremists reacted immediately to the
Quartet's efforts with more devastating acts of terror:
Hamas and the Palestinian Islamic Jihad competed in
their claims of responsibility for two suicide bombing
attacks in Israel on 18 and 19 September 2002. The
second, in Tel Aviv, killed six Israelis and one Scottish
national on a civilian bus. Sixty people were injured,
many of whom were mutilated by the blast. Nearly all
Security Council members condemned these attacks
publicly, and privately within the Security Council
consultations room. Most of the Governments
represented in this Chamber have also made timely
statements condemning these attacks and the groups
that continue to perpetrate them. We encourage others
to join us in condemning these acts of terror in the
strongest possible terms.

The United States is intensively engaged in
efforts to calm the situation in the Middle East. Israel's
recent actions in the Ramallah Muqata'a are not
helpful, either in achieving a lasting end to violence or
in promoting vital reforms. The United States has made
this clear at the highest levels of the Israeli
Government. It is essential that Israel consider
carefully the consequences of its actions and avoid
further measures that escalate rather than reduce
tension and violence. The further destruction by Israel
of the Palestinian Authority's remaining civilian and
security infrastructure will not improve Israel's
security situation; on the contrary, it will only set back
further the prospects for implementing the reforms
necessary to ensure real improvements in the
Palestinian Authority's security performance. It is also
likely to have serious negative consequences for
political stability in the West Bank and Gaza, and
therefore for the prospects of resuming the political
process.

The United States objectives are clear: ending
terrorism, promoting Palestinian civil reform, restoring
active security cooperation, alleviating the
humanitarian situation inside Palestinian areas and
working towards a resumption of a political dialogue
that leads to a lasting peace. Progress on these
objectives is critical to restoring trust and confidence
between the two sides. A common front, exemplified
by the Quartet and those that support its efforts, can
make a real difference in resolving the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. I call on all members of the
international community to support and encourage
steps on the ground that will contribute concretely and
objectively to meeting these objectives.

We will not support the adoption of a one-sided
text that fails to recognize that this conflict has two
sides, that fails to condemn acts of terror and the
groups that perpetrate them and that fails to call for the
dismantling of the networks that threaten all the people
of the Middle East, both Arab and Israeli.

