Mr. Chavez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): In turn, I
would like to express my gratitude for the statement
made by Minister Nqakula, the Facilitator of the
Burundi Peace Process, and to convey to him our
acknowledgement both to his country, South Africa,
and to the other countries of the region, for all the
efforts that they have deployed in order to support the
United Nations in the context of the peacebuilding
process in Burundi.

Like previous speakers, I would also like to
underscore that, as far as Peru is concerned, Burundi is
an important example for us. We need to ensure that
this becomes a successful example, and to that end we
support the work being undertaken by the
Peacebuilding Commission.

On this occasion, I would like to make the
following two brief comments in order to express the
fact that my delegation shares the ideas that were
outlined earlier by Minister Nqakula with regard to the
situation in Burundi. The first of these concerns the
fact that the Peace Agreements and the Comprehensive
Ceasefire Agreement, unfortunately, have not yet
created the confidence needed to make it possible to
establish dialogue and to build peace. In this regard,
the deadlock in the implementation of the ceasefire
agreed between the Government and the Forces
nationales de liberation (FNL) is a cause for concern.
We are of the view that greater efforts undertaken by
the neighbouring countries, and also by the African
Union, should be geared towards supporting both the
Government and the FNL in order to ensure that this
dialogue continues and to ensure that a climate of trust
can be established and to ensure that we do not return
to a cycle of violence. Dialogue, without conditions, is
necessary to ensure full compliance with the
Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement.

The Government should refrain from taking
actions that would undermine its positive interaction
with the FNL. At the same time, the FNL should
refrain from armed responses. Therefore, there is a
need to come up with creative mechanisms that can be
used in order to meet the requirements laid down in the

Agreement and to ensure that the FNL returns to the
Joint Verification Monitoring Mechanism, thus
avoiding an outbreak of hostilities.

We are convinced that a conflict would only
result in greater violations of human rights, would
increase instability and would further impede the
restoration of peace in Burundi. Without peace, it
would not be possible to rebuild the country, nor would
it be impossible to attract private investment, which is
crucial to allow Burundi to move in the right direction,
allowing it to rebuild its own economy.

The second comment made by Minister Nqakula
that I wish to touch upon is the comment indicating the
internal situation in the country. This situation is not
contributing greatly to the peace process. In this
context, we would also like to express our concern for
ensuring proper governance and democracy in Burundi.
There is a need to establish an inclusive, democratic
system, respectful of all parties. To that end, we
believe that the establishment of a system of robust
parties, in which opposition to the Government is
respected and in which freedom of the press is ensured
within the context of the law, is crucial.

We hope that the new Government will be
successful in its efforts to that end and will continue an
inclusive and transparent dialogue.

