Mr. Hoscheit (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, your presence at today's debate,
convened in such a timely manner by the Danish
presidency of the Security Council, stresses the
importance that we must attach to the subject that we
are discussing today.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The acceding countries Bulgaria and
Romania, the candidate countries Turkey and Croatia,
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Serbia and Montenegro, as
well as Ukraine, align themselves with this statement.

The European Union fully recognizes the need to
bridge the gap in United Nations machinery that exists
between the end of armed conflict and the resumption
of sustainable development through post-conflict
peacebuilding. Experience has shown that
peacebuilding activities are crucial to ensuring that
countries emerging from war avoid any relapse into
violence and conflict by assisting them in their
transition to lasting peace and long-term development.

Post-conflict scenarios are complex situations
calling for a comprehensive and coherent strategy
involving a variety of different needs, actors and tools
as well as a broad spectrum of activities such as the
protection of civilians, disarmament, demobilization,
the reintegration of combatants, security sector reform,
reconciliation, the rebuilding of institutions and of
basic infrastructures, as well as timely support for
sustainable social and economic development, the
establishment of effective and democratic governance,
respect for the rule of law and human rights, and the
full and equal participation of women, in accordance
with resolution 1325 (2000).

While outside assistance can be indispensable in
creating a secure environment, national ownership
allowing for an early involvement, including at the
planning stage, of actors at the local and national levels
in post-conflict peacebuilding activities and their
accountability for long-term development is equally
indispensable. That will help ensure the sustainability
of both the security environment and of subsequent
peacebuilding activities. International efforts to foster
ownership must build on local potential by using
existing resources as early as possible in the process.

To avoid any relapse caused by cross-border
interference, regional problems need regional solutions
as well as policies based on a regional perspective.
West Africa is probably the most telling example in
that context. Regional and subregional organizations
must participate in peacebuilding activities at the
earliest possible stage.

One challenge related to peacebuilding is
effectively to bring together the various actors,
instruments and capabilities based on their comparative
advantages. From the outset, special attention should
be given to avoid any duplication between the
activities carried out by integrated peacekeeping
operations and those falling under the purview of
United Nations specialized agencies and programmes,
as well as to the early involvement of the international
financial institutions. A further deepening of the
dialogue and practical cooperation between the United
Nations and other international or regional
organizations, including during the mission-planning
phase, is also needed.

The European Union, for its part, has used its
development policy and other cooperation programmes
to provide a basis for post-conflict reconstruction
activities. These constitute powerful instruments for
addressing the root causes of conflict and thus
preventing their re-emergence. The European Union,
which provides some 55 per cent of development
assistance, 66 per cent of grant assistance and around
55 per cent of humanitarian assistance worldwide, must
play - and is, indeed, playing - a lead role in
addressing post-conflict challenges.

The European Union is also striving to
consolidate post-conflict reconstruction processes

worldwide - often in close cooperation with the
United Nations or by supporting United Nations
operations - through a range of activities, including

institution-building, the rehabilitation of basic
infrastructure, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration activities (DDR) and security sector
reform, as well as through support for reconciliation
and regional integration processes, human rights and
democratization activities. But we can, and must,
improve our focus and the effectiveness of our actions.
We must be able to respond rapidly to specific
situations and adapt our response to the particular
circumstances, using the appropriate mix of
instruments. In every situation there is a risk that the
international community will assist only partly in the
process. Ongoing assistance must be guaranteed,
particularly with regard to DDR programmes.

In the area of civilian crisis management, the
European Union is active in a number of priority areas.
These include police training, since civilian police
have an important role to play in post-conflict
environments, promotion of the rule of law,
strengthening civilian administration, civil protection
and security sector reinforcement. Five operations,
involving the mobilization of 1,300 personnel on the
ground, are currently under way: police training
missions in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and in two areas in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and a rule-of-
law mission in Georgia. An integrated rule-of-law
mission for Iraq will be launched in July 2005, through
which some 770 people will be trained.

In order to address immediate needs, the
European Union will need to further develop its
capacity to deploy multifunctional civilian crisis-
management resources in an integrated format and at
short notice for use in the context of European Union-
led autonomous missions or of operations conducted by
other organizations, such as the United Nations or the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
A European Union rapid civilian-response capability
could contribute added value to international
peacebuilding efforts.

The European Union intends to develop its
capacity to work more with the United Nations so as to
assist countries emerging from conflict and will
accordingly endeavour to link emergency relief,
rehabilitation and development. We are also firmly
committed to developing our cooperation with the
African Union and subregional organizations. The
European Union action plan in support of peace and
security in Africa focuses on a number of practical
actions that are largely oriented towards peacebuilding.
In that context, the European Union will today submit
to the pledging conference in Addis Ababa a
comprehensive and substantial offer of support to assist
the African Union's efforts in Darfur.

In order to bridge the gap between the end of an
armed conflict and the achievement of sustainable
development, and to ensure the formulation of a
comprehensive and coherent strategy for peacebuilding
in specific post-conflict situations, we need an
institutional mechanism that involves all relevant
actors. In this context, the European Union welcomes
the Secretary-General's proposal to establish a
Peacebuilding Commission and endorses the main
purposes and functions set out in his explanatory note.
The European Union also recognizes the importance of
sustained, assured and predictable funding for
peacebuilding activities.

