Mr. Adorn (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Allow me to begin by wishing you, Mr. President, all
the best for the presidency of the Security Council,
which falls to your country for the month of June. I also
congratulate Ambassador Djani and his entire team on
the high quality of the Indonesian presidency, which led
the work of the Council with transparency and fairness
during the month of May.

I would also like to thank Mr. Francois Lounceny
Fall, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Central Africa and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), for
his enlightening briefing on the sociopolitical and
economic situation in Central Africa and the Lake
Chad basin region, as well as the activities of UNOCA.

Cote d'Ivoire is satisfied to note the holding, in a
generally peaceful environment, of elections in several
countries of Central Africa. This relative success,
however, cannot mask the persistence of multiple
political and security challenges that are impacting the
humanitarian situation in the region. Tensions caused by
demands for natural resources, in addition to poverty,
insecurity and the challenges of reconstruction, are all
factors that exacerbate the security and humanitarian
situation in a region so full of potential.

That is why my country welcomed the signing ofthe
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic on 6 February, while noting
with concern the lack of eagerness demonstrated by
armed groups to translate the concrete commitments to
which they have freely subscribed into concrete actions.
In that regard, my country condemns the violence
perpetrated by the armed groups that has resulted in
the killing of more than 50 civilians in the north-west
of the country in recent weeks. We also wish to express
our profound indignation at the continuing attacks on
schools, hospitals and humanitarian personnel.

In the face of these extremely serious facts, my
delegation believes that the protection of civilians is of
extreme urgency. We call for the full implementation
of the peace agreement, including the provisions
for the establishment of joint special security units;
the implementation of a national programme of
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation; and upholding State authority throughout
the national territory. In this regard, C6te d'Ivoire
commends the efforts of President Faustin Touadera
and expresses its full support following the launch of
the activities of the Khartoum agreement follow-up
committee on 15 May.

It is important that we underscore and welcome
the support role of United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, as well as the strengthening of cooperation
among the States of the subregion, notably through the
creation ofjoint cooperation commissions, which serve
as framework to develop solutions to the challenges
political, security and humanitarian issues they share.
My delegation therefore welcomes the re-establishment
of the Cameroon-Central African Republic joint
commission on 6 May, and hopes that it will enable both
countries to consider and find sustainable responses to
their common challenges.

Turning to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, C6te d'Ivoire joins the rest of the international
community in duly appreciating the stable sociopolitical
environment that has been established following
the presidential, legislative and local elections and
the appointment of the Prime Minister. We remain
convinced that the Congolese Government and people
have the ability to address the sociopolitical, security
and humanitarian challenges before them.

My country therefore urges all Congolese political
actors to work together to ensure that the prevailing
calm endures over the long term and to promote national
reconciliation, which is a guarantee of lasting peace.
In that vein, my country encourages the Congolese
Government to pursue its efforts, in conjunction
with the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
multilateral partners, to resolve the thorny issue of the
Ebola epidemic.

With regard to Cameroon, we wish to echo the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
welcoming the recent milestones reached by that
brotherly country's Government towards a lasting
and inclusive agreement to the crisis with a view to
maintaining its territorial integrity and national unity.

On the situation in Burundi, my delegation calls
on all stakeholders in the crisis to prioritize dialogue
to reach consensus solutions to all political and social
challenges. We remain convinced that the international
community, and the African Union and the Community
of East African States in particular, can play a
constructive role in the current situation. We therefore
urge them to continue their efforts to find pressing
solutions to humanitarian issues and organize the
peaceful holding of elections in 2020.

Cote d'Ivoire also recalls the concerns repeatedly
expressed by the Security Council on the security and
humanitarian situation in the Lake Chad basin, where
armed terrorist groups, such as Boko Haram, and cross-
border criminal networks are operating. My country
believes that the security approach taken by the States of
the region, through the Multinational Joint Task Force,
remains appropriate. It must be therefore supported by
efforts for economic and social development and the
fight against the effects of climate change.

Moreover, we note that despite the reduction in
its operational capacity, the actions of the Lord's
Resistance Army, including kidnappings, looting and
killings, remain a threat to the safety and security of
civilians, particularly in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Central African Republic. In that
regard, we welcome the decision of the African Union
Peace and Security Council to maintain the Regional
Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord's
Resistance Army.

My country is convinced that, despite the ongoing
manifold challenges in Central Africa, UNOCA
remains a valuable tool for preventive diplomacy
and coordination among the various United Nations
agencies, the contribution of which to regional peace
and stability is essential. That is why the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General enjoys Cote
d'Ivoire's ongoing support for his tireless and highly
admirable commitment. We encourage him to continue
to lead through his cooperation with the States of
Central Africa in order to create a political, security
and humanitarian subregional environment that is
conducive to peace and development.

