Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like, first of all, to express thanks for the introduction
to the report on the implementation of the mandate of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and for the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Soren
Jessen-Petersen. I also want to express thanks for the
statement made by Mr. Covic' on behalf of the Council
of Ministers of Serbia and Montenegro.

From the report, we see that, although there is
progress, it has been uneven and limited, and that the
standards have not yet been implemented. This is why
we believe it would be appropriate to develop an
integrated strategy for the period from now until mid-
2005 and have an overall assessment of progress and
implementation of the standards in mid-2005.

We agree with the emphasis being placed on the
economy and on security, which are the basic pillars
for the stability and development of the entire society.
However, this does not mean that attention should be
diverted from other fundamental areas, such as, for
example, the dialogue with Belgrade, the participation
of the Kosovo Serbs and the fulfilment of the eight
standards.

The elections of 23 October for the Kosovo
Assembly, which were held peacefully, freely and in a
correct manner, constitute an important advance in
strengthening Kosovo's provisional institutions and in
the process of stabilization and normalization.
Nonetheless, we do express our concern at the non-
participation of the Kosovo Serbs.

Likewise, we take note with interest of annex I of
the report before us (S/2004/907), which elaborates on
the shortcomings, achievements and remaining
challenges in the implementation of the standards. In
the light of the balance sheet contained in that annex,
efforts should continue in fundamental areas, such as
return and reconciliation, security conditions and
freedom of movement for the minorities of Kosovo, in
particular the Kosovar Serbs. It is essential that
measures continue to be adopted to preserve - and
ensure respect for - the rule of law, by bringing to
justice those who perpetrate acts of violence, by
requisitioning illicit weapons and by suppressing
organized crime. For our part, we believe that progress
should continue in economic legislation, privatization,
tax collection and the establishment of a general
budgetary process.

We believe that UNMIK's broad review of its
functions under resolution 1244 (1999) is appropriate,
as is the eventual transfer of competencies that do not
affect sovereignty to the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government. We also believe it is fundamental
that this transfer entail an increase in the Provisional
Institutions' responsibility and accountability, and that
this be subject to monitoring and supervision by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

The images of violence in March that have been
referred to here in this Council must not be forgotten.
The dialogue seems to us the key to avoiding another
such situation, and for this reason, we are very
interested in efforts at reaching out between Kosovar
Albanians and Serbs. It seems to us unacceptable that
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and
party leaders have not investigated the responsibilities
or omissions by public authorities regarding the violent
acts of March, nor have they condemned the
information broadcast by the media that incited this
ethnic violence.

We agree that the basic challenge to the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government of Kosovo
and to Kosovo's political leaders remains that of
making sure that progress in implementing the
standards leads to sustained and tangible benefits in
Kosovo for all of the population. This is why
constructive dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina
and between UNMIK and the Kosovo Assembly are
vital elements for the success of this undertaking. We
trust that, with the implementation of the integrated
strategy, all those involved - UNMIK, the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government, the local political
leaders and other groups i will all be in a position to
undertake more effective action for the attainment of a
Kosovo that is truly multi-ethnic, stable and
democratic, with the ability to include all the
inhabitants of Kosovo without any exclusion.

