I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this high-level open meeting on such a highly important topic as the protection of civilians in armed conflicts. Let me take this opportunity to congratulate Estonia on a successful presidency of the Security Council this month, despite the difficult work conditions imposed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. I would like also to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, for his comprehensive briefing and report (S/2020/366) and commend his leadership and tireless efforts to uphold the protection of civilians, especially in this particularly difficult COVID-19 context, which severely impacts populations already afflicted by conflicts, including refugees and displaced people, as well as those living under occupation. My thanks and appreciation go also to Mr. Peter Maurer for the long-standing commitment and action of the International Committee of the Red Cross related to the protection of civilians in armed conflicts and other situations of violence for more than a century. I salute the participation in this meeting of the Nobel Peace Laureate Ms. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, a leading actor in the promotion of peace, justice and democratic rule. It is important on such occasions to recall that protection for the civilian population is a basic element of humanitarian law. Civilians not taking part in hostilities must, on no account, be attacked and should be spared and protected. The 1949 Geneva Conventions and their 1977 Additional Protocols contain specific rules to protect civilians. In situations that are not covered by these treaties, such as cases of internal violence, civilians remain legally protected by other instruments of international law, mainly human rights law, as well as by national laws compatible with international laws and by the principle of humanity. Unfortunately, despite this adequate and comprehensive legal framework, today's reality shows that the civilian population continue to suffer most from the consequences of armed violence. In the various ongoing conflicts, whether in Africa, the Middle East or elsewhere, civilians are increasingly caught up in hostilities, including in urban populated areas. Even worse, in many instances, we witness military operations by armed groups deliberately targeting civilians as a retaliation for perceived support to their adversaries. The Secretary-General's report contains disturbing information about tens of thousands of civilians killed, physically injured or traumatized in 2019. It reveals that millions of people continue to be forced from their homes or displaced. It is regrettable to recognize also that conflict-related sexual violence persists in many armed conflicts, where women and girls, in particular, are still subject to appalling sexual violence. It is equally deplorable to acknowledge that conflicts continue to have a devastating impact on children, as tens of thousands of boys and girls are being forced to take part in hostilities, including on front lines, and are being exposed to a multitude of other violations, including killing, maiming and sexual violence. The protection of civilians may even deteriorate under COVID-19, a context that might be seen by some parties to conflicts as an opportunity to strike while Governments and the international community are absorbed by the health crisis. Such a scenario could lead to increased violence and civilian suffering. We have to admit that more than 70 years after the adoption of the Geneva Conventions and more than 20 years after the Security Council added the protection of civilians to its agenda, the results are way below expectations. The truth is that the terrible suffering that continues to be inflicted upon civilians caught up in armed conflicts is due not to an inadequate legal framework, but to poor compliance by actors and an absence of accountability for serious violations. Such suffering would be highly diminished if parties to conflicts respected international humanitarian law and international human rights law or if perpetrators of serious violations were held accountable. The lack of action against violations of international humanitarian law has unfortunately led to the perception of a free ride for parties to a conflict to commit atrocities. As a party to the Rome Statute, Tunisia is strongly committed to the fight against impunity and reiterates its full support to the International Criminal Court to investigate, prosecute and try individuals accused of committing the most serious crimes of concern to the international community. Criminal justice is badly needed to prevent the recurrence of violations of international humanitarian law. Justice should be based on credible investigation and prosecution, and not be subject to politicization. A number of other factors have also contributed to the deterioration of the protection of civilians, including the growing intercommunal, ethnic and religious tensions and violence, the increasing involvement of armed groups and non- State actors in the conduct of hostilities, including foreign terrorist fighters and mercenaries, the widespread availability of weapons, mainly as a result of illicit trafficking in small arms and violations of arms embargoes, in addition to the use of armed remotely piloted aircraft or drones by an increasing number of States and some non-State armed groups to conduct indiscriminate attacks in places such as Libya, Somalia and Yemen. We believe that it is urgent to initiate a debate around the growing acquisition and use of armed drones in order to address concerns not only over compliance with international humanitarian law and accountability, but also over their use by non-State actors in terrorist activities. Beyond calling for promoting respect for international humanitarian law and accountability, the protection of civilians requires that we strive to put an end to the hostilities and silence the guns everywhere. In this regard, we reiterate our full support for the call launched on 23 March by the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire. We believe that the Security Council has a moral obligation to support this call, particularly in the COVID-19 pandemic context, and we look forward to the unanimous adoption of the draft resolution presented by Tunisia and France in this regard. However, stopping hostilities is not enough. It is also our responsibility to find durable solutions to many protracted conflicts and disputes, which continue to inflict suffering upon civilians in the Palestinian territories, Libya, Yemen and many parts of Africa. It is our responsibility, too, to ensure full compliance with arms embargoes and prevent the flow of arms, which perpetuates hostilities and leads to more civilian casualties. It is our responsibility to prevent the outbreak of armed conflict and to address its root causes before hostilities take the lead over preventive diplomacy and before it is too late to save civilians. To conclude, let me say that ensuring the protection of civilians needs a united Security Council take up its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security more efficiently. It needs its members to prioritize the global common interests of the international community. It needs all of us to uphold our commitment to multilateralism and to the Charter of the United Nations. As an elected member, Tunisia will spare no effort during its mandate to contribute to these goals.
