I thank the Government of Germany for convening today's debate on peace operations and human rights at a time of far-reaching challenges. As the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) continues to gather pace, its impacts on health, societies and economies threaten development and amplify or create new grievances and tensions. Resolution 2532 (2020) rightly recognizes the particularly devastating impact of the pandemic on countries affected by conflict and humanitarian crises. I welcome its strong call for a global ceasefire in all situations on the Security Council's agenda. I trust that it will also spark broader and more coordinated global action to mitigate and prevent the pandemic's impact in the present and in future. The Council has often stressed that conflict prevention must be grounded in respect for and protection of human rights. In other words, human rights are central to the Council's mandate to maintain international peace and security. This principle has been consistently implemented through the integration of human rights in the mandates of peace operations in the gravest crises threatening the world. Currently, 12 United Nations peace operations - six peacekeeping operations and s1x special political missions - have human rights components. These human rights components on the ground powerfully contribute to better protection; they bring missions closer to the people; they serve and foster the capacities of Governments to advance inclusive development, rule of law and peace. In this context, the importance of the Secretary-General's Call to Action for Human Rights cannot be overemphasized. Drawing on the respective forms of expertise of different components of peace operations, the Call to Action is aimed at strengthening the collective efforts to carry out mission mandates in increasingly complex environments. The Call's proposed agenda for protection will be an important element in ensuring that human rights serve as a shared and effective basis for the United Nations system's work and in reinforcing the collective engagement, contribution and responsibility of all components of peace operations in advancing human rights. Only action to address the human rights violations inflicted on people can prevent the recurrence of conflict. This is the work that human rights components of peace operations are mandated and trained to do - detecting and addressing the inequalities and grievances that underlie specific conflicts. As the COVID crisis deepens, challenging societies, economies and institutions in every region, the work of human rights components in supporting peace operations to deliver on their mandates and address root causes of conflict and instability is becoming even more crucial. Monitoring and reporting by human rights components shape early warning on developments that threaten to destabilize specific situations. Today, this work includes assessment of the effectiveness and enforcement of measures designed to contain COVID-19; identification of the pandemic's impact on vulnerable groups, particularly internally displaced people, refugees and women; and assessment of the impact on specific economic, social and cultural rights. The monitoring of increases in stigmatization, discrimination and hate speech related to the pandemic, as well as conflict-related violations by all parties, is also essential to efforts to highlight, address and prevent further human rights violations. The impartial monitoring and reporting by human rights components, together with the components' engagement with the parties to conflict, State institutions and civil society, underpin the political good offices of every mission. In other words, human rights components have an essential role to play in contributing to peace operations' overall objectives of supporting political and peace processes. We see this dynamic in peace operations across the world. In Afghanistan, the reporting on the protection of civilians by the human rights component of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has helped to build the UNAMA's role as a credible and impartial interlocutor and opened doors with parties to the conflict. The Mission recently called on all parties to redouble their efforts to protect civilians and de-escalate the conflict, in order to save lives and create an environment conducive to success in the upcoming peace talks. In the Central African Republic, human rights staff have demonstrated their importance to conflict prevention, notably through their work on hate speech and support for judicial and non-judicial mechanisms for accountability, including the innovative mechanism of the Special Criminal Court. In Libya, accountability mechanisms for addressing past violations and for preventing ongoing ones are essential to following up on the Berlin process and to addressing ongoing conflict and lawlessness. The adoption by the Human Rights Council of a fact-finding mission is an example of the support that human rights mechanisms can bring to accountability and conflict-prevention efforts. In South Sudan, the work of the Human Rights Division of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan to fight impunity helps to highlight crucial gaps in accountability and the effect of those gaps in fuelling ongoing violence and impeding reconciliation efforts. In the Sudan, the 2019 Constitutional Declaration adopted by the Transitional Government is centred on human rights. The recently established United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan, together with the local office of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in the country, will support the Government's efforts to build inclusive institutions that address the root causes of conflict and rebuild on stronger ground. In Iraq, our monitoring and reporting on human rights violations committed since the start of the popular demonstrations in October 2019 has called attention to cases of abductions, disappearances, torture and killings of demonstrators. Together with targeted advocacy, this effort contributed to significant restraint by the security forces during the recent renewal of protests and the planned establishment ofa national fact-finding committee. Consistent with the Government's acknowledgement of the need for accountability, these are important steps towards future prevention of similar acts and increasing the Iraqi people's confidence in the authorities. Human rights staff in peace operations also assist in strengthening the capacity of national human rights and rule of law institutions. In Haiti and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, United Nations police and the human rights components of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti and the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) have jointly worked with national authorities to strengthen the offices of the Inspector General to address cases of human rights violations. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, support for mobile courts has led to significant progress in tackling impunity, while mobile investigation teams provide key analysis of specific situations. In Ituri, such reporting has led MONUSCO to adopt standing combat deployments to boost protection of internally displaced people. More broadly, this work underpins the Mission's conflict-prevention strategy by shaping efforts to address the root causes of conflict and intercommunal violence. Human rights components also work to assist in managing the risks related to mandate implementation, notably by supporting implementation of the Human Rights Due Diligence Policy on United Nations support to non-United Nations security forces. With the Council's support, the Policy has significantly improved the work of the United Nations on governance and security. The Security Council has been increasingly engaged in developments at the regional level, mandating region-wide engagements to counter security threats, including those related to terrorism. In these operations, there are often increased risks for the civilian population; grounding operations in respect for human rights and international law is therefore crucial to their success. In addition to the partnerships the OHCHR is building with the African Union, the compliance framework approach we have developed constitutes a comprehensive package of prevention, mitigation, response and remedial measures that further operationalize the work of the United Nations on the protection of civilians. We have been supporting the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5) Joint Force's operationalization of this framework since 2018, with the main objective of preventing harm to civilians during military and counter-terrorism operations. I commend the G-5 for being the first subregional armed force committed to implementing such a compliance framework. Further efforts are needed for full operationalization, particularly by placing a strong focus on the protection of vulnerable populations, including women, children, and internally displaced people. Such measures are crucial to ensuring that the Joint Force is effective in fulfilling its mandate and in inspiring confidence in the communities it serves. As the Secretary-General's Call to Action for Human Rights states, there is no better guarantee for prevention than for Member States to meet their human rights responsibilities. Conversely, unresolved human rights issues and underfinanced implementation of human rights recommendations result in a fragile ultimately untenable peace and force prolonged United Nations engagement in the country. At a time of multidimensional global and regional crises, we need redoubled investment in rules-based international structures that serve the common good by identifying and addressing grievances before they fester into violence. Adequate financing for Security Council human rights mandates for peace operations is among the soundest and most cost-effective investments in the interests of all. In addition to resources, robust political support for these components, expressed through the voice of the Security Council, is needed. United Nations peace operations are among the Organization's most significant achievements and a powerful tool for protecting and promoting human rights. They need resources and the strong political support of Council members to bind together all United Nations operations around a common effective approach to crisis, from prevention to recovery.
