Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Prendergast for his briefing on the
situation in Afghanistan.

The international community is greatly concerned
about the emergency loya jirga to be convened in
Afghanistan next month. Whether the loya jirga will be
held as scheduled, and whether the elected Transitional
Government will be truly representative and thus
command the support of all Afghan ethnic groups and
the people in all districts will have a direct bearing on
whether the hard-won peace will be maintained and
whether the political blueprint designed for
Afghanistan by the Bonn Agreement will be
implemented.

Therefore, setting the stage for the convening of
the loya jirga has constituted the current political life in
Afghanistan. We welcome the deep interest and the
great enthusiasm of the Afghan people with regard to
the loya jirga. Such interest and enthusiasm fully
reflect their strong aspirations to emerge from war and
to rebuild peace, and they show that the overall
situation in Afghanistan is moving in the right
direction.

On the other hand, the Afghan situation still faces
numerous challenges. In particular, conflicts among
local warlords continue. Some factions are attempting
to manipulate elections, and some parties are
complaining that they have been pushed out of the
political process. All that is having a negative effect on
the preparations for a loya jirga. All the parties in
Afghanistan must, for the sake of their overall national
interest, put aside past grievances, end the violence and
join hands to build peace and to rebuild the country.
Only then will it be possible for Afghanistan to have a
bright future.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) has been functional for only
two months. However, it has done a great deal of
effective work to ensure that the loya jirga will proceed
smoothly and to mediate conflicts among local armed
groups. We express our appreciation for the tireless
work of Ambassador Brahimi and UNAMA and shall
actively cooperate in and support that work. The
personnel recommended by China for UNAMA will
soon be dispatched to Afghanistan to participate in
assistance work.

The International Security Assistance Force has
played an important role in helping to stabilize the
situation in Afghanistan. China favours the extension
of its mandate through the adoption of a resolution. At
the same time, China is ready to work with other
countries to help Afghanistan build its own army and
police force.

Another arduous task facing Afghanistan is that
of reconstruction. Peace has made reconstruction
possible and steady progress in rebuilding will lay the
groundwork for further peace. China attaches
importance to the rebuilding of Afghanistan. Not long
ago, Foreign Minister Tang Jiaxuan of China paid a
visit to Afghanistan, during which China pledged to
help rebuild a hospital in Kabul and, in principle, a
water-conservancy facility in Parvan and a hospital in
Kandahar that were originally built with China's help.
Both sides have signed an agreement on assistance and
economic and technical cooperation valued at $30
million, while notes have been exchanged regarding the
provision of office supplies by the Chinese Foreign
Ministry to its Afghan counterpart.

We have also extended cooperation to
Afghanistan in its anti-drug campaign and agreed to
give positive consideration to certain new assistance
projects proposed by Afghanistan, including the
rebuilding of the Baghram textile mill. China is ready
to continue, to the best of its ability, to provide
assistance towards peace and reconstruction in
Afghanistan.

