Mrs. Theofili (Greece): Allow me to commend the
Swedish presidency for organizing today's debate, as
well as for its excellent work so far on this sensitive
issue. I also wish to congratulate all Council members
on the adoption of resolution 2427 (2018).

Greece fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
wishes to add some further remarks.

The protection of children affected by armed
conflict and the safeguarding of their rights constitutes
a priority for Greece. In this vein, my country has
already ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of
children in armed conflict. Moreover, Greece has also
endorsed the Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, the
Paris Commitments to protect children from unlawful
recruitment or use by armed forces or armed groups,
the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the
Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child
Soldiers, as well as the Safe Schools Declaration.

At the national level, Greece is in the process of
drafting a special national action plan dedicated to the
rights of the child - a joint and inclusive endeavour
involving the participation of all relevant stakeholders.
The action plan will focus, inter alia, on the protection
of unaccompanied children.
Undoubtedly, Greece considers the protection of
the rights of conflict-affected children who seek asylum
within its national territory, whether unaccompanied or
not, as a matter of utmost priority. Special protection is
provided to foreign minors by the code for migration
and social integration. In order to provide effective
and adequate protection for all refugee and asylum-
seeking children, the competent national authorities
are cooperating closely with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, as well as
civil society organizations.

Additionally, in the field of education, a special
office for refugee education has been set up to deal
with refugee education issues aiming at ensuring the
integration of refugee children in the Greek educational
system by providing psychosocial support following
a preparatory, transitional period. Furthermore, the
Ministry of Education has been implementing an
emergency action plan for the education of all refugee
and migrant children, regardless of their status.
Moreover, in the field of public health, the national
action plan on gender equality sets as a strategic goal the
promotion of physical and mental health of all members
of special population groups, including refugee girls.

Focusing on the protection of the rights of conflict-
affected children by taking targeted action through
strategic partnerships remains a high priority for all
stakeholders, the international community, States and
civil society organizations. Such inclusive, coordinated
action at the international, regional, national and local
levels should include all stages of armed conflict in
order to achieve sustainable peace in a more effective
way. After all, by safeguarding the rights of children
in the present we invest in shaping the peaceful and
democratic citizens of the future.

