Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for inviting me to address the Security Council in my
capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). Allow me
to congratulate the people of Guinea-Bissau on their
peaceful and active participation in the second round of
presidential elections, which was a fundamental step in
the country's history. I thank once again all of Guinea-
Bissau's partners who contributed resources, technical
support and observers. Also, I would convey a very
special word of appreciation for the invaluable work of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Jose
Ramos-Horta, whose personal qualities and dedication
have been an asset for the United Nations and a decisive
contribution to the process.

As we await the proclamation of the results, let
me outline some important discussions that have taken
place in the Guinea-Bissau configuration during the
past few months, with a view to contributing to future
steps.

First, the configuration has been actively following
the situation throughout the transitional period. By
means oftwo press statements, it has called on all parties
to respect the electoral outcome as the expression of
the democratic will of the people of Guinea-Bissau. It
has served as a forum to help improve the coordination
among key regional and international partners - one
aspect that is likely to become even more important
as we prepare to resume full international cooperation
with the country.

On the basis of my January visit to Bissau along
with Assistant Secretary-General Judy Cheng-
Hopkins, the configuration has also initiated early
planning for the post-electoral engagement. In that
regard, I had proposed to the configuration and to the
Council that we consider three achievable medium-
term peacebuilding objectives as our guidance in that
process: the completion of a full democratic cycle in
Guinea-Bissau, significant strides in food security and
basic social indicators, and enhanced coordination and
understanding to advance on the modernization of the
security and defence sector.

I also believe that the configuration was able to
strengthen its partnership with the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS) and its coordination with Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ramos-Horta.
The synergy with the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) is also
an important dimension, which is translated through the
PBF's funding of projects ranging from support to the
electoral process and the establishment of the National
Commission for Planning and Strategic Coordination,
to the promotion of women and youth employment.

Secondly, it is important to bear in mind that the
pursuit of our first medium-term strategic objective,
the completion of a full democratic cycle, has just
begun. In all democratic systems, the formation of a
Government is a complex process, and it is all the more
so for a country such as Guinea-Bissau, emerging from
institutional rupture and facing daunting social and
economic challenges. We welcome the initial gestures
of Prime Minister-designate Domingos Simoes Pereira
towards inclusion and dialogue.

As we have highlighted time and again, it is
essential that international assistance be present from
day one. Pressing issues such as the payment of salaries,
especially for civil servants in the education and health
sectors, and food security are also key elements for the
consolidation of the democratic transition. Decisive
and swift support is needed. I will remain in contact
with Special Representative Ramos-Horta and other
partners, such as the World Bank, in order to ensure
that the PBC stands ready to help.

I believe that we find ourselves today better
positioned, from a technical point of View, to
reengage with Guinea-Bissau. The proposal of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
a government efficacy amelioration programme that
is aligned with the priorities identified by the new
Government in order to ensure national ownership and
based on broad consultations with all international
partners can be a key element to enhance capacity and
transparency. We look forward to working with the
elected authorities on the review of the peacebuilding
strategic framework and the possible cooperation with
the PBF on a set of national peacebuilding priorities.
We can already count on improved coordination among
key partners and on encouraging and skilled leadership
in Bissau. A successful transition is likely to mobilize
both traditional and new partners, and that can well
present a unique opportunity.

That leads me to my next consideration. Beyond
the emergency budgetary support to keep a new
Government running, we have welcomed the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General's proposal
that a donors' conference be held as early as possible,
so that the willingness to re-engage on the part of the
international community can materialize in much-
needed concrete pledges and disbursements. At the
same time, we understand that conditions need to be
put in place for that support to be effective.

As noted by Assistant Secretary-General Judy
Cheng-Hopkins during our configuration's most recent
informal meeting, a donor's conference should not be
seen as business as usual. We must communicate and
articulate in an effective way the improved technical
basis for engagement, the concrete impact that can be
achieved with modest amounts in Guinea-Bissau, the
great potential of the country in agriculture, services
and tourism, and, above all the people's desire to move
past the cycle of poverty and instability.

Fourthly, with regard to the modernization of the
security and defence sector, I believe that we will now
be better positioned to devise a comprehensive and more
effective strategy in support of legitimate authorities.
The Economic Community of West African States has
been playing an important leading role in that regard,
and we should stand ready to continue to support its
efforts - and the engagement of other partners - with
resources and expertise. The PBC stands available to
play a coordinating role and offer strategic advice by
providing a platform that can bring together the main
partners around common objectives.

That engagement can be important to help bring
about the necessary political space for such complex
processes to advance. As we have noted in the past,
security sector reform in Guinea-Bissau cannot be
Viewed in isolation, and it should not concentrate solely
on the top-level structures. It is linked to reforms in other
key sectors: economic revitalization, reconciliation and
political dialogue, and the creation of opportunities
and political alternatives with a view to consolidating
democratic stability.

I stress once again that it is key to ensure that no
social group be perceived as being left behind and that
all be granted their due recognition. Our expectations
should also be attuned to such realities so as to help
us devise the most effective strategies to advance
on realistic objectives. In that connection, we look
forward to the upcoming national conference on the
modernization and restructuring of the security sector,
which is scheduled to take place next month, and
welcome the efforts of UNIOGBIS to promote dialogue
and outreach on that issue.

That brings me to a final consideration, on the
upcoming renewal of the UNIOGBIS mandate by the
Council. As noted by Special Representative Ramos-
Horta in our most recent configuration meeting, the
linkage between the PBC, including as a political body,
and UNIOGBIS should remain a key building block of
the Office's mandate.

Resolution 2103 (2013) refers to the PBC's readiness
to reengage with Guinea-Bissau once conditions allow
and to the need to further realign the United Nations
system's State-building and peacebuilding activities
and the contribution of the Peacebuilding Fund to peace
consolidation in Guinea-Bissau. It is my view that we
have made some important strides in that direction
already. Building on such strides, the Council could
consider strengthening the elements of the UNIOGBIS
mandate that refer to its partnership with the PBC and
the potential for that partnership to help bring about
enhanced coordination, additional strategic advice
on a key set of core, achievable and nationally led
peacebuilding priorities and greater synergy with the
PBF and other institutional partners.

