Mr. Adom (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I too
thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative and Head
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), and Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares,
Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs, for their
enlightening briefings. I also welcome the participation
of the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia in this meeting, as well as that of the
Ambassador ofKosovo to the United States of America.

Cote d'Ivoire notes with concern the lack of
significant progress in the dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade. This dialogue should pave the way
towards a definitive settlement of the Kosovo issue and
lead to reconciliation between the two countries. We are
therefore worried by the persistence of tensions that are
further exacerbating the climate of mistrust between
Serbia and Kosovo and could even serve to catalyse the
deterioration of the sociopolitical and security situation
between the two countries and in the Balkans more
generally. My country therefore calls on the Serbian
and Kosovar parties to work responsibly and in good
faith to preserve the gains made by pursuing dialogue,
especially under the auspices of the European Union.
In this connection, we believe that the issues of import
tariffs and the immunity of United Nations officials
need to be urgently addressed.

Maintaining and even strengthening stability as
it stands must be a top priority for the international
community. It must justify the tireless efforts of
the United Nations and other institutional actors to
normalize the situation between Belgrade and Pristina.
That is why my country is satisfied to note the desire
expressed by Presidents Aleksandar Vucie and Hashim
Thaci to pursue this critical dialogue in Paris in
July 2019.

Cote d'Ivoire is convinced that no obstacle, no
matter how complex, is impossible to overcome in the
dispute between Kosovo and Serbia so long as both
parties engage, resolutely and in good faith, in dialogue
to reach bold compromises that will guarantee peace
and stability for their peoples and for the Balkans.

We commend the European Union for its mediation
efforts and believe that it should continue to play
a leading role concerning the issue, as it pertains
in particular to preventive diplomacy efforts to be
undertaken with a view to normalizing relations
between Kosovo and Serbia.

With regard to the comprehensive implementation
of the Brussels Agreement, my country takes this
opportunity to reiterate its appreciation for the
excellent work done by UNMIK personnel in support
of the Government of Kosovo. We also reiterate our
full support for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Tanin, given his remarkable
personal commitment. The support of UNMIK is
crucial as it could become a genuine catalyst of efforts
geared towards reconciliation among the various
communities, which is a prerequisite for restoring
peaceful coexistence between Kosovo and Serbia. To
that end, it is worth noting and acknowledging the
initiative to promote the learning of the Albanian and
Serbian languages in both communities, as well as the
holding of the third annual Kosovo Youth Assembly.
Various other initiatives aimed at women and young
people, among others, also deserve to be commended.

Cote d'Ivoire also encourages the authorities of
Kosovo to pursue their efforts to entrench the rule of
law and combat corruption and impunity. Similarly, we
welcome the outstanding contribution of the European
Union Rule ofLaw Mission in Kosovo, which has helped
to build transparent, democratic and multi-ethnic
institutions in the country since 2008.

Like the memory of peoples and States emerging
from particularly violent conflicts, such as that which
rocked the Balkans in the 1990s, deep stigmas and
divergences have been slow to fade, and relations
between Serbia and Kosovo are the perfect illustration
of that. However, those two sovereign entities must
agree to maintain good-neighbourly relations and
should create the conditions for lasting peace and
stability between their countries in particular, and in
the Balkans in general, to ensure the happiness of their
respective peoples.

