Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): At the outset, I would like to acknowledge the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mali, who will join us via video-teleconference. I thank Mr. Jean- Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, for his insightful overview of the operations of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). Saint Vincent and the Grenadines strongly condemns the mortar attack on a military base in Kidal in northern Mali. We wish the injured a rapid and full recovery. MINUSMA has been entrusted with the very important role of supporting the Malian authorities as they strive to fully implement the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. We recognize that across such a vast territory, plagued by the multifaceted challenges of persistent underdevelopment increasingly exacerbated by climate change, the restoration and extension of State authority depend on the support of a wide range of actors across the region and within the international community. Successful regionalism creates many buffers that insulate Member States from the rigours of a rapidlychanging, and often tumultuous, global political economy. Deepened integration must, however, be built not only on security cooperation but also across the humanitarian, development and peace nexus. Indeed, without development, there can be no security. Only the structural changes brought about by an improvement in the standard of living will draw people away from the lure of armed groups as they become more firmly embedded in legitimate socioeconomic activity. We encourage our partners and friends in the international community to explore all options available in bringing investment to this region. In order to solve and prevent violent extremism and the proliferation of armed groups, we need to ensure inclusion, open dialogue and the return of full State authority to the affected areas. Also, the perpetrators of terrorist and extremist acts must be held accountable. We welcome the redeployment of 1,330 troops, which, through the accelerated disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process, will be instrumental in restoring the rule of law and trust. We also share concerns about the challenges with regard to the implementation of the peace agreement. In particular, we support better representation of women in the peace and other political processes, and we commend MINUSMA's efforts in that regard. In additional, we note the continued grave violations against children, including recruitment by armed groups. In order to build lasting peace for future generations in Mali, we must protect children. We encourage MINUSMA to continue its community engagement initiatives to ensure buy-in from the communities and people in Mali. In addition, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines supports the continuation and strengthening of dialogue to resolve the situation in Mali. The holding of the final session of the inclusive national dialogue and the expressed willingness of the signatory movements to the peace agreement to resume meetings of the Agreement Monitoring Committee are encouraging signs. MINUSMA's challenges in the north are understandable given the conditions on the ground. We believe that the mobility challenge can be resolved through the deployment of air assets necessary to facilitate operations. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines will support efforts to that effect. Before closing, I wish to highlight the consequences of climate change on peace and security in Mali and the subregion. We encourage resilience building and long- term strategies for adaptation in Mali. The international community should also mobilize itself to assist in that regard. Finally, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines would like to fully align itself with the joint statement of the three African members of the Security Council delivered by my colleague from the Niger.
