Mr. Alahmad (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to express my appreciation
for the valuable briefing by Mr. Alexander Zouev,
Assistant Secretary-General for Rule of Law
and Security Institutions in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.

We are discussing an extremely important topic
today on the Security Council's agenda, as the issue
of mines, explosive ordnance and improvised explosive
devices is directly linked to the United Nations goal
to maintain peace and security in armed conflict and
dispute zones. Regrettably, since the United Nations
began monitoring civilian casualties caused by such
explosives and mines in 1999, statistics have shown an
increase in the number of civilian casualties resulting
from the remnants of war and mines. It is truly
saddening that children comprise the largest category
of civilian victims of the remnants of war.

Our discussion today on mine action and warnings
concerning their negative impact on civilians, especially
in the aftermath of war, is of particular importance to
the State of Kuwait because of its bitter experience
following the liberation of the country from the Iraqi
occupation, which in its wake left behind landmines
throughout its territory, including on beaches and in
vast expanses of desert, that have killed many civilians.

We commend all United Nations efforts to maintain
peace and security among all conflicting parties,
which is achieved through peacekeeping operations
and the Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General, as well as efforts to arrive at settlements
and confidence-building measures and limiting the
deadly effects of landmines on the lives of civilians
following conflicts.

Allow me in this regard to commend the heroic
actions taken by more than 100,000 men and women
in peacekeeping operations in different conflict zones,
risking their lives in order to maintain and protect
the lives of others, especially civilians, in extremely
dangerous and complicated environments. We call
for improving the preparation and performance of
peacekeepers, who are operating in areas at high risk of
explosives, so that they are better able to perform their
duties and save their lives.

I would like to define three important measures that
would alleviate the impact of landmines on civilians:
first, to stop violence and conflict between armed
groups; secondly, to facilitate restoring public services
in post-conflict areas and promote the 2030 Sustainable
Development Goals for establishing peaceful and
conflict-free societies; and thirdly, to issue national
laws which prohibit the possession of weapons and
explosive materials.

We welcome measures to enhance partnership

and cooperation between the United Nations and other
States at the national and international levels in the field
of mine action. Moreover, we commend the partnership
established between the United Nations and the African
Union Commission to manage mine action. I would
also note the efforts made by the United Nations, in
cooperation with the Government of Iraq, through joint
programmes aimed at screening and clearing areas of
mines in the liberated areas of Iraq. We also welcome
the work being done between the United Nations and
the Governments of Lebanon, Libya, Somalia and other
Governments of Member States.

We condemn the use of landmines by the Houthis
in Yemen. These landmines are being placed randomly,
thereby endangering the lives of civilians, in clear
violation of international humanitarian law.

In conclusion, I note that resolution 2365 (2017),
which the Security Council adopted last year,
represents a positive development in the efforts of the
United Nations to combat the danger of landmines,
explosives and improvised explosive devices remnants
of war. I reaffirm that such efforts to stop the use of
landmines will save the lives of many civilians and
make an important contribution to achieving the desired
security and peace. We support the recommendation of
the Secretary-General to consider mine action on an
annual basis in the Council.

