Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French): First of all, I would like to thank Deputy Special Envoy Matar for being here and for her briefing. Ms. Matar and Mr. Pedersen enjoy our full support. We all know that a political settlement is the only solution to the conflict. Without the political commitment of the Syrian authorities, the cycle of violence will continue unabated and instability will persist in the region. The Constitutional Committee, established in September, raised cautious hopes for a new dynamic. Those hopes are in danger of being dashed. We call on Damascus to re-engage in the political process and not to obstruct agreement on the Committee's agenda. We also call for the holding of the next session of the Committee. To that end, we encourage all Member States with influence on the parties to exercise that influence. The good faith of the Syrian authorities will be assessed on the basis of the outcome of the process. We take this opportunity to support the Special Envoy and his team in their work and commitment. We also reaffirm that Belgium, in line with European policy, will not participate in the reconstruction process without a political solution that is firmly in place. Let us not forget that the political process is not limited to the Constitutional Committee. Nearly a year ago, in his first briefing to the Council (see S/PV.8475), the Special Envoy prioritized the release of those who were arbitrarily detained and abductees. We echo his call for an increase in the number of releases. That is of utmost humanitarian importance and an essential element of confidence-building. We encourage the Special Envoy to intensify his contacts with the parties on the issue. Greater significant progress must be made. Detainees must be released. Families must again be able to embrace their loved ones or, at the very least, receive information on their whereabouts and their well-being. That is their right. It is a right that is enshrined in international humanitarian law. The behaviour of the Syrian authorities in the matter is unacceptable. Lastly, the situation on the ground is worrisome. Earlier today, Belgium provided details about the humanitarian situation in the north-west (see S/PV.8707). We are deeply concerned about the military escalation. We call on the Syrian authorities and those who provide them with military support to establish, as a matter of urgency, a ceasefire in the north-west. I will conclude by saying that, for Belgium, the Syrian conflict can be resolved only through a negotiated political process, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). Resolution 2254 (2015) contains all the elements for a political solution: a nationwide ceasefire, a political process, the drafting of a new constitution and free and credible elections, with the participation of the Syrian diaspora, in an environment that protects the rights of Syrians.
