Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): At the outset, my
delegation would also like tojoin others in paying tribute
to all those who have lost their lives or suffered injury
while working for the United Nations. In particular, we
would like to pay tribute to Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello.
We welcome the increased attention given to the
issue of the protection of civilians, as evidenced by the
process leading to the Oslo Conference and the recent
thematic work of the Security Council. The presidential
statement adopted in February (S/PRST/2013/2) sent
a strong message, especially with respect to both the
need to fight impunity and the role of the International
Criminal Court. We were also pleased to see that the
Council recognized the importance of ensuring access
for and protection of peacekeepers, humanitarian and
medical personnel.

As highlighted by the Secretary-General in his
most recent report (S/2012/376), we have come far in
identifying responsibilities, achievements, needs and
shortcomings in the field of protecting civilians in
armed conflict. But in many conflicts around the world,
we need concrete action on the ground to avoid civilian
suffering and casualties. All parties to a conflict,
including State and non-State actors, must ensure that
their forces respect international humanitarian law
and that they are trained to do so. They must strictly
respect the principles of distinction and proportionality
and they must in particular avoid the use of explosive
force in densely populated areas. Swift and unhindered
access for humanitarian actors must be guaranteed,
and not arbitrarily denied. Third States should refrain
from contributing to civilian suffering, inter alia, by
prohibiting arms transfers that pose a significant risk of
international humanitarian law violations.

The safety of humanitarian workers is of particular
concern. We call on all States that have not yet done so
to ratify the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel and its 2005 Optional
Protocol.

We also recall that attacks on humanitarian workers
may constitute a war crime under article 8(2)(e)(iii), of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC).

Where prevention fails, as is often the case,
accountability becomes all the more important. It is an
essential element of reconciliation and it helps prevent
the recurrence of conflict. Accountability is first and
foremost the responsibility of each State, but armed
conflict frequently - almost automatically - leads
to dysfunctional domestic justice systems. The ICC
was designed to fill that void and to deliver justice and
redress for victims. We therefore strongly encourage
States that have not done so yet to join and to implement
the Rome Statute.

The Security Council also has an important role to
play, in particular by referring appropriate situations to
the ICC and by promoting accountability at the domestic
level. The Council should be ready to swiftly establish
commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions
to jump-start accountability efforts, and it should be
ready to effectively follow up on their outcomes. Where
appropriate, the results of investigations mandated by
the Human Rights Council should be brought to the
attention of the Security Council for further action.

All of what I have mentioned applies to the current
situation in Syria. There has rarely been a situation
in the recent past where more serious crimes under
international law have been committed at this scale
and for such a long time without any response by the
international community. Given the unwillingness
and inability of the domestic legal system in Syria to
investigate and prosecute the crimes committed, we
have joined a total of 63 States that have called upon
the Security Council to refer the situation in Syria to
the ICC. Should the Council's failure to act upon that
call continue, it may be incumbent upon the General
Assembly to formally recommend that the Council to
make such a referral.

We note that the Syrian National Coalition
publically called for the referral and we welcome that
commitment to obey the rule of law. We also encourage
any future Government to submit the situation in Syria
to the jurisdiction ofthe ICC, in accordance with article
12(3) of the Rome Statute.

