Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea): At the
outset I would like to welcome you, Mr. Minister, and
express my deep gratitude to you for handling this open
debate on the prevention of armed conflict.

As the Secretary-General emphasized in his
report, the primary responsibility for preventing
conflict lies with nations themselves. However, in an
age when we are facing ever-increasing challenges
related to international peace and security, the role of
the United Nations is becoming more and more pivotal.
We firmly believe that the prevention of such conflicts
largely hinges on the preventive capacity of the United
Nations and its Member States. Indeed, conflict
prevention lies at the heart of the United Nations
mandate for the maintenance of international peace and
security, which emphasizes the Organization's mission
"to save succeeding generations from the scourge of

a,

war .

My delegation fully supports the Secretary-
General's intention to move the United Nations from a
"culture of reaction" to a "culture of prevention," a
notion that is closely tied to the vision of a "culture of
peace." As has been made evident by the conflicts in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sierra Leone,
Kosovo and East Timor in recent years, United Nations
efforts to resolve conflicts once they have already
escalated are often futile. But while it is generally
acknowledged that conflict prevention is far more cost-
effective, in both human and financial terms, than post-
conflict management, the political will and financial
commitment of Member States are often elusive in the
earliest stages of conflicts.

Furthermore, as the Secretary-General noted in
his report, while a large number of Member States have
expressed their support for conflict prevention during
previous open debates, they often have different
priorities for action. In this regard, the Republic of
Korea favours a comprehensive approach that
encompasses democratization, respect for human rights
and the rule of law, socio-economic development and
the promotion of good governance.

I would like to comment on a few of the issues
raised in the Secretary-General's report that are of
particular importance to my delegation.

First, my delegation fully agrees with the
Secretary-General's recommendations for strengthening
the capacities of the principal United Nations organs
for conflict prevention. In particular, we support the
recommendation that the General Assembly consider a
more active use of its powers in the prevention of
armed conflict and explore ways of enhancing its
interaction with the Security Council in developing
long-term conflict prevention and peace-building
strategies. Greater interaction between the General
Assembly and the Security Council would enhance
transparency and ensure that the views of the Member
States on conflict prevention are heard.

Secondly, my delegation notes that the broader,
more holistic approach to conflict prevention has
emerged in response to the growing realization that
sustainable peace cannot be achieved without
addressing the structural root causes of conflicts. In
fact, the most effective form of conflict prevention may
be the pursuit of sustainable development and
democratization, areas in which the Economic and
Social Council can and should play a more active role.
In this regard, the multifaceted nature of conflict
prevention requires enhanced cooperation within the
United Nations system, particularly among the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council.

Thirdly, recognizing that a stable social
environment is key to preventing the outbreak or
recurrence of a conflict, my delegation supports the
Secretary-General's recommendation that we devote
greater resources to the United Nations humanitarian
agencies and integrate preventive activities into the
work of these agencies in pre-crisis situations. In
particular, we stress the need to advocate for the
protection and welfare of women and children and to
mobilize international support for the fight against
HIV/AIDS. My delegation looks forward to the special
session of the General Assembly on HIV/AIDS next
week and to the special session on children this
September and hopes that they will bring forth tangible
results.

Fourthly, my delegation believes that the United
Nations should continue to strengthen its relationship
with a wide array of international actors, particularly
regional organizations, and pursue regional preventive
strategies. We recognize that, due to their proximity,
regional organizations are often more attuned to the
situation on the ground and can therefore develop
effective institutional capacities for early warning and
conflict prevention, such as the mechanisms
established by the Organization of African Unity and
the Economic Community of West African States. For
this reason, we are looking forward to the
implementation of the follow-up measures to the Fourth
High-level United Nations-Regional Organizations
Meeting on conflict prevention and peace-building,
held last February.

Fifthly, as the Brahimi report recommends the
Secretary-General's more frequent use of fact-finding
missions to areas of tension in support of short-term
crisis-prevention action, we firmly support the
enhancement of the preventive role of the Secretary-
General. In this regard, we believe that the allocation
of adequate financial resources for conflict prevention
is essential. For its part, the Republic of Korea has
contributed to the Trust Fund for Preventive Action
since its inception in 1997 and intends to maintain this
commitment.

I would like to conclude by reiterating my
Government's unwavering support for efforts to
enhance the preventive capacities of the United
Nations, Member States and key international players.
We hope that this debate will mobilize Member States
towards a more effective strategy for conflict prevention.

