Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): As a country that
has consistently advocated reform of the working
methods of the Security Council, Indonesia naturally
strongly supports the convening of the present debate.
We welcome, in particular, its open nature, as the
Council can thereby benefit from the views of the
wider membership of the United Nations.

We appreciate very much the important statement
made by the Secretary-General reflecting the
importance he attaches to the subject we are
considering today.
08-49188
Indonesia associates itself with the statement to
be delivered later today by the representative of Cuba,
on behalf on the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).

My delegation attaches great weight to the
measures identified in the note by the President of the
Security Council contained in document S/2006/507
(19 July 2006). It is our belief that a systematic and
concerted application of such measures would indeed
help promote the Council's transparency, interaction
with non-Council members and efficiency. My
delegation is therefore encouraged to note that the two
years since the note's issuance have seen some
progress in its implementation.

While welcoming this development, Indonesia
can also see room for further progress. It is our
conviction that the objectives of greater transparency,
interaction with non-Council members and efficiency
are compatible. Indeed, they are quite inseparable from
efforts to further enhance the legitimacy of the
Council's decisions and their effectiveness.

Transparency has recently been enhanced.
Monthly programmes of work and forecasts have been
made available. The United Nations Journal announces
both formal and informal consultations of the Council
and, to a certain degree, the meetings of the subsidiary
organs. Not least, we have seen efforts to give renewed
impetus to open meetings.

However, not infrequently, the monthly
programme of work and forecast of the Council bears
little resemblance to the actual work of the Council in a
given month. Unforeseen crises invariably seize the
Council's attention. Meetings, including formal and
informal consultations, are convened at short notice. It
is incumbent that the Council recognizes that this way
of working is increasingly becoming the norm, rather
than the exception. Thus, it would be appropriate for
the Council to further develop an information
dissemination system that responds to the dynamism of
a fast evolving situation and yet is comprehensive and
inclusive in its reach, in order to ensure that the wider
membership of the United Nations is informed in a
timely and accurate manner of the Council's activities.

We welcome the increased resort to open, formal
meetings as another facet of transparency. In order to
increase transparency, especially at an early stage of
consideration of an issue, the Council should strive for
open meetings. Indeed, unless there are strong,
irrefutable arguments to the contrary, we believe that
3
reports by the Secretary-General, already published
and available to Member States, should be presented
and considered at open meetings of the Security
Council. It would be to the Council's advantage to hear
the Views of interested Member States at that stage as
well. Consideration of any follow-up action by the
Council may take place at its subsequent informal
consultations.

Nevertheless, care needs to be exercised in
evaluating the actual significance of the reported
increased resort to formal meetings. We must ensure,
for example, that the potential contributions of such
formal meetings are fully harvested. The Views of the
wider membership deserve full consideration.
However, not infrequently, presidential statements are
issued immediately after open debates and resolutions
are adopted before the views of the concerned
countries are fully heard. The Council should allow
sufficient time to incorporate the valuable inputs from
concerned Member States.

Also, we must be cognizant of the possibility
that, as resort to formal meetings becomes more
common, there may be a tendency for substantive
consideration of Council decisions to take place
outside of formal meetings, and even outside of
consultations of the whole, through such processes as
the "groups of friends".

The latter brings us to the question of greater
interaction with non-Council members. We support the
efforts of the Council to consult with the wider
membership of the United Nations and other relevant
stakeholders, particularly when drafting resolutions,
presidential statements and press statements. We
believe such interaction has the potential not only to
enhance the quality of the Council's decisions, but also
to engender an equally important sense of common
ownership in them, thereby strengthening the prospects
for their effective implementation.

As a country that strongly espouses greater
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, Indonesia naturally attaches particular
importance to the ways and means that might facilitate
interaction between them. In line with resolution 1631
(2005) and the World Summit Outcome document, the
Security Council has on some occasions conducted
enhanced consultations and cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations, as well as the Group of
77 and China, the NAM. and other groupings, to speak
on specific subjects in its open debates.

Investment in such interaction would help
enhance the wealth of information, insights and the
spectrum of perspectives that guide the Council's
deliberation and decisions and also promote synergy
between the Council's efforts and those of regional
organizations. Of particular significance is the
promotion of interaction between the Security Council
and the troop-contributing countries (TCCs), not only
in the drawing up of mandates, but also in their
implementation and when the situation on the ground
demands it.

In short, more interaction between the Council
and the wider membership of the United Nations
should be promoted. A footnote, however, may be
needed. It is important that such interaction be
inclusive, involving each member of the Council,
consistent in its application, reflecting the Council's
readiness to engage with parties that may make
contributions to its decision-making, and transparent.
Taken to the extreme, we are concerned by situations in
which discussions on draft resolutions and statements
are carried out outside the Council proper, leaving less
than optimal opportunities for deliberation on them
within the Council.

No doubt, we are all for the promotion of
efficiency in the Council's working methods. In that
connection, Indonesia wishes to acknowledge the
important steps the Secretariat has taken in carrying
out several of the recommendations identified in the
note by the President contained in document
S/2006/507. I should now like to share some
concluding thoughts.

Form follows function. We believe that in
considering the various facets of the Council's working
methods, including the possible format of Council
meetings, it is important that we not lose sight of the
underlying objectives or aims of the activity in
question. With regard to consolidation and further
progress, we believe that it is important that the
progress already made in the implementation of the
note by the President be consolidated and that renewed
and concerted efforts be made where progress is yet to
be made.
As a matter of principle, Indonesia shall
consistently place a premium on working methods that
promote transparency and greater interaction between
the Council and the wider membership. Not least, we
shall consistently place a premium on working methods
that offer the best chance for the Council to speak with
a common voice in carrying out its Charter-mandated
responsibilities. It is imperative that the Council be
transparent as well as equitable and just in its approach
to all threats and disputes that imperil international
peace and stability. We seek a Council that safeguards
the interests of all and whose decisions and actions are
in full consonance with the established principles of
international law and the Charter of the United
Nations.

