Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like first to
congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency of the
Security Council for this month of July. I would also
like to express my gratitude to the Secretary-General,
his Special Representative Ms. Coomaraswamy and the
Executive Director of UNICEF, Mr. Lake, for their
comprehensive briefings. Japan very much appreciates
the advocacy activities of Ms. Coomaraswamy, in
particular her country visits, as well as the dedicated
field work done by UNICEF in the area of children and
armed conflict.

While there has been commendable progress,
such as the signing of action plans by the Governments
of Afghanistan and Chad this year with the United
Nations to end the recruitment and use of child
soldiers, many challenges still remain on the agenda in
terms of children and armed conflict, including sexual
violence against children.

Based on Japan's two-year experience in the
Council's Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, until the end of last year, I would like to
focus on three issues that we regard as particularly
important, namely, attacks on schools and hospitals,
accountability for persistent perpetrators and a
comprehensive approach.

First, Japan is deeply concerned about the
reported trend of an increasing number of attacks on
schools and hospitals during conflicts. We strongly
condemn the perpetrators of such attacks, in particular
those who target female students and girls' schools.

Attacks on and the military use of educational
and medical facilities and attacks against pupils,
teachers and medical personnel not only deprive
children of their lives but also seriously violate a
child's fundamental rights to access to educational and
medical services. Such acts are not permissible under
any circumstances, in particular in conflict situations.
The Security Council should play a key role in
protecting children's rights to education and health.

In that regard, we welcome that the new
resolution just adopted by the Council (resolution 1998 (2011)), which Japan proudly sponsored, requests the
Secretary-General to include in the annexes to his
reports those parties that engage in recurrent attacks on
schools and hospitals and against protected persons in
relation to such facilities.

Secondly, Japan continues to be concerned about
the fact that as many as 15 parties to conflict have been
listed for more than five consecutive years in the
annexes to the Secretary-General's reports. In order to
ensure accountability for persistent perpetrators, the
Security Council must reinforce targeted measures
against them, as the Council already agreed to impose
seven years ago in resolution 1539 (2004).

We welcome the fact that, as a result of the
briefing by Ms. Coomaraswamy in the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the Committee included several individuals
in its sanctions list for their grave violations against
children. We encourage the holding of briefings on a
more regular basis to the relevant sanctions committees
by both the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict.

We commend the German presidency and all
Council members for addressing in very strong terms
the issue of accountability for persistent perpetrators in
the new resolution.

Thirdly, I would also like to underline the need to
address the issue of children and armed conflict in a
more comprehensive manner, through cooperation
between Member States and the United Nations
system. Support must be ensured seamlessly, from the
protection of children in conflict to the rehabilitation,
care and reintegration during peacebuilding efforts of
those formerly associated with armed forces or groups
and who are victims of sexual violence. Children's
perspectives need to always be considered in the
processes and programmes related to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration efforts, as well as
those associated with security sector reform,
landmines, unexploded ordnance and cluster munitions.

We also expect that the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, apart from just adopting
conclusions on each situation annually, will be more
creative in holding special meetings and issuing
political messages in a timely manner in response to an
urgent appeal by a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.
In its assistance to conflict and post-conflict
countries, Japan has placed great importance on the
protection and empowerment of children, who are the
most vulnerable. For example, in cooperation with
international partners, we have extended assistance in
the areas of rehabilitating child victims of landmines
and providing mine-risk education in countries such as
Cambodia. Through the United Nations Trust Fund for
Human Security, Japan has also supported community-
based programmes that improve the educational
environment and provide education and training for
former child soldiers in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. By preventing and alleviating the deleterious
impacts of conflict, we will continue to endeavour to
enable children around the world to have a brighter
future.

