Mr. Campbell (Ireland): The representative of Italy
outlined the views of the European Union on the current
situation in Lebanon in the Council debate that took place
last Monday. The European Union has repeatedly called
on all the parties to show the utmost restraint and to cease
all military activities in order to end the current cycle of
violence.

The tragic events earlier today in southern Lebanon
mark a grave deterioration of the current situation and one
which can only be viewed with the deepest concern by all
interested in securing a lasting peace in Lebanon and
throughout the Middle East.

The Government of Ireland earlier today strongly
condemned the attack on the headquarters of the Fijian
battalion of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), which resulted in a large number of civilian
deaths and injuries, as well as in injuries to UNIFIL

 

personnel. Such attacks on United Nations facilities are
wholly unacceptable. My Government has conveyed its
sympathy to the injured and to the families of those killed
as well as to the Governments of Lebanon and Fiji.

We reiterate our call on all the parties to respect fully
the safety and security of UNIFIL, in which Ireland has
served as a major contributor for many years, so that the
Force can effectively carry out its mandate. We welcome
the clear language to that effect in the resolution that the
Council unanimously adopted this evening.

From the outset of the crisis in Lebanon, my
Government has been urging all parties to show the utmost
restraint and to end hostilities at the earliest opportunity.
We have also expressed our grave concern about the
growing humanitarian crisis in Lebanon arising from recent
developments.

Today's events underline ever more clearly the need
for all parties to respond to the appeals, from whatever
quarter, for restraint and for an end to violence, which
assists only the enemies of peace. My Government is
seriously concerned that the spiralling of violence we are
now witnessing could, if not quickly halted, pose a serious
danger to the Middle East peace process. That must not
happen.

We welcome the resolution adopted by the Council
this evening, which, together with the ongoing diplomatic
initiatives, should achieve the urgent objective of ending the
current crisis and avoiding further casualties.

