Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): The Plurinational State
of Bolivia is grateful for the briefing provided by the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock. We
express our support to him in carrying out his mandate.

We deplore the fact that the crisis in Syria
has generated so much suffering, destruction and
loss of human life. According to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
there have been more than 500,000 deaths since the
conflict began and around 7,000 just from January to
September this year. It is unacceptable that there are
now 13.5 million people who require humanitarian
assistance, 6.3 million internally displaced persons and
3.5 million people who continue to live in areas that are
besieged or difficult to access. Many of them are girls,
boys and elderly people.

We believe that humanitarian assistance must
arrive in an expedited manner and urge the parties to
guarantee and facilitate humanitarian access. In that
sense, we reiterate once again our heartfelt thanks for
and acknowledgement of the work being undertaken
by the staff of the various agencies and humanitarian
assistance organizations, and we demand that
international humanitarian law be upheld while they
carry out their risky work on the ground.

Bolivia wishes to highlight the agreements reached
at the latest meeting in Astana, held in September.
We believe this process is an effective complement to
the Geneva negotiations. Since the beginning, it has
allowed thousands of lives to be saved thanks to the
effective implementation of the de-escalation zones,
which has significantly reduced the escalation and level
of violence in Syria. We welcome the establishment of
new de-escalation zones in eastern Ghouta, in some
areas of the north of Homs, Idlib and the neighbouring
provinces of Ladhiqiyah, Hama and Aleppo, as well as
in areas in southern Syria.

Nevertheless, we reaffirm that the establishment
of de-escalation and security zones should be a
temporary measure based on a consensus among the
guarantors, and under no circumstances should it
undermine the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. We
also highlight the efforts carried out by Russia, Iran
and Turkey, the guarantors of the ceasefire on Syrian
territory whose joint work created the four violence
de-escalation zones, facilitating the establishment of
a joint coordination centre that will make it possible
to better manage a violence-reduction process in more
de-escalation zones.

We underscore the important work that the Russian
Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the
Syrian Arab Republic has been carrying out, both as a
guarantor of security in the deployment of humanitarian
assistance and in the evacuation of people from the
areas in which armed confrontations have taken place.

According to OCHA, September was the deadliest
month of the year for civilians subjected to daily
attacks in residential areas. These recent events in
Syria indicate again the urgent need to both revitalize
the political process in Geneva and reinforce the
tangible results of Astana, in consultation, of course,
with all the parties involved, including the Cairo and
Moscow platforms, in order to enable the development
of confidence-building measures and thereby improve
the political and humanitarian situation.

Finally, we express our solidarity with the workbeing
done in Astana, and we commend the commitment of
lhchostofthedialoguc,theGovernmentofKazakhstan. The President (spoke in French): There are no

, , , . more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
We call tor compliance with the agreements reached in
I now invite Council members to informal

Astana, as W511 as With resolution 2336 (2016), 50 that consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.

they may be fully implemented. The meeting rose at 3.30pm.
