Mr. Castellen Duarte (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation commends you, Sir, for
convening this important meeting on a subject of
particular importance to us all. I should also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his extensive and
detailed annual report on children and armed conflict,
contained in document S/2007/757, which reflects
progress and challenges and takes global stock of that
thorny problem in the light of international
instruments, including relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.

Children are humankind's greatest treasure. They
represent the continuity of our species, our future, and
the bridge to generations to come. According to the
Gospel of Saint Matthew, Jesus Christ, in a discussion
with his apostles at which they argued about which
among them was the most important, placed a child in
their midst and said "unless you turn and become like
children, you will never enter the kingdom of heaven"
(The Holy Bible, Matthew 18:3-4).

My delegation shares the concerns referred to in
the Secretary-General's report about a series of acts,
undertaken in armed conflict throughout the world, that
violate children's human rights. Those include the
recruitment of children and internal displacement;
cross-border incursions by armed groups to recruit
children in refugee camps; the targeting of girls and
boys alike for sexual and gender-based violence,
including rape; the growing frequency of children
being detained for their alleged link to armed groups,
in contravention of international norms, concerning
which the Secretary-General cites instances in
countries on three continents; systematic and deliberate
attacks on students, teachers and schools, particularly
schools for girls, with the aim of preventing them from
studying; and the use of weapons with indiscriminate
effect, including cluster munitions, in areas with
civilian populations, with serious consequences,
particularly for children and long after conflicts have
ended.
In addition, in armed conflicts there is organ
trafficking, separation of families and the indirect
effects such as the loss of basic services, including
provision of drinking water, sanitation and health and
education services, and also increased poverty,
malnutrition and disease and the terrible psychological
impact of war on children.

Among the signs of progress, the report of the
Secretary-General points to major precedents for
ending impunity for those who commit crimes against
children, such as the confirmation of charges against
various suspects by the International Criminal Court
and the pronouncement of sentences by the Special
Court for Sierra Leone, including with regard to ending
the recruitment of children by the forces in conflict in
Cote d'Ivoire. It is also important that national
authorities, who are responsible for ending impunity,
prosecute those who violate the rights of children in
their territories. Particular attention should be given to
the situation of children in post-conflict situations.

We would like to support the recommendations of
the Secretary-General set out in his report, especially
those regarding equal weight to all categories of grave
violations against children, not just those related to
preventing the recruitment of children by armed forces
or groups; support for countries in implementing the
monitoring and reporting mechanism within the
framework of resolution 1612 (2005); the possibility of
targeted measures against parties that continue to
commit grave violations against children; and
immediate consideration of the grave humanitarian,
human rights and development consequences of cluster
munitions.

