Mr. Ngafuan (Liberia): I bring greetings from Her
Excellency Mrs. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, President of
the Republic of Liberia, as well as from Liberians both
at home and abroad. Liberia commends you, Madam
President, and other members of the Council, for
elevating the ebola crisis onto the agenda ofthis body and
bringing into focus the urgency of international action.
We hope that today's deliberations will spur a response
from the global community that is commensurate with
the speed and intensity of the Ebola challenge.

Until 22 March 2014 - when the Ebola virus disease
invaded our country and began to wreak havoc in Foya,
a small city in a tri-State area where Liberia, Guinea
and Sierra Leone meet - the Liberian people, with the
unswerving support of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia, had been enjoying the dividends of the peace
achieved in 2003, following 14 years of bloody civil
conflict. During those years of calm, we succeeded in
institutionalizing the democratic culture and had begun
to take some strong steps, with the support of the United
Nations and other international partners, to address the

legacy of socioeconomic devastation bequeathed by the
protracted Liberian civil war.

Since the Ebola outbreak, the Government of
Liberia has taken a host of measures, including the
heightening of awareness and prevention campaigns
to address the crystallized denial and the deep-rooted
traditional practices that create fertile ground for the
spread of the disease. We declared a state of emergency,
and we are continuing to dedicate significant amounts
of our own paltry resources to the fight. We have also
enlisted the constructive involvement of our people in
the battle as we constantly review and revise strategies
to accommodate to the evolving nature of the crisis.

In spite of our efforts, buttressed by those of our
international partners - prominently the World Health
Organization (WHO), Medecins Sans Frontieres and
the United States Center for Disease Control - the
Ebola virus disease continues to sprint faster than our
collective efforts to contain it. It has now extended its
deadly embrace to nearly 2,800 persons in Liberia,
leading to the loss of 1,500 precious lives. One hundred
and seventy of our small community of health-care
workers have already been infected, 80 of whom
have lost their lives. Unfortunately, given that women
constitute the bulk of our health-care workers and are
traditionally the ones who care for sick members of the
family, nearly 70 per cent of all those infected by the
Ebola virus disease in Liberia are women.

The huge toll that Ebola has taken on health-care
workers and on our general health system has seriously
undermined our ability to adequately respond to routine
illnesses such as malaria, typhoid fever, measles, and
diarrhoea. Moreover, an increasing number of pregnant
women are dying while trying to give life.

Even before the outbreak, we were grappling
with herculean challenges. They include finding
productive employment for a significant number of
our people - especially the youth, some of whom are
ex-combatants - strengthening the rule of law and
implementing measures for security sector reform.
We were fully involved in various peacebuilding
and peace consolidation activities through Liberia's
engagement with the Peacebuilding Commission.
We were also making valiant efforts to comply with
regional protocols aimed at curbing the spread of
small arms and light weapons and transnational crime.
The Ebola outbreak has distracted our attention from
those national priorities and has gravely undermined
our ability to address them, with the attendant risk of
adversely affecting peace and security in our country
and our region.

The impact of Ebola has been multidimensional. It
has negatively affected all sectors of our economy and
has effectively arrested the progress of our nation. A
preliminary assessment points to an estimated decline
in real growth of the gross domestic product of 3.4 per
cent, plummeting from an earlier projection of 5.9 per
cent to a low of 2.5 per cent. The mining, agriculture
and services sectors are expected to bear the greatest
brunt of the crisis. As we mourn daily the loss of a
family member, a friend or a fellow citizen as a result of
Ebola, we are becoming increasingly concerned about
the long-term socioeconomic difficulties that the Ebola
virus disease will occasion.

Liberia expresses its profound appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his many initiatives, including
his announcement today of a new United Nations
mission - the United Nations Mission for Ebola
Emergency Response, or UNMEER 4 to scale up the
response and mobilize the international community
to deliver urgently needed support in a coordinated
manner. We thank the wider international community,
including the African Union, for all the effort and the
resources - financial, human, and material - that
have so far been dedicated to the fight against Ebola.
The Liberian Government and people offer deep
gratitude to President Barack Obama and the people of
the United States for the heart-warming announcement
that the United States Government will take a host of
bold and concrete initiatives, including the deployment
of engineers, military and medical personnel and
equipment to our region to establish new treatment
units and to train national staff. As a major Power, the
United States has made a major move, and it is our hope
that new, additional and complementary contributions
will be forthcoming to our region in a true expression
of international solidarity.

While we commend some members of the
international community for extending hands of
solidarity and empathy to us as we grapple with this
virus, we are shocked and remain concerned by the
actions of others in imposing travel and other restrictions
on Ebola-affected countries. Those actions, which run
counter to advice from the WHO, the International
Civil Aviation Authority and other experts, border on
blanket stigmatization and have now started to seriously
undermine humanitarian efforts in our countries. We
therefore call upon the concerned Member States to
reconsider their policies in light of the expert advice
provided by the specialized international agencies.

The experts have put out a very gloomy prognosis
for what would happen in the next few weeks or months
if the global community fails to take bigger, bolder
and timely action to disrupt the further transmission
of Ebola. Just three weeks ago, WHO estimated that
20,000 persons run the risk of being infected, half of
whom may come from Liberia alone. Two days ago,
President Obama, while appropriately declaring the
Ebola epidemic a potential threat to global security,
expressed fears that if the current trend continues,
hundreds of thousands of people may be infected with
the virus.

The global community cannot remain passive and
allow those apocalyptic predictions to come to pass. We
cannot sit idly and watch, as ifwe were watching a movie
on our TV screens. The sobering reality is that we are not
watching a pre-recorded movie with a predetermined
climax. We, the affected countries, as well as countries,
institutions and individuals of good conscience across
the globe, are all actors in this evolving plot and can
effect the ultimate outcome, based on what we do or fail
to do. It would be tragically shameful if we failed to act
quickly, robustly and concertedly in putting an end to
the spread of this deadly disease.

We therefore thank the Security Council for the
forward-looking resolution 2177 (2014), adopted here
today, and encourage all Member States, to support the
resolution through concrete actions. Let us all join in
the Act Now campaign against Ebola.

