Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
start by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. I assure
you of our full support and cooperation with a view to
ensuring that this month, too, will be a very successful
and productive one for the Council. We have no doubt
that that will be the case, given your great skill and the
able manner in which you are conducting our business.

I would also like to reiterate our gratitude for the
commendable conduct of the Council's work by
Ambassador Munir Akram and his team during the
month that has just ended.

I wish to welcome the presence in the Council
Chamber and the participation in this meeting of
Chairman Bryant and his delegation. Their presence
provides a very good - indeed, historic - opportunity
for a productive dialogue between the Security Council
on the one hand and the Liberian authorities and the
Liberian people on the other.

That dialogue will certainly enhance the
preparations for the forthcoming Security Council
mission to West Africa, including Liberia, which we
hope will take place later this month. Chairman
Bryant's presence is also a mark of the qualitative
change in the situation prevailing in Liberia compared
with that of six months ago. That is proof of the
personal qualities and commitment of the members of
the Government of Liberia to the cause of the people.

I would also like to thank Mr. Klein for the clarity
of his briefing, and to commend the personnel of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) for the
successful way in which they have been implementing
the mandate of the Mission. The results achieved so far
have exceeded our expectations. That demonstrates that
the leadership and the political and material support of
the Council and the international community are
among the determining factors in dealing with complex
crises.

The situation in Liberia continues to be a central
question for the Security Council and for the continent.
During the solemn launching of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union just over a week ago,
heads of State or Government, while welcoming the
progress being made in the peace process in Liberia,
noted, however, that there is still much to be done to
ensure that peace is truly consolidated in the country. It
is therefore timely that the Security Council is meeting
to review the situation in Liberia and to welcome the
progress that has been achieved.

In his most recent report (S/2004/430), the
Secretary-General described the ceasefire as largely
holding, while recognizing that the security situation
remains fragile, owing to the fact that the disarmament
process has yet to be completed. That is also a fact,
judging from what we have been told this morning.

The consolidation of peace in the country will
depend mostly on the achievements of the Government
of Liberia during this critical, but key, transitional
period of the country, from war to peace and from
relief to first steps of recovery.

As has been repeatedly said, the Government of
Liberia will be able to handle this transitional period
only if its efforts, the political will of the Liberian
people and political forces involved in the process are
duly and promptly complemented by adequate
assistance from the international community. This
meeting could be a good opportunity for the Council to
reiterate the support of the international community.

The challenges faced by Liberia are indeed
enormous. Evidence of extensive destruction to
infrastructure and the social fabric is overwhelming.
According to the Secretariat's Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, non-
governmental organizations and United Nations
agencies, of Liberia's population of 3.3 million, 1.7
million people are in need of assistance, 80 per cent
live below the poverty line, 35 per cent are
undernourished and 75 per cent do not have access to
clean water, while unemployment has reached 85 per
cent. The Government has also to face the burden of
refugees and displaced persons and the difficult task of
restoring State authority.

Faced with that economic and social
environment, the Government has spared no effort to
build peace in Liberia, and that is very commendable.
The main question remains how to make the peace
process irreversible in such a fragile situation.

It is our View that to make this positive trend
irreversible, the key role will have to be played not
only through the efforts of Liberians, but also through
the international community's implementation of the
commitment made at the International Reconstruction
Conference for Liberia, held in New York just a few
months ago, in February. In that connection, it is a real
concern that of the $522 million pledged, only $66
million have been received so far.

By presenting the Results-Focused Transitional
Framework, the Government of Liberia and the
partners have clearly pointed out not only the needs to
be met, but also the right way to ensure a successful
transition and sustainable peace. Chairman Bryant has
shown his personal commitment to the successful
execution of this Framework by heading the
Implementation and Monitoring Committee itself.

As was established during the Security Council
meeting on complex crises and the United Nations,
held last month under the Pakistani presidency, Liberia
is one of those complex crises in which the link
between peace and development must remain at the
core of the international community's response.

God endowed Liberia with natural resources that
can contribute significantly to the prosperity of its
people. Assistance from the international community
should therefore focus on helping Liberia to exploit
those natural resources for the benefit of its population.
We commend the Government of Liberia, and
Chairman Bryant in particular, for the administrative,
political and economic reform measures, which have
been presented in a very detailed form to the Council
this morning.

We welcome the role of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) in assisting the National
Transitional Government to restore proper management
of the country's natural resources and in devising
mechanisms for ensuring accountability and
transparency in the collection and disbursement of
revenues, as well as in restoring institutional capacities
and a legal framework to end impunity.

UNMIL is putting in place adequate tools for
Liberia for a lasting solution to the problems affecting
the country, as that will enable full control of the
situation by the Liberian Government. The
establishment by the Transitional Government of a task
force to deal with Security Council sanctions is further
proof of its political will and commitment. Those
efforts also call for adequate Council attention. We are
of the opinion that the Council needs to respond
effectively to help and to respond to the plea made by
Chairman Bryant here this morning concerning the
ending of sanctions.

Liberia has been described in the recent past as
the epicenter of subregional instability. Progress made
towards peace is evident. The restoration of confidence
between the countries of the region is under way, and
useful lessons have been learned from the conflict in
Liberia and neighbouring countries that have enabled
the United Nations to develop a regional approach.
That will also prevent new conflicts in the region.

The commendable work being performed by
UNMIL, the Economic Community of West African
States, United Nations agencies, the Bretton Woods
institutions and non-governmental organizations, as
well as other partners, constitutes steady steps towards
the stabilization of Liberia. It is our conviction that the
political will and the unity of the Liberians is a key
factor. With the assistance of the international
community, Liberia will regain its rightful place in the
world and will play its role as a pioneer of the United
Nations and African unity, a key player for the political
independence and economic integration of Africa, as
well as a symbol of freedom for the entire continent.

To paraphrase what Chairman Bryant said just a
little while ago, leadership is about inspiration.
Chairman Bryant inspires us to continue to work with
him and his Government toward building peace in
Liberia and reconstructing that great country.

