Mr. Cowen (Ireland): I wish, on behalf of Ireland
and the Irish Government, to join other members of the
Council in extending our sympathy to the United States
Government and to the families of those who lost their
lives as a result of the plane crash in Queens, New
York, this morning.

I think we are here this morning, in this
ministerial format, to assert an agenda of hope and
commitment in opposition to those who wish to impose
an agenda of despair and tyranny and terror. Yesterday
afternoon's memorial ceremony at the World Trade
Center emphasized for us, yet again, that the atrocities
of 11 September challenge everything we cherish. It
reconfirmed for us all that the terrorists hold in
contempt everything that the United Nations embodies.
Terrorists have no respect for freedom or tolerance;
they have no respect for the human rights of innocent
people; they have no respect for promoting diversity
and pluralism; they have no respect for creeds or
religions; and they certainly have no respect for the
views and convictions of others.

So it has been necessary for the international
community to mobilize effectively, answering what is
in effect the call of duty and of honour. In continuing
to do that, we have to act with courage and
determination, and also with wisdom and foresight. In
the immediate period ahead, we seek to bring to justice
those who perpetrated these vile acts, and it is right
that that should be the case. We also, of course, have to
put in place provisions of law and policies and action
by Governments throughout the world that will destroy
the capacity of those forces to act. That means that we
have to go beyond words. It means action by us all,
together.
I fully subscribe to what the Secretary-General
has said this morning: that all States need to sign, ratify
and implement without delay the 12 existing
international legal instruments in this connection. And
I think that to confirm the seriousness of our intent we
must ensure that we complete and agree on a
comprehensive convention on terrorism, and that the
definition terrorism involve the necessary legal
precision and moral clarity to which the Secretary-
General has referred. I do not believe that anyone in
the civilized world would have any objection to or
problem with defining terrorism as callous disregard
for and wilful taking of innocent civilian life, or the
proposition that no cause on this Earth, political or
otherwise, can justify the methods that terrorism
represents.

Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) of 28
September offers a blueprint for action in how to
remove permanently the capacity of international
terrorism to operate: its funds and resources, its
organization and its capacity to group and re-group.

We warmly welcome the work of the Security
Council Committee on counter-terrorism in laying solid
foundations for full implementation of all the
provisions of resolution 1373 (2001), and we
congratulate its members. In implementing that
resolution, we have to work together to strengthen the
capacity of all States to do so effectively. That means
the provision of mutual support and assistance,
wherever it is necessary.

We also need to assert, strongly and powerfully,
in the period ahead the indispensable role of the United
Nations in tackling common threats and in achieving
joint objectives and goals. The United Nations
represents the foundation of international law, the focal
point of international endeavour, the place where we
come together to assert universal ideals and to look to
new horizons of joint action. It cannot and should not
be used by the international community, or any one of
us, only on bad days and disregarded on good days: we
need the United Nations more than ever before in a
world that is becoming increasingly economically
integrated but with truly dangerous fissures in its
structures.

International terrorism can fester through our own
complacency if we fail to tackle vigorously its capacity
to act. We have now finally learned the lesson, at a
terrible cost. We must also tackle the wider
conditions - and there are such conditions - that can
allow terrorism to survive and even flourish.
We have many challenges to meet in building a
fairer international system. Making the point that the
200 richest people in the world have greater assets than
the two billion people at the other end of the spectrum
is not to make a philosophical point. I think it is neither
wise nor secure - nor right - to continue to conduct
world affairs in that way.

At a time of action against a frightening common
threat, we must make sure that we do not simply ignore
such realities, which are faced by many people: we
would do so at our peril. It is important that, in
pursuing retributive justice, we also pursue with equal
seriousness the issue of distributive justice. It is
necessary, of course, to assert that our most effective
response to a great evil must be based not only on
shared determination but also on our common values
and on our commitment to help and support each other
within the framework of the United Nations and the
broad agenda it pursues.

Ireland supports the draft ministerial declaration
before the Council.

