Sir Jeremy Greenstock: A number of Security
Council delegations came to the View late last year that
the Security Council's work on counter-terrorism
needed to be stepped up a gear. For all the progress
made by the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) in
monitoring and encouraging the working
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) by Member
States, achieving real improvements in practice on the
ground everywhere is taking too long. The threat is real
and immense. The urgency is irrefutable. As Chairman
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, I welcome this
ministerial meeting to raise the pace.

So what has the CTC achieved against the
objective of ensuring that all Governments have taken
effective steps to ensure that there is no support, active
or passive, for terrorism anywhere? In 15 months, the
CTC has received over 280 reports from 178 Member
States. These show that the vast majority of
Governments throughout the world have begun to
respond to the challenge laid down in resolution 1373
(2001) to prevent and suppress terrorism. In almost
every case, parliaments have begun to consider or to
adopt new laws. Governments have reviewed the
strength of their institutions to fight terrorism, and in
some cases have already strengthened them. But there
is still much more to do before terrorists find that the
bar against terrorism has been raised everywhere. It is
in recognition of this that I would like to set out for the
Council today the views of the CTC on what more we
can do to further global implementation of resolution
1373 (2001).

First, all States must begin to work towards this
shared goal. Thirteen States have not yet submitted a
report to the Committee. They are over a year late. Two
States have not yet even picked up the telephone; they
are Liberia and Timor-Leste - although that new
Member of the United Nations should be allowed more
time. We know that the others - Chad, Equatorial
Guinea, Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, the Marshall Islands,
Sao Tome and Principe, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Swaziland, Tuvalu and Vanuatu - are working on
reports, three with outside assistance set up by the
CTC. We know that others have real difficulties. But,
whatever the underlying reasons, they are failing in
their responsibilities as Members of the United
Nations. The declaration to be adopted today sets a
final date for submission of 31 March. The CTC will
continue to be in contact with all these States, offering
whatever help or advice they need to complete the
reporting requirement. But after 31 March it must be
clear that any non-reporting State will be held to be
non-compliant with resolution 1373 (2001).

Secondly, States must understand what they need
to do to improve their implementation of resolution
1373 (2001), and do it. The Committee, through its
confidential letters to States, offers advice and
guidance on how to fill the gaps in implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), focusing as a first priority on
legislation and the issue of terrorist financing.
Resolution 1373 (2001) is a complicated resolution,
requiring significant effort by States to strengthen their
laws and institutions to cope with the modern threats of
terrorism. States must take prompt action, including
having a process in hand for becoming party to the 12
relevant conventions and protocols. The CTC will
bring to the attention of the Council any difficulties it
encounters, as requested in the declaration that will be
adopted today.

The CTC pays tribute to the large number of
Member States that have worked hard to meet the
requirements. We know that the task is not easy, and
that many States will require help. The Committee
stands ready to offer whatever guidance and advice it
can directly, and encourages States to contact the
Committee's experts on any matter arising from the
Committee's letters. The experts are a source of
tremendous knowledge, and I commend them for their
huge contribution so far. States can also use the online
directory of counter-terrorism information and sources
of assistance, a tool for Governments to access
information on best practices and potential assistance
programmes. The experts will continue to facilitate the
provision of assistance, being in touch with States
about their assistance needs, and with potential
providers on the current priorities, which at present are
legislation and countering terrorist financing. But all
States have the responsibility not only to improve their
own counter-terrorism capacity, but also, where they
can, to help others. Only by working together will we
defeat the universal threat of terrorism. It is right that
the declaration calls on States to assist each other. Not
enough has yet been done actually to get projects up
and running.

Achieving all this will be easier for individual
States if they work within the collective effort of their
region. Since its establishment the CTC has developed
links with international, regional and subregional
organizations that have, or intend to develop, counter-
terrorism programmes. International organizations
must work with States on standards in their own areas
of competence. Regional organizations must develop
an understanding of the international obligations of
States in the area of counter-terrorism, and help their
members to meet them. International and regional
organizations have key roles to play. The CTC looks
forward to discussing this with such organizations at
the special meeting to be held on 7 March, and to
setting action on hand.

So far the CTC has not initiated action on
paragraph 4 of resolution 1373 (2001), which notes the
potential links between terrorism and other forms of
international organized crime. But what is happening
out there, in areas of the world vulnerable to terrorism
and international organized crime, is threatening. The
structures that the Committee is helping to put in place
for counter-terrorism may have a wider value and
effectiveness in strengthening the capacity of all
Governments against international crime of all kinds.
There may be advantages, too, for our work as a
Council against the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. I would hope that ministers will demand
accelerated action across the full range of these vital
security issues.

Let me close by paying tribute to the work of
Security Council members on the CTC, and to the
Vice-Chairmen, the experts and the Secretariat
throughout 2002. We begin the new year with five new
members and a new Bureau. The Vice-Chairmen -
Ambassadors Aguilar Zinser of Mexico, Gaspar
Martins of Angola and Lavrov of the Russian
Federation - and I look forward to directing the work
of the CTC in the coming months. I am determined to
make my last three months in the chairmanship count,
and intend to pass on to Ambassador Arias of Spain a
Committee with a continued sense of purpose, direction
and momentum. The Security Council would expect
nothing less; the world of law and order can afford
nothing less. I hope that ministers will hold their
delegations to account for the right results.

