Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank Special
Representative Shearer and President Mogae for their
detailed updates, and most of all for their tremendous
efforts to restore peace in South Sudan.

The situation in South Sudan remains volatile.
Despite the declared ceasefires and the effects of the
rainy season, the fighting has continued throughout the
country, bringing only more civilian casualties, more
destruction of infrastructure, more displacement and
more food insecurity. Moreover, the fear looms that
the armed clashes may further intensify when the dry
season begins.

Ukraine continues to believe that there can be
no military solution to the crisis in South Sudan. A
genuine political process within the framework of the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan is the only viable option for
addressing the current challenges in South Sudan. The
leadership and other stakeholders in the country must
not only demonstrate their political will, but prove their
commitment to peace through their concrete deeds.

International support for a peaceful resolution of
the conflict in South Sudan reached an unprecedented
level last week. It is remarkable that three major
organizations - the United Nations, the African
Union and the Intergovernmental Authority for
Development - were united in their desire to put an
end to the suffering of the South Sudanese people. My
delegation welcomes the outcome of the African Union
Peace and Security Council ministerial meeting on
South Sudan held in New York a few days ago. We believe
that the communique issued after the meeting sends a
clear message that the status quo is not sustainable. We
also fully agree that the situation in South Sudan can
no longer be treated in a routine manner, including in
the Security Council. Urgent steps and decisions must
be taken if we are to ensure that the current momentum
does not become yet another lost opportunity for peace
and stability in South Sudan. In this light, I want to
highlight three points.

First, the fighting must stop. No political process
has a chance of succeeding under the whizz of bullets.
We call on all stakeholders to cease hostilities and
commit to a permanent ceasefire without preconditions
and in good faith.
Secondly, the political dialogue must be inclusive,
transparent and independent. The commencement
of activity of the National Dialogue Committee is a
positive step forward. To succeed, it must enjoy the
full support of all major groups of South Sudanese
society. As it was underscored in the African Union
Peace and Security Council communique, the national
dialogue should complement, and not be perceived as
as replacement for, the full implementation of the peace
agreement and the revitalization process led by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development Council
of Ministers.

That brings me to my third and final point.
Ukraine looks forward to the high-level revitalization
forum, which should create new momentum for the
implementation of the Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in South Sudan. In that regard, it is crucially
important that all actors involved fully coordinate their
efforts and speak with one voice.

In conclusion, I want to underline that there can be
no more excuses for not having peace in South Sudan.
The international community is ready and willing to
assist the Government of South Sudan. In turn, the
Government of South Sudan must finally deliver on its
own commitments.

