Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I wish at the outset to join my colleagues in
thanking Mr. Jan Egeland for providing us with up-to-
date information on the situation in respect of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

Clearly, solving that problem requires systematic
and coordinated action at the international, regional
and national levels. A swift United Nations response to
incidents of violence against civilians in armed conflict
can play an important role in addressing crisis
situations. The current tasks in that area should be
considered in the context of resolving a number of
conflicts, many of which have been mentioned today,
including those in the Sudan, Cote d'Ivoire, Burundi
and Haiti. Unfortunately, that list is far from
exhaustive.

One very important factor in preventing violence
against civilians is the elimination of impunity and
bringing to justice all persons guilty of crimes against
civilians. It is important to harmonize as fully as
possible the relevant international and national legal
instruments.

The Security Council must continue to make use
of the regional and country approach in dealing with
the problem of the protection of civilians. In that
connection, it is important to take account of the
economic, social, historical, religious, cultural and
other characteristics of the countries or regions
involved, as well as of the particular aspects of each
individual conflict, the root causes thereof and the best
way of arriving at a settlement. Indeed, regional and
subregional organizations can play a very important
role in that respect. As has been noted today, the
African Union monitoring mission in Darfur is doing a
great deal to stabilize the situation in the region, and it
is quite clear that it must be strengthened, in
accordance with proposed plans.

In recent years, the problem of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict has been viewed
increasingly from the perspective of human rights and
of monitoring compliance with the provisions of
international humanitarian law. Humanitarian activities
are one of the key components in a comprehensive
strategy aimed at preventing crisis and at bringing
about a post-conflict settlement. Such activities must,
of course, be based on the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations and on fundamental humanitarian
principles. Their success will depend largely on the
extent to which they are accompanied by efforts on the
part of the international community to find a political
settlement to a given conflict. There is an ever-growing
role in that respect for the Economic and Social
Council, as the organ responsible for coordinating the
humanitarian activities of the United Nations.

I agree with those colleagues who have raised the
issue of the importance of ensuring the safety of
humanitarian personnel who are working to help
vulnerable groups of people. We must step up
coordination in that area, particularly in the context of
integrated missions that have humanitarian, military,
political and reconstruction components. Such
coordination must be strengthened at the United
Nations system level, at the level of the various
international structures and also at the field level.
There is another important issue: ensuring
adequate protection for children during and after armed
conflict. We greatly appreciate the work of the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) in that respect.
There is a need to develop and strengthen the
educational infrastructure and also to try to put an end
to the forced recruitment of children by closing off
recruitment channels. As the Council is aware, work is
currently under way on a new Security Council
resolution on children and armed conflict that attaches
considerable importance to a monitoring and
accountability mechanism. Work is continuing on the
draft with respect to the need for further consideration
of a number of important issues, including the role of
the Security Council in putting in place a mechanism to
deal with situations that are not on the Council's
agenda. The Russian delegation trusts that consensus
will soon be arrived at and that the Council will then
be able to take an effective decision on what, I would
reiterate, I consider a most important issue.

We believe that a regular exchange of views on
enhancing Security Council activities and the work of
other structures of the Organization in protecting
civilians in armed conflict will give additional impetus
to efforts by the international community to deal with
this extremely important problem.

