Mr. Quinlan (Australia): The links between
terrorism and transnational crime and the dramatic
impact they have on contemporary conflict is a subject
that this Council has not adequately addressed before.
I therefore thank you, Mr. President, personally for
being here and for Chad's leadership in convening this
debate. I also thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman
for his briefing and Ambassador Tete Antonio for his
statement.

All speakers today have described how terrorist
groups and criminal networks each pose an increasing
threat to peace, security, development and growth.
Combined, the consequences are greater and more
complex. No region is immune. The effects are
particularly manifest in countries already affected by
conflicts, where the consequences of criminal activity
often exacerbate their very causes. Weak institutions are
corroded further, corruption is more firmly entrenched,
legitimate economic opportunities decline and become
less appealing, development is hindered, and conflicts
are prolonged.

The adoption of today's resolution 2195 (2014)
is an important advance. The report requested of the
Secretary-General should survey the links between
terrorism and transnational crime and should better
position the United Nations system to disrupt the ability
of terrorists to establish and benefit from those links.
The report should define how the Council can play a
more effective role

In the meantime, the Council can sharpen two of
its core tools. Both are important for the report we
have mandated from the Secretary-General and also
from the Secretary-General's independent review of
peacekeeping operations.

The first is United Nations peacekeeping and
special political missions. Eight of the eleven countries
facing the highest threat from Al-Qaida-affiliated
groups currently host United Nations missions. And
organized crime is a major threat in almost every
theatre in which United Nations missions are present.
In addressing the threat, we need to get more serious
about the role of those operations. We cannot ignore the
elephant in the room, as a recent International Peace
Institute report described it.

This starts with strengthening mandates in relation
to transnational organized crime. Missions also need
more tools and training to gather information on and
analyse the threat to help host States disrupt illicit
activities. United Nations police components can play
an important role in building the capacities of host-
State law enforcement in that area, as highlighted in
Resolution 2185 (2014), on policing, which the Council
adopted last month. Skills in areas like criminal
investigations, analysis and financial crime are relevant
to both transnational crime and terrorism.

The United Nations should deploy more serious
crime support units, such as the model proposed in
the Central African Republic, and the Standing Police
Capacity needs more expertise in this area. But the
support from United Nations missions also needs to
extend to judicial systems. Actual prosecutions and
convictions are one of the most important tools in the
fight. Strengthening border management is potentially
the most challenging task. The Council needs to consider
where the United Nations can play a more effective
role - drawing on modern technologies, providing
capacity-building of border agencies, supporting border
community engagement programmes and facilitating
regional initiatives.

Secondly, one of the most effective tools at the
Council's disposal - sanctions - should continue
to be finely honed to deny terrorist groups access
to resources and sanctuary and, most importantly,
to starve them of funds. As Chair of the Council's
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee for the past two years, I
have consistently tried to highlight that any individuals
who materially support the actions of a person or entity
on the Al-Qaida sanctions list are themselves eligible
to be included on the list and subject to the sanctions.
That includes organized criminal groups, even if
they have no ideological connection to Al-Qaida. The
Council reinforced that point when it identified the
key sources of financing for Islamic State for Iraq
and the Levant-Daesh in its 19 November presidential
statement (S/PRST/2014/23), which Australia brought
to the Council. States need to bring those facilitators to
the Council's attention.

And, as today's resolution 2195 (2014) reaffirms,
sanctions self-evidently need to be implemented if they
are to have any effect. The Council and the United
Nations system must deliver more support to key States
to ensure they have the technical capacity to implement
the sanctions measures. Member States are begging
for such assistance. And as Ambassador Antonio has
said this morning, that is especially important for
neighbouring States when an arms embargo and a peace
operation are being set up. Only then will we effectively
constrain the ability of terrorists and spoilers to procure
funds, arms and recruits.

It is also essential that the Council continue to
take more innovative steps to enforce the sanctions
measures where violations are acute. We have done that
in Somalia, as others have mentioned, by mandating
maritime interdiction of weapons and charcoal.
Charcoal alone has been giving Al-Shabab a financial
lifeline to the tune of $80 million annually.

There is also a great deal that Member States can
do. They can ratify and implement the key international
treaties on terrorism and transnational organized crime
to provide a stronger platform for cooperation; better
align responses to the nature and scale of the threats by
making more effective use of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) transnational crime
threat assessments; and build technical capacity in
law enforcement, border controls and criminal justice.
We would add to that capacity in following the money.
Going after the proceeds of crime through the use of
anti-money-laundering tools, financial intelligence,
asset freezes and seizures can be as effective in
reducing the incentives of criminal activity as going
after the criminals themselves.

Finally, stronger bilateral and regional partnerships
are fundamental. Strengthening intraregional
cooperation builds trust, facilitates information
exchange, enhances capacities and eliminates safe
havens for transnational crime. We welcome advances
in African regional networks that we have been briefed
on today. We have seen this work in our own region,
the Pacific, with the 18 Transnational Crime Units

that make up the Pacific Transnational Crime Network
having worked successfully to disrupt illicit drug,
firearms and wildlife trafficking throughout the region.
As the UNODC has often said, it takes a network to
defeat a network. We must strengthen our networks, use
the tools we have to maximum effect and above all keep
pace with the rapidly changing nature of the threat.

To conclude, it is today axiomatic that terrorism
and transnational crime are increasingly linked. It is
imperative we understand that reality and calibrate
our responses accordingly. This must be an ever-more
crucial dimension of the Council's role in maintaining
international peace and security. We again thank Chad
for the initiative in bringing this to us today.

