Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We express our
appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for
his comprehensive briefing. My delegationjoins others
in warmly welcoming Mr. Tieman Coulibaly, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of
Mali, to today's meeting.

We fully endorse the recommendations of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/541) and
would like to make the following observations for the
Council's consideration.

First, our main priority should be to accelerate
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. Kazakhstan welcomes the
increased cooperation between the Malian Government
and other signatories, which has resulted in progress as
evident in the deployment of mixed patrols in Kidal and
Timbuktu and the registration of combatants eligible
for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. We
commend the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, the African Union and the other relevant actors
for their important role in facilitating the dialogue
among the signatories.

My delegation encourages the parties to continue to
show genuine will in advancing the implementation of
the Agreement. We underscore the need to focus on the
three long-term strategic pillars of the Agreement that
are emphasized in the independent observer's report.
We reiterate that the Agreement's key provisions with
regard to encouraging national reconciliation, ensuring
basic services and strengthening resilience, economic
development, good governance and the rule of law
are essential to the process of establishing lasting
peace and stability in Mali. The genuine inclusion of
women and young people in the peace process and in
decision-making is also important to enduring stability.
Another crucial task is ensuring the transparent, fair,
peaceful and inclusive conduct of the presidential
elections in July. We welcome the Government's
electoral reforms and call on the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and the international community to
provide adequate financial and technical assistance to
the Government, which is crucial to the success of the
electoral process.

Addressing the deteriorating humanitarian situation
in northern and central Mali is equally important. We
therefore call on international partners and donors to
fund the humanitarian response plan for 2018. We urge
all parties to comply with international humanitarian
law and international human rights law.

With regard to the upcoming renewal of the
MINUSMA mandate, we support the independent
strategic review's recommendations, including on
ensuring a tailored approach to the protection of
civilians mandate and prioritizing the Mission's tasks
so as to increase its role in advancing the peace process.
In order to address the Mission's capability gaps, it is
critical to provide the contingents with better equipment
and predeployment training commensurate with the
situation of asymmetric conflict that Mali presents. It
is also worth considering the concept of equipment-
contributing countries.

Kazakhstan firmly believes that fully operationalizing
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel will
substantially strengthen the efforts of MINUSMA and
the Malian national security forces to combat terrorism
and other cross-border threats. Finally, like others, we
strongly condemn the violent attacks by terrorist groups
on civilians, humanitarian workers, the Malian security
forces and MINUSMA personnel. In conclusion,
we would like to commend Special Representative
Annadif and all the brave men and women representing
the United Nations in Mali who are committed to peace
in such a hazardous and challenging environment.

