Mr. Lucas (Angola): Mr. President, I thank you
on behalf of the Angolan delegation for convening this
meeting on the situation in Kosovo. We welcome the
Deputy Prime Minister of the Republic of Serbia to this
meeting of the Security Council, and we took good
note of the programme of action that he formulated in
his statement.

My delegation continues to follow closely the
developments in Kosovo, and on various occasions in
Security Council meetings we have expressed our
comprehensive views on the situation.

In today's meeting we would like to emphasize
the following. We join previous speakers in expressing
our great concern for the recent security incidents in
Kosovo. My delegation strongly condemns the recent
killing and wounding of young Kosovo Serbs - a
stupid and gratuitous crime. The perpetrators must be
brought, as soon as possible, to the dock. We convey
our heartfelt condolences to the families of the victims.
My delegation views those horrific crimes as a serious
setback for the United Nations efforts to foster multi-
ethnicity in Kosovo and create conditions for the return
and re-integration of the Kosovo Serb minority.

We welcome the meaningful progress achieved by
the political process in Kosovo and the progress at the
institutional level towards the goals set in Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) and the Constitutional
Framework. However, the progress made at the
institutional and political levels is not matched by
similar progress in the security situation and inter-
ethnic relations, which remain matters of great
concern.

We recognize the need to deploy continued efforts
to improve the security situation, particularly through
the strengthening of the Kosovo police and law
enforcement institutions. We also recognize the need
for a determined fight against sectarian extremists and
terrorist elements and against transnational organized
crime, lively scourges of the region whose existence is
a serious threat to the entire process of rebuilding
Kosovo. We support the work of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and insist on the necessity of a constructive dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina that should be further
expanded to political issues in order to achieve
concrete results.

My delegation urges the leaders of Kosovo to
show renewed commitment to the peace process and
the objectives set by the international community for
Kosovo. We reiterate that the policy of "standards
before status" remains a consistent strategy in framing
the objective of establishing a multi-ethnic and
democratic society in Kosovo, an endeavour that
requires permanent dialogue, patience and
determination.

To conclude, we would like to extend our support
to the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in Kosovo, Mr. Harri Holkeri. We wish him all
success in such a difficult but noble task.

