Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): Mr.
President, we wish to thank you very warmly for
having responded to our request for this emergency
meeting.

This meeting was made necessary by the situation
prevailing in the occupied Palestinian territories, which
have been reoccupied and where a full-fledged war has
been unleashed against the Palestinian Authority and
its leader, Chairman Arafat. Chairman Arafat is not
only being held hostage but also is in danger of being
killed by Israel's military, under the command of Prime
Minister Sharon, who in the past has been notorious for
his policy of oppression and deliberate attacks against
civilians, including assassinations.

These large-scale attacks and the direct
occupation of territories under Palestinian control
demonstrate once again that Mr. Sharon's
Government - which became more radicalized during
the holding of the historic Arab Summit in Beirut -
demonstrate that Israel refuses peace, as it did when the
Arab States, meeting in Beirut, held out an offer of
comprehensive peace which had elicited the support of
the vast majority of States.

Since the Madrid Conference, we have known
full well that Mr. Sharon is waiting for any Arab or
international initiative that might lead to a just and
comprehensive solution of the problem in the Middle
East, so that he can sabotage it.

It was no coincidence that Mr. Sharon led a
provocative mission to the Al-Aqsa Mosque in
September 2000. Indeed, at that very time many peace
initiatives were under way, and great strides were being
made in the direction of peace.

The reoccupation of territories under Palestinian
control is a policy that is tantamount to State terrorism.
It is also a means of economically strangling the area.
The policy of humiliation and targeted assassinations
devised by the Sharon Government in order to deal
with developments on the ground is the principal fuel
for the mounting frustration and despair of the
Palestinian people, who see that the prospects of an
entire people have been dimmed.

To put an end to the threat looming as a result of
the present situations, all Israeli forces must
immediately withdraw from territories under Palestinian
authority. The siege on President Yasser Arafat must be
lifted immediately and unconditionally: in the eyes of
the international community, he remains the very
embodiment of the Palestinian people and their
legitimate elected leader and representative.

Talks must begin to find a comprehensive
solution to the security problem so that peace
negotiations can resume. For some time the Palestinian
side has demonstrated its wish to negotiate a political
solution on the basis of agreed texts and existing
arrangements and terms of reference. The Beirut
summit aimed to put on the table a unified,
comprehensive and clear-cut Arab initiative, consistent
with international law, that would promote a just,
comprehensive and lasting solution to these problems
and would take account of the interests of all the
parties.

In this extremely sensitive situation, Tunisia
appeals yet again to all the members of the
international community to shoulder their
responsibility, to rise to the challenge in the occupied
territories and to use their influence to put an end to the
Israeli campaign of aggression against the Palestinian
people. Tunisia reaffirms that international protection
must be provided to the Palestinian people. All
necessary measures must be taken as soon as possible
to guarantee the personal safety of President Arafat,
and the siege on him must be lifted. Israel must be
compelled to respect international legality and comply
with existing agreements. It must respond seriously and
responsibly to the current Arab and international peace
initiatives.
Tunisia appeals to the Security Council to address
this extremely grave and urgent situation with
firmness. We call upon the Security Council to seize
the historic opportunity offered by the Beirut summit.
We must ensure that Israel does not make us miss this
rendezvous with history and this wonderful political
opportunity.

