Mr. Rowe (Sierra Leone): Mr. President, my
delegation would like to associate itself with the words
of welcome and congratulation extended to you by
previous speakers. We look forward to working with
you in your capacity as the President of the Security
Council and as the new Permanent Representative of
France.

Sierra Leone has no more child soldiers. We say
this not with a feeling of pride. We have no reason to
take pride in the fact that Sierra Leone is not named in
the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2002/ 1299)
among areas of conflict where children are still being
recruited and/or used as child soldiers. On the contrary,
we say Sierra Leone has no more child soldiers only
with a sense of relief; relief that our children, those
who survived the atrocious rebel war, are free at last
from the abominable practice of recruiting children to
kill and be killed.

As a country that has just emerged from a
prolonged and brutal armed conflict in which children
were both perpetrators and victims, we know from
experience the immediate and long-term consequences
of the abduction, drugging, training and deployment of
children for armed combat. Experience has also taught
us that urgent action must be taken to put an end to
such practices, first and foremost through the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants.

In 1999 the Government of Sierra Leone insisted
that its peace agreement with the rebel movement the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) must include an
appeal to the conscience of the parties to recognize that
the children of Sierra Leone, especially those affected
by the conflict, in View of their vulnerability, are
entitled to special care and protection consistent with
the provisions of the International Convention on the
Rights of the Child. The Government, for its part, also
pledged to accord particular attention to the issue of
child soldiers by mobilizing resources through the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, and through
the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and
other agencies, to address the special needs of these
children in the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) process.

I would like to pay tribute to the Special
Representative, Mr. Otunnu, and to Ms. Bellamy of
UNICEF for their untiring efforts on behalf of the
children of Sierra Leone. We would also like to
commend them for their statements this morning.

Sierra Leone has also learned from experience
that the problem of former child soldiers could be
addressed through the establishment of an oversight
institution for the welfare of children in a post-conflict
situation. Beyond the disarmament and demobilization
process, however, we have tried to ensure that the
welfare of children and the protection of their right to
develop in a peaceful environment are at the centre of
government policy-making and resource-allocation
strategies.
Our thanks again go to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Otunnu. His ground-
breaking 15-point agenda for action for the children of
Sierra Leone paved the way for the establishment in
January last year of a statutory National Commission
for War-Affected Children. It is now the principal child
protection and advocacy mechanism in the country.
Although the scope of its work is relatively wide and
covers different categories of war-affected children, the
Commission is expected to address the special needs of
former child combatants.

My delegation takes note of the reference in the
Secretary-General's report to the risk we face in Sierra
Leone of losing thousands of former child combatants
to the conflict across the border in Liberia. This
underscores our concern that in the absence of
adequate resources for implementing the Government's
reintegration programme for ex-combatants, especially
the thousands of demobilized child ex-combatants,
those warlords will take advantage of the situation and
recruit them again into the killing circus that has
characterized the activities of the rebel movements in
the subregion. We therefore endorse wholeheartedly the
recommendation that the Security Council and Member
States should be urged to provide sustained and
adequate resources to the relevant organizations
engaged in implementing DDR programmes for
children.

My delegation strongly believes that the
establishment of international norms prescribing the
involvement of children in armed conflict, and strict
compliance with those norms, are important steps in
our collective effort to rid the world of this
unconscionable practice. My delegation shares the
view set out by the Secretary-General in his report that
the codification of international norms and standards
for the protection of children during conflict has made
an impressive contribution to that effort. Sierra Leone
has ratified the two Optional Protocols to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. We have also
become a party to the African regional equivalent, the
Organization of African Unity and African Union
Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child. Our
ratification of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court is also a testimony to our commitment
to, among other things, the relevant provisions
concerning the recruitment and use of child soldiers,
and the mechanism of accountability for crimes
specific to children.

We also share the view of the Secretary-General
that the challenge today is to ensure their
implementation on the ground, that is, compliance with
these international norms. The list of violators
contained in his report is indeed an important step
forward in our efforts, as he puts it, "to induce
compliance with international child protection
obligations by parties to conflict" (S/2002/1299, para. 28).

However, my delegation believes - and we
would like to stress this point here - that we must also
recognize that rebels and other non-State insurgent
groups are not parties to those international instruments
on the involvement or use of children in armed
conflict. As we witnessed in Sierra Leone,
notwithstanding the commitments rebel movements
make in peace agreements, these forces, at least in the
West African subregion, account, in our view, for most
of the recorded abuses of international norms for the
protection of children in armed conflict. We recall here
the number of instances where the RUF rebel
movement reneged on peace and ceasefire agreements.

We observe that there are only four Governments
on the "name and shame" list annexed to the Secretary-
General's latest report. That of course does not mean
that we should downplay violations by States. The list
indicates clearly, as far as we are concerned, that ways
and means must be found for dealing more effectively
with the role of non-State actors in the recruitment and
use of child soldiers.

This brings my delegation to a related issue that
has been placed on the agenda of the Security Council:
the illegal trade and transfer of small arms and light
weapons. Many speakers referred to it this morning,
and Switzerland and other delegations also spoke about
it eloquently this afternoon.

The Sierra Leone delegation would like to take
this opportunity to reiterate once again its appeal to all
States, in particular manufacturers and their agents, to
ensure, including through appropriate legislation, that
these weapons do not get into the hands of rebel
movements and other non-State actors. Security
Council arms embargoes and travel restrictions against
rebel movements are very important - we recognize
that - but are certainly not enough, especially where
sanctions monitoring mechanisms do not exist or are
woefully ineffective.

Finally, based on the Sierra Leone experience, my
delegation would like to see in the draft resolution to
be adopted by the Security Council following its
discussion of the Secretary-General's report some
reference to the question of impunity. The Special
Court for Sierra Leone should be seen as an example of
the type of mechanism available to the international
community for addressing impunity, especially
impunity related to the recruitment of children to
commit heinous atrocities in conflict situations.

We feel that the Special Court could be regarded
as a court set up for our children's sake. As the
prosecutor, David Crane, said recently, the children of
Sierra Leone have suffered enough both as victims and
as perpetrators. The objective is to prosecute not
children, but the people, including those warlords, who
forced thousands of children to commit unspeakable
crimes.

