Miss Durrant (Jamaica): My delegation wishes
to welcome the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, and
Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, member of the Transitional
Cabinet of East Timor responsible for Foreign Affairs.
We thank them for their important contribution to the
Council's consideration of the situation in East Timor.

The Security Council must now focus on
developments in the territory, the preparation for
elections on 30 August, progress made in capacity-
building and the exit strategy of the United Nations. In
this regard, we are grateful for the update provided on
each of these areas in the Secretary-General's report,
and I wish to comment in turn on these issues.

First, on the preparations for elections and
independence, the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) has made
excellent progress in the registration of political parties
and the residents of East Timor. We are pleased that the
election campaign has been peacefully launched and
that deadlines for registration on other activities have
been met. The fact that no party is basing its campaign
appeal on regional or ethnic affiliations is encouraging,
as is a commitment of the parties to conducting
themselves in a peacefully and mutually respectful
fashion and to defending multi-party democracy. We
are optimistic that, with the special preparations to
ensure public safety, the community policing activities
and the apparent commitment of the people of East
Timor to this process, the elections will be conducted
with fairness, with wide participation and in an
environment of calm and stability.

We look forward to the establishment of the
Constituent Assembly after elections and to its
important work on the constitution. We hope that the
wide participation encouraged during the election
campaign and the involvement of the population in the
decision-making process will also be an essential part
of the second stage of the political process. We wish to
stress the importance of finding common ground with
regard to the drafting of the constitution and the need
for those intimately involved to work in a spirit of
cooperation and compromise. We also anticipate a
renewed focus on economic and social development
and reconstruction during this period.

Secondly, with regard to capacity-building, the
Secretary-General's report details the substantial
progress that has been made in the areas of finance, the
economy, education and the social services. We are
particularly interested in the progress made in the area
of justice and reconciliation. The National Council's
finalization and endorsement of a regulation
establishing a Truth, Reception and Reconciliation
Commission is a welcome development.

Developing a strong and effective police force
and improvement of the judicial system are also
objectives important to addressing the security
situation and the overall maintenance of law and order.

We note the progress that has been made so far in
the transfer of authority to the East Timorese. In
particular, we are pleased that efforts have been made
to ensure gender balance at the different levels of the
East Timorese Administration and that women
constitute some 27 percent of candidates on the
national list of parties. We hope that these initiatives
will also result in a substantial number of women being
elected to the Constituent Assembly.

On the East Timor economy, we view the signing
of the Timor Sea Arrangement as an important
development in the Timorization process. The long-
term benefits expected to accrue from this agreement,
along with the strong economic growth referred to in
the Secretary-General's report, augur well for East
Timor's economic viability and sustainability. The
assistance of United Nations agencies such as the
United Nations Development Programme and of
international financial institutions and their future
collaboration on development plans will also be crucial
in contributing to the economic growth of East Timor
and in creating an enabling environment for
investment.

The refugee situation remains of concern to us, as
do incidents of militia activity in West Timor. We
commend the Indonesian Government for its
cooperation in the registration of refugees in West
Timor, and we look forward to the findings of the inter-
agency security assessment mission, which visited
West Timor from the 6 to 14 July. We again encourage
the Government of Indonesia to implement all the
measures called for in resolution 1319 (2000) in order
to create a more secure environment for the return of
United Nations staff to West Timor.

My delegation cannot forget the murder of the
staff of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees last September. We attach
importance to the implementation of the memorandum
of understanding on cooperation in legal, judicial and
human rights matters. We urge the Government of
Indonesia to take steps to implement the section of the
memorandum pertaining to the transfer of persons for
the purpose of prosecution.

In regard to the exit strategy, it is clear that a lot
more needs to be done in East Timor and that the
impact of many of the initiatives taken by UNTAET
can be evaluated only in the long term. In this regard,
the Secretary-General's report due in October will be
an important contribution to the evaluation by the
Council. We must therefore carefully consider the
timing and impact of the reduction of the international
presence in East Timor. East Timor, after all,
constitutes a unique experiment for the United Nations.
We are all agreed that after independence, East Timor
will still require the assistance of the international
community. Our exit strategy depends a great deal on
the progress in capacity-building, especially in the
areas of the police, the justice system, institutional
capacity and the long-term security of East Timor.

We look forward to discussing the
recommendations of the working group on post-
UNTAET planning and the recommendations of the
integrated mission task force. We note the
recommendations in the Secretary-General's report and
welcome the proposed inclusion of a human rights
component in the successor mission. We would also
like to emphasize the importance we attach to the
development and training of the East Timor Police
Service, and we encourage UNTAET to work urgently
towards achieving the targets set for December 2001
and April 2003.

We agree with the Secretary-General that the
substantial strength of the United Nations civilian
police should be maintained until East Timor police are
fully trained and deployed. We also agree with the
Secretary-General's assessment of the security
situation in East Timor. We share his view that the
militia groups will continue to pose a threat both to the
internal stability of East Timor and to the well-being
and security of refugees remaining in West Timor. We
therefore support the need for a continued United
Nations force, the size of which has to be determined
in close coordination with the elected representatives
of the East Timorese people so that we can maintain a
secure environment. We feel it is important that the
military presence be proportionate to the security risks
and threats to the territory. In this regard, we must heed
the appeals made to the Council by Mr. Ramos-Horta.

The continued support of the international
community for the people of East Timor is crucial to
the cementing of the substantial gains already made
and to future sustainable growth in East Timor. We also
agree with Mr. Ramos-Horta that excellent relations
with other countries in the region will be East Timor's
best defence.

In conclusion, Jamaica salutes the people of East
Timor in their long, long struggle for self-
determination, and we look forward to welcoming East
Timor into the family of nations after independence
early next year. We also pay tribute to the men and
women of UNTAET, under the dynamic leadership of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello.

