Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for showing his deep
dedication to the people of South Sudan by being here
today and injecting his passion and compassion for the
people of a country that he has visited many times.

I want to begin my remarks by apologizing to
the Secretary-General, because I do not know how
long he has been asking for an arms embargo and
targeted sanctions. It is not every day that he comes
to the Security Council and is very specific about
his prescriptions. Yet, in the case of South Sudan, he
has asked, and we have not delivered. I think that is
something upon which we need to reflect in light of
the graphic nature of the briefings that we have heard
and the first-hand eyewitness testimonies that we have
read, by which we have been horrified. South Sudan
used to be an issue on which the Council was pretty
unified. We should try to retrieve that unity in light of
the Secretary-General's warning, which will go down
as one of his last warnings to this Council. If we fail to
act, South Sudan will be on a trajectory towards mass
atrocities. The Secretary-General has said it. We have
to admit that, as a Security Council - each and every
one of us.

I would just add an account of one family that has
been affected by the conflict, the matriarch of which
is 28 year-old, Irene, a mother from Yei River state.
She and her children barely escaped death on two
occasions. The first time, she was reportedly at home
when armed men came to her door and called out her
husband's name. Irene's husband had just managed to
push her and the kids under their bed before the soldiers
kicked down the door and shot him in the head. Irene
fled for the Ugandan border but ran into another group
of armed men. As she relayed to a journalist, two
women were trapped and raped by the men. The men
took two infants and used them as if they were sticks
to beat the women. The children survived but they were
damaged inside.

That account is so graphic and so terrible and yet,
the number of accounts from the region that have that
kind of gory, savage detail is too large to count. Babies
used as clubs to beat their own mothers, rape, the
execution of a woman's husband - that is what Irene
witnessed before getting to Uganda and the relative
safety ofa refugee camp. That is just one story over the
past week -just this week. For Council members who
were saying that things are getting better, they should
know that an average of 5,189 refugees like Irene stream
into Uganda every day. That is this week. That is not
back in July or back when the conflict started in 2013.
The situation is not getting better, but worse.

Meanwhile, we are sitting on our hands as a
Council. We have to try to stop atrocities in South
Sudan, and the question is not whether we should do
that, but rather how quickly we can do that. We have to
adopt an arms embargo, targeted sanctions - the tools
in the toolbox that we have. If people have better ideas,
then we are open to better ideas, but more of the same is
not working. Violence is tearing South Sudan apart, and
the Government undermines virtually all international
efforts to help. I say that much more in sorrow than in
anger, given how closely the United States has worked
with that Government and how closely the United
States has wanted to work with that Government, even
throughout this crisis.

Three million people have been displaced inside
and outside South Sudan and more than half of the
country faces food insecurity. The United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra'ad
Al Hussein, has reported that violations of human
rights are so widespread that they have become almost
commonplace. As we have heard from all the visitors
who go to various parts of South Sudan, violations
includes the systematic use of sexual violence as a
weapon of war. What does that actually mean to the
people in the country? In the town of Yei, blockaded
civilians cannot venture out of the city into their fields,
so the crops that would feed them rot away. That is
what is happening right now. In the Equatorias, which
in one stage of the conflict had not seen violence, the
threat of violence is now so extreme that the only way
to flee the city is by crawling through the bush, because
soldiers and armed groups who rape and murder control
the roads. In Unity state, one rape victim told the
Commission on human rights in South Sudan, "there is
no stigma around rape because for us it is normal. It is
happening every day to us."

Those Council members who were on the trip to
South Sudan heard those testimonies at first hand. That
should not surprise us. Consider the Government's
unfortunate response: continued obstruction of
assistance and defiance of the demands of the Council.
As we have heard, in recent weeks, the Government
deported four highly experienced aid workers with no
apparent justification, including the country directors
for two very large non-governmental organizations.

We also have to talk about the opposition. The Sudan
People's Liberation Army in Opposition (SPLA-IO)
is making it even harder for humanitarian agencies to
operate in the areas that they control. Non-governmental
organizations now need to petition the SPLA-IO for
accreditation, which requires a fee. Then they have to
give at least 48 hours notice of any humanitarian flight
before arrival. That is now common practice across
the country. It makes it impossible to deliver food to
people who need it. Again, for those who think that
the situation is getting better or is static, I have bad
news. The United Nations recorded more obstructions
to humanitarian assistance last month than during any
other month since June 2015. We see more obstructions
to humanitarian assistance and yet, we sit here doing
more of the same and expect a different result, which is
the definition of insanity.

South Sudan is making it harder for people to
get aid, even as the Council has done the right thing
in demanding unfettered access. The Government is
obstructing and defying. In August, we tried to mitigate
the violence by authorizing the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) Regional Protection Force
(RPF). I express thanks to all Council members who
supported the Force. Since then, the Government has
talked a lot about allowing the RPF to deploy, and they
have expressed some type of consent to the RPF in
statements and letters at least six times - we only know
about six times. How often have they consented? They
consented on 4 September, 20 September, 15 October,
16 October, 16 November and 30 November. However,
none of those letters of consent or words of consent has
translated into consent on the ground and deployment,
which is the measure ofwhether our will as a Council is
being respected. Again, we are witnessing obstruction
and defiance.
The South Sudan Government has also offered
assurance that UNMISS can patrol without interference.
That is part of what the Council has rightly asked for.
However, in reality, we know that is not happening.
In recent weeks, South Sudan's authorities have again
imposed restrictions on UNMISS patrols around
the Equatorias, as well as in areas outside Wau and
in the region of Bahr el Ghazal - two places where
we know that people are in need of protection. Yet,
we see more obstruction and more defiance of the
Council's resolutions.

The problem right now for us in taking this wait-
and-see posture is that South Sudan, as the Secretary-
General put it in his extraordinary briefing, may
be running out of time. Even if we could deploy the
entire RPF tomorrow and even if UNMISS faced no
obstruction of any kind, those peacekeepers would
face immense challenges in stopping the escalating,
ethnically based violence that we are witnessing on the
ground. The Council needs to do much more to respond
to the growing risk ofmass atrocities. The warnings are
everywhere. We have all heard them. The Commission
on human rights in South Sudan has said that South
Sudan is on the brink of an all-out ethnic civil war.
The Special Adviser of the Secretary-General for the
Prevention of Genocide, Ms. Adama Dieng, who is
sitting right here with the rest of us, has warned of a
"strong risk of violence escalating along ethnic lines
with the potential for genocide".

Nobody here can say that things have gotten better
since Adama Dieng briefed us. We have just heard from
the Secretary-General and Mr. Stephen O'Brien that
things have gotten worse. The people within the United
Nations system whose job it is to sound the alarm have
sounded it. History is going to show what each of us
did and where each of us stood when the sirens were
blaring and when the red lights were flashing in South
Sudan. Now is when each of us has to be counted.
Where were we when the lights flashed red for the
people of South Sudan?

In some parts of South Sudan, ethnic killings are
already underway. Every day, we hear vows to take
revenge on the airwaves, as the number of killings
increases and as the cycle of Violence escalates. In
Central Equatoria, at least 1,900 structures - houses,
businesses, schools - have been destroyed since the
fighting began two months ago. The Government has
mobilized at least 4,000 militia from other areas and
staged them in Equatoria. We know that large-scale
attacks could start at any moment.
Let me wrap up with a closing argument on this
incredibly important issue. Some on this Council argue
that it is not the right time to impose an arms embargo
and targeted sanctions. Some point to the public
statements and nice words from Government officials
that say that we need to give the Government yet
another chance. Another chance? We have seen citizens
in South Sudan go hungry as money gets invested in
large weapons systems. We have seen the deployment
of peacekeepers stalled. It is late December. We were
there in early September. Not one soldier of the RPF
has been deployed - not one soldier.

Of course, we join others in hoping that our dear
friends in South Sudan, with whom we have worked
so closely and for whom we worked to secure their
independence, will follow through on their recent
promises, just as we had hoped that they would follow
through on previous promises. However, to use those
promises as an excuse to delay action, when we hear
from the Secretary-General so powerfully about what
is happening on the ground, when he has been banging
his head against this table for so long, for more than a
year, asking for such measures to try to mitigate the
violence, we have no more alibis.

Some Council members have been pretty direct
about expressing concerns about the risks that imposing
those measures would pose to their peacekeepers or to
their workers who are on the ground in South Sudan.
Every Government has a responsibility to look out for
their citizens, and I very much appreciate that concern,
as we also, of course, have many aid workers and
embassy personnel who are there in South Sudan.

But can we really believe - those of us who care
about our people - can we really believe that more
arms coming into the country is the way to look out
for their safety? Can we really believe that allowing the
Government of South Sudan to continue to invest its
money in such weapons systems, instead of in the food
that people need to eat, is the best way to look out for our
people? The people that we are hoping to designate are
people whose public statements no one disputes - they
are on the record, advertising their statements aimed
at ethnicizing the conflict and spoiling whatever
hope there is to get back to a peace agreement. Those
individuals feel a sense of impunity. If the Council is
unprepared to act on such designations, can that sense
of impunity be good for our people on the ground, our
workers, our peacekeepers and our aid workers? It can
not be. How is impunity good? How are more arms
good for the safety of our people?
However, well beyond that, what about the South
Sudanese people? Do they get a vote? How would they
vote on such measures? We heard them when we met
with a wide range of civil society and other actors. We
know how they would vote, and we need to keep their
votes in mind. We need to bring this draft resolution at
last to a vote, which we will do by the end of this year.
Members of the Council will need to raise their hands
and make a decision on where they stand on the issues
of life and death that have been raised by the Secretary-
General and by everyone who goes to South Sudan
and comes back. Above all, the people of South Sudan
have a stake in our action. Council members - each
of us - will need to own our decisions, so the United
States urges members to prepare to vote your conscience
and to vote to stand with the people of South Sudan.

