Mr. El-Keib (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): Permit
me at the outset to extend to you, Sir, our
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I wish also to
thank the Council for having invited me to speak
before it today.

It is a great honour for me to appear before the
Council as the representative of the new Libya, free of
the tyrannical regime that had strangulated its people
for 42 years. I take this opportunity to express the
gratitude of my people to the United Nations in general
and the Security Council in particular for their
courageous stand at the side of the Libyan people in its
eight-month plight, and for their ongoing support in the
transitional phase, which we hope will lead us to our
goal of building a free, democratic State of institutions,
the rule of law, respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, and a multilateral system
imbued with the spirit of tolerance, conciliation and
justice. That is the State for which tens of thousands of
martyrs sacrificed themselves, and we have taken it
upon ourselves, in the eyes of Allah, not to betray their
blood and to fulfil their aspirations.

I take this opportunity once again to emphasize
the commitment of the transitional Government to its
international obligations, including those provided for
under the United Nations Charter.

Members of the Council are well aware that my
country is suffering the legacy of a dictatorial regime
that has adversely affected the various sectors of the
State and deprived our young people of hope and the
Libyan people of its right to development and
prosperity. My country also suffers under the vestiges
of a war of liberation that destroyed our remaining
institutions and a significant part of our infrastructure.
A great number of pro-Al-Qadhafi elements, whose are
hands are stained with Libyan blood and who
plundered the public treasury, have yet to be brought to
justice.

Therefore, the ongoing transition is facing
significant external and internal challenges. Concerted
national efforts and the support of the international

community are necessary if we are to meet those
challenges and, by the end of the transition, reach
safety with the adoption of a permanent constitution
and the election of a parliament and a Government.
These in turn will lead the country in the following
phase towards the achievement of our people's
ambitions for progress and prosperity.

Despite the domestic challenges and the rising
expectations of our people, the transitional
Government has achieved much in less than four
months. The transitional Government has made the
objective of restoring justice and strengthening
sovereignty its highest priorities in the belief that the
cardinal concern of the State and citizens alike is
security. While some isolated incidents erupted in
recent months in various pockets around the country,
our security authorities managed to contain them. The
entrenchment and stability of the State were manifest
in the great celebrations in which the Libyan people
voluntarily came out in the cities and villages to
commemorate the first anniversary of the 17 February
revolution. Nothing happened to disturb security or
cause turmoil.

Our Government has an integrated policy to
reintegrate and absorb the revolutionaries. It has
formulated a plan to involve the revolutionaries in
State institutions. Some 10,000 revolutionaries have
been integrated into the Ministry of the Interior and
6,000 in the Ministry of Defence. More than 12,000
revolutionaries will be integrated into that Ministry.
Another 10,000 will be sent to training seminars in
brotherly States. The Government has also established
an authority on ex-combatants to provide
revolutionaries an opportunity to enter various
professions.

We attach particular attention to disarmament and
to the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and man-portable air defence systems (MANPADS),
given the threat they pose to national and international
security alike. We cooperate closely with the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya and with the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
I would like to take this opportunity to reassure the
international community that the chemical weapons
hidden by the former regime that have been found are
under control. In cooperation with the Secretariat and
various brotherly States, we are trying to destroy those
weapons in accordance with an agreed time frame.
With regard to the yellow cake nuclear material, it too
is under control. International Atomic Energy Agency
inspectors have visited storage sites and have made
sure that they are safe.

With regard to conventional weapons,
ammunition and MANPADS, strenuous efforts are
under way to cooperate with international partners to
collect, control and prevent the smuggling across the
border of such weapons. In that connection, my
Government has called for the holding of a regional
ministerial conference on border security, to be held in
Tripoli on 11 and 12 March. The meeting will include
defence and interior ministers and heads of security
agencies from Algeria, Chad, Egypt, Mali, Morocco,
Niger, the Sudan and Tunisia. The purpose of the
conference is to coordinate efforts to control and
monitor borders, address illegal immigration, prevent
weapons smuggling, combat drugs and address the
activities of pro-Al-Qadhafi elements, who still operate
freely in some neighbouring States and continue to
pose a grave threat to the security of Libya and of its
neighbours.

In support of our efforts to achieve internal
security and stability and to protect our long borders,
we call upon the Security Council, with all due respect,
to lift the embargo on military equipment and
weaponry so that we can re-equip our military forces
and police so that they can carry out their duties.

There is no doubt that national reconciliation is a
prerequisite for the restoration of social harmony and
stability. It is a sine qua non for the building of the new
Libya based on respect for human rights. Laws on
transitional justice and national reconciliation have
recently been put in place. In accordance with Libya's
social heritage, reconciliation committees have also
been established, which include political and religious
leaders and social and civil institutions that contributed
to the settling of many differences among the tribes,
which led to the return of displaced persons to their
villages and cities.

Genuine reconciliation can be achieved only by
trying the criminals, speeding up trials and meting out
punishment to the guilty. Efforts are also being made,
in cooperation with international civil organizations
and partners, to strengthen the concept of national
reconciliation and transitional justice.

With a view to fostering transitional justice, an
amnesty law has been enacted for certain crimes
committed prior to 17 February 2011. The law covers

various crimes, except assassination, murder,
abduction, torture and the theft of public and private
money.

With regard to pro-Al-Qadhafi elements who
committed grave violations against the Libyan people,
they will be brought to justice. In that connection, the
so-called Saif Al-Qadhafi will be tried in accordance
with the principles of justice and fairness.

On behalf of the Libyan people, through the
Council we call upon the international community to
seriously cooperate with us in ensuring justice by
surrendering pro-Al-Qadhafi elements who committed
crimes against the Libyan people, including returning
the money in their possession. We hope to cooperate
with the various parties. Many fugitives are still at
large, and pose a grave threat to the security of Libya
and the region.

The human rights situation in Libya is one of our
main concerns, as well as a national priority. In that
connection, Libya has cooperated with the Human
Rights Council International Commission of Inquiry
during its field visits to various Libyan cities and
regions. The Government has adopted numerous legal
and practical measures to restore judicial and police
control over many jails. The laws that restricted
freedoms and hindered the spread of a culture of
human rights have been annulled. The State has
established the National Council for Public Liberties
and Human Rights to monitor violations and receive
complaints.

We acknowledge that there have been some
violations of human rights. However, I would like to
emphasize that those were isolated rather than
systematic incidents. They were due to the fact that
some revolutionaries were not aware of the principles
of international law and international humanitarian law.
A ministerial committee led by the Minister of Justice
has been set up to look into those violations.

The Transitional Government is committed to
determining the destiny of the people who went
missing during the revolution. The Ministry for
Assistance to the Families of Martyrs and Missing
Persons has taken many important steps, including the
setting up of national committees to determine the
destiny of the missing, without distinction. The
Transitional Government therefore urges the
international community and our partners to provide us
with technical expertise and financial support in this
endeavour.

The Government is doing its best to improve the
situation regarding the displaced by providing them
with adequate shelter that meets standards of human
dignity, including providing the necessary
humanitarian assistance.

The Government has also paid considerable
attention to treating the wounded and the sick. We have
sent more than 30,000 wounded for treatment outside
the country.

The complete legitimacy of the executive and
legislative authorities in Libya can only be achieved
through elections. Strenuous efforts are therefore being
made to develop a legal framework to ensure the
transition from the revolution to the State. The
electoral law has been adopted and the Higher National
Electoral Commission has been established. Electoral
constituencies will be defined within the set time
frame. An institutional authority that represents all
sectors of society will be elected. We promote the role
of women in social, political and economic life to
enable them to assume decision-making positions. In
that regard, the electoral law provided for competitive
listings to ensure the equality of men and women in the
elections.

In order to promote multilateralism in the new
Libya, we have laid the foundations for the
establishment of parties and civil society organizations.
Individual and joint initiatives are being taken in civil
society organizations working in various fields. The
Transitional Government is committed to taking the
necessary measures for transparent elections to be held
in a secure environment and on time. The Higher
National Electoral Commission is therefore receiving
full support with regard to its independence. We hope
that it will continue its work and complete the work of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) in that connection. We look forward to
strengthening those efforts in coordination with the
international community.

I would like to express our thanks for the recent
international efforts to release frozen Libyan assets. We
appreciate the Sanctions Committee's agreement to
delist the Central Bank of Libya and the Libyan Arab
Foreign Bank. To that end, we call for the adoption of
resolutions providing for the confiscation of funds of
the Al-Qadhafi family and the remaining elements of

his regime who are betraying Libya. We have taken
positive and concrete steps to restore transparency in
administering State resources.

With regard to our foreign investments, I would
like to express our deep concern that some States are
not protecting Libyan investments despite the fact that
the Security Council, in coordination and consultation
with the Libyan Government, delayed freezing Libyan
assets until they had been monitored, assessed and
rationalized following the establishment of a new body
to administer Libyan investments.

We call on the international community to allow
that institution to receive the assets. We appreciate the
valuable and considerable cooperation with UNSMIL,
as well as the advice that it provided to various Libyan
authorities on such aspects. Libya's signing of the
agreement on the Mission demonstrates our
appreciation, and we hope that such cooperation will
continue.

We seek to establish bilateral and multilateral
relations on the basis of mutual respect and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States in the
belief that peaceful means are the only way to solve
international conflicts, to put an end to terrorism and
violence in all its forms, to respect human rights and
fundamental freedoms, and to promote international
peace and security, with the participation of
constructive actors and other States.

We look forward to establishing a free and open
economy that fosters individual entrepreneurship and
in which there are opportunities for all in line with
their abilities, while not ignoring the State's obligation
to promote the prosperity of its citizens. Despite the
fact that only a year has passed since the toppling of
the despotic regime, there has been concrete progress,
even if it has been achieved at the high cost of our
people's blood. Despite the fact that the first
anniversary of the revolution was a time of happiness
and celebration, we remember the killing and the
sacrifices of our people as the price of freedom.

Allow me to say that, as part of the Libyan
people, I am extremely proud of their achievements.
The Libyan people recognize and appreciate the extent
of the contributions of the international community, in
general, and of the United Nations towards the success
of the revolution. We look forward to continued fruitful
work with the United Nations over the coming year.

