Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I join others in extending
a very warm welcome to Mr. Smith, the Executive
Director of Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED), and in expressing our very strong
appreciation for his briefing, which was very
comprehensive, crystal clear and quite focused. His
statement, together with his suggested organizational
plan for the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
which we strongly support, very clearly sets out the
direction for the way forward.
Italy aligns itself with the statement that Slovenia
will soon make on behalf of the European Union, and
recognizes the importance of today's debate, which

reiterates the firm commitment of the Security Council
to the fight against international terrorism - I would
note the revitalized energy shown by previous
speakers.

CTC and CTED continue to play a crucial role in
the fight against international terrorism and in assisting
Member States with the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). For
many States, the task of concretely implementing
resolution 1373 (2001) is still daunting. The donor
community and recipient States need to cooperate
actively if we are to have an efficient system for
preventing terrorists from moving freely across
international borders and for blocking their access to
financial and economic resources, as well as weapons.
In this area, CTED is in the best position to match the
needs of many States with offers of assistance from
other States and organizations. We must be frank;
CTED has limited resources and does not have a magic
hand to allow States to implement resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1624 (2005) immediately, comprehensively
and effectively. What it can do is to continue
monitoring implementation of the resolution and
enhance - and this is the point - its role in
facilitating and encouraging technical assistance
through an improved mechanism.

The new Executive Director, Mr. Smith, has
already undertaken very important action to fix the
international problems within CTED. I will not repeat
what colleagues have already said. The aim is to
strengthen its ability to perform its multifaceted tasks,
to communicate its activities more effectively to
Member States and to integrate its action with all
relevant actors within the framework of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We wish to
encourage him again to stay on his path. We confirm
our solid support, as have all previous speakers, for the
revised organizational plan that the CTC has recently
endorsed.

In view of the new resolution on CTED's
mandate, which Italy is willing and ready to
co-sponsor, let me highlight three points.

First, we need to instil, in every possible manner,
a truly cooperative spirit in the relationship between
the CTC and CTED and the wider membership. We
encourage the CTC to act on this message, also by
revising its methods of work and its style of interaction
with Member States and with the main international

stakeholders in counter-terrorism. To that end, we
would envisage having thematic discussions more
frequently and in open formats. What Mr. Smith has
said about the two smaller units - one on
communications and outreach - is really what is
needed. I will not repeat what Ambassador Kafando,
Ambassador Ripert and Ambassador Verbeke have said
about the importance of communications and outreach
to the membership.

The second point, concerning the need for the
Council's three counter-terrorism committees to
cooperate with each other, has been stated repeatedly
over many years, but evidently those committees still
have to make progress in this area. We look forward to
the Council's guidance in this matter. Too often old
practices and procedures seem to count more that the
objectives we want to achieve in this field. Italy would
like that attitude to change. In future, the Council
should also consider whether the time has come to
create a unique support structure to replace the three
groups of experts. That, under the Council's strategic
direction, could help the actions of these committees.
Such a move would enable a truly comprehensive
approach, particularly to the dialogue with Member
States not on the Council. It would also lend strength to
the call for the whole system to take the coherent
approach that is at the foundation of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

Third, the Global Strategy encompasses a more
extensive set of actions to counter terrorism than those
included in resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005)
and calls for all Member States, United Nations entities
and other international organizations to act coherently.
CTED has to respect the limits of its mandate as set by
Security Council resolutions. However, within that
mandate, we feel that CTED - and I repeat this - is
in the best position to grasp all opportunities that the
Strategy may create to counter terrorism in an effective
and sustainable way.

Finally, Italy reaffirms its conviction that
international terrorism can be fought more adequately
through effective cooperation by the international
community, as foreseen and repeated and enhanced in
the organizational plan for CTED, in paragraph 2 (c)
(S/2008/80, enclosure), and as so clearly delivered in
all the statements by Mr. Smith. In this spirit Italy has
sought to strengthen its collaboration with various
countries and regional stakeholders by providing
counter-terrorism technical assistance, in cooperation
with partners such as the African Centre for Study and
Research on Terrorism, in the IGAD Capacity-building
Programme against Terrorism in Africa and, in Asia,
the Southeast Asia Regional Centre for Counter-
Terrorism and the Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement
Cooperation.

With the Council's renewal of the CTED
mandate, Italy will continue to assure its concrete
support to all its efforts, while not neglecting the wider
counter-terrorism efforts that take place in the context
of the Global Strategy, to ensure overall concrete
results, to save lives, and to support the victims of
terrorism.

