Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Please allow me to
begin by expressing our personal delight at seeing you
back in the Chair, Mr. Minister. We know that you have
a busy schedule, and we are very glad that you have
taken time from it to be here with us. We are also very
pleased that you have organized this wrap-up meeting,
because we think that it can be a very useful addition to
the work of the Council. Let me also say that we were
supposed to have a very quiet, sleepy month in August,
but it turned out to be quite busy and hectic.

Following your suggestion, Mr. President, that we
should make brief, focused, frank interventions, I will
confine myself to making three points and will not
cover the whole agenda for the month. I wanted to
highlight the following three points because I thought
they were noteworthy. Perhaps the wider membership
might want to take note of these events that took place
during your presidency.

Let me begin with the discussions that took place
early this month at the Princeton Club on regional
approaches to conflict management in Africa. Here
again, Sir, I commend you for participating personally
in that meeting. I found those discussions useful in at
least two ways. First, in terms of procedure, it was an
eye-opener that if you take the same group of people
and move them to a slightly different location without
this formal setting, you can have a much more
substantive discussion. I thought that the discussions
that we held on that day were far more candid than
most of those that we have had in this Chamber.
Therefore, I think that this was a useful innovation,
which, I hope, other presidencies will carry on. As you
yourself said, Sir, these presidencies are
interconnected. So where we have useful innovations in
one presidency, we hope that they will be carried
forward in the future.

That discussion was useful not just in procedural
but also in substantive terms. One of the key
conclusions that I brought back from the discussion
that morning was that if we are going to find solutions
to many of the key, difficult items on our agenda, we
cannot just view them nationally. We have to View
them regionally. The classic cases that were mentioned
that morning at the Princeton Club included West
Africa, where the problems of Sierra Leone and Liberia
and the Mano River Union area flow into each other,
and we have to take a regional approach. Of course, the
mission that the Secretary-General sent, which was led
by Assistant Secretary-General Ibrahima Fall,
reconfirmed that regional approaches are needed. Of
course, you need a similar regional approach in the
Great Lakes region. That is something that I think the
Council has taken cognizance of.

One other point along those lines is that these
regional approaches should not be confined only to
Africa. They can be extended to other regions. Frankly,
in the last two months, we have had another vivid
lesson of this, when we saw how the problems in
Kosovo had spilled over into Macedonia. By just
focusing on Kosovo in our discussions, perhaps we
missed the regional dimension. I hope that the
discussion you organized at the Princeton Club, Sir,
will leave a lasting legacy of guiding the Council
always to factor in the regional dimension in its
deliberations.

Secondly, I would like to commend Colombia's
presidency for completing work on the resolution on
prevention of armed conflict. As we all know, that was
a commendable initiative by the delegation of
Bangladesh. The number of hours that Bangladesh has
put in to ensure that the resolution was completed is
amazing, and we would like to commend that
delegation. But there is one small point that we would
like to draw to the attention of non-members of the
Council, which is one small paragraph: the eighteenth
preambular paragraph. I would like to read it aloud. It
reads as follows:

"Reiterating the shared commitment to save
people from the ravages of armed conflicts,
acknowledging the lessons to be learned for all
concerned from the failure of preventive efforts
that preceded such tragedies as the genocide in
Rwanda (S/l999/1257) and the massacre in
Srebrenica (A/54/549), and resolving to take
appropriate action within its competence,
combined with the efforts of Member States, to
prevent the recurrence of such tragedies".
(resolution 1366 (2000)

That is, in our view, a very significant paragraph,
because, frankly, the track record of this Council on
conflict prevention has not been a glorious one. It has
failed to spot many conflicts and serious situations. I
think that the commitment that we made in that
resolution as a whole, and also in this particular
paragraph, is something that members of the Council
should take note of. Non-members too should take note
of it, because they should remind the Council that this
is a commitment that it has taken on board by adopting
this resolution.

My third and final point refers to the discussion
we had yesterday afternoon in informal consultations. I
do not know whether it was intended to be really
substantive or pro forma, but I thought we ended up
having a very substantive and meaningful discussion of
the meeting that took place among the representatives
of Bangladesh, the United Kingdom and Colombia,
who represented the Security Council in the 13 June
meeting with the Open-ended Working Group on the
Question of Equitable Representation on and Increase
in the Membership of the Security Council and Other
Matters related to the Security Council.

I flag this because, as we all know, many of the
discussions that take place in the informal
consultations are leaked, and sometimes we are
uncomfortable about that. But this time, I hope that the
discussions will be fully leaked to everybody, because
we actually had many useful interventions. I will not
soon forget the rather eloquent intervention by
Ambassador Ward - which we are used to - and the
passionate intervention by Ambassador Wegger
Strammen - which we are not used to - on the subject
we discussed.

I think it is important for us not to see these
discussions just as theoretical sessions, but as sessions
that should over time have an impact on the actual
work of the Council with a view to improving its
working methods. Clearly, this institution, like any
other, is not perfect. It is a human institution; it needs
improvement. I thought that many useful suggestions
for improvements were put forward yesterday, and I
hope that some way will be found, as part of the
President's principle of interconnected presidencies, to
use some of the ideas from that discussion for future
presidencies. Of course, we are specifically looking to
the presidency of France in September.

At the end of the discussion there was no
decision, but I was pleased that there seemed to be a
kind of implicit commitment that, first, we should try
to complete the tremendous work that Ambassador
Chowdhury has done in the working group on
sanctions. Ambassador Chowdhury has put in an
enormous number of hours. I think the time has come
to bring his work to fruition, and I hope that will
happen in September. And secondly, as suggested by
one colleague - either France or the United Kingdom,
I believe - if we are going to discuss the question of
the speakers' list, it should be referred to the informal
working group on documentation and other procedural
questions. I hope that too will be done.

Those were just two minor results of the
discussion yesterday. The larger discussion yesterday
was about how we can ensure that the Security Council
is perceived by the rest of the United Nations
community to be dynamic and to be changing in
response to the needs of the day, and in response to all
the feedback we are getting from the rest of the United
Nations community.

Once again, Sir, we congratulate you on a very
successful presidency.

