Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by thanking the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1367 (2006) and the Panel of Experts
for their continued work in supporting the Council's
resolutions on Iran. I particularly want to thank
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi for his continued leadership as
Chair of the Committee.

Like others, I welcome the successful conclusion
to the negotiations on Iran's nuclear programme. The
agreement on 14 July on the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action and the adoption on 20 July of resolution
2231 (2015) constitute significant achievements for
international diplomacy. I pay tribute to the work of
the Council and my E3+3 partners in delivering those
important agreements. I hope we can draw on that unity
in the coming months when tackling other issues that
threaten international peace and security, starting with
Syria.

At heart, those important agreements represent a
historic shift in our approach to Iran. We now have an
opportunity to reset our relationship with that country
at a time of great regional instability. I hope all sides
can seize it. Our focus must now be on the swift and
full implementation of the Plan of Action. We hope that
Iran will complete the agreed-on measures promptly,
and give the international community confidence
that Iran's nuclear programme is, and will remain,
exclusively peaceful.
As the briefing reminds us, during the current
transitional period, the bulk of sanctions will remain
in place and must continue to be enforced in full. That
includes all United Nations sanctions and all obligations
on United Nations States Members arising from
resolutions on the issue. In the implementation period
that follows, we must remember that many binding
restrictions, such as those on conventional weapons and
ballistic missiles, will remain in place during periods
outlined in the Plan of Action. The phased lifting of
sanctions should act as an incentive for Iran to meet
all obligations under the comprehensive agreement.
A Council mechanism will be needed to monitor the
implementation of the restrictions in resolution 2231
(2015), and we look forward to working together in the
Council to set up that mechanism.

We welcome the notifications from Member States
about the delivery of equipment for use at the light
water reactor at the Bushehr nuclear reactor power
plant. We also welcome notifications received by the
Committee about the use of designated funds to pay
contracts entered into before designations came into
force. This report reminds Member States that we must
continue to report any suspected violations of Council
provisions, in accordance with the requirements set out
in the relevant resolutions.

Turning to the work of the Committee, I am grateful
for the continued crucial role it plays in supporting the
enforcement of the relevant Council sanctions measures
on Iran. I also welcome the ongoing work of the Panel
of Experts and the appointment of seven experts to
serve on the Panel. I look forward to working closely
with all members of the Council on the next steps on
this issue. I am grateful for the assistance provided by
the Committee and by the Panel of Experts to Member
States and international organizations, and for their
participation in international meetings and conferences.
But we remain disappointed at Iran's continued failure
to respond to past requests for information on various
incidents of concern. Once again, we urge Iran to
respond to the Committee's requests.

The United Kingdom remains committed to a
peaceful and lasting solution to the Iran nuclear issue.
As the British Foreign Secretary made clear during his
historic visit to Tehran last month, the comprehensive
nuclear agreement with Iran is in all our interests.
For the international community it is the best way
of ensuring Iran does not develop a nuclear-weapon
capability. For Iran it can reset relationships with the
international community and enable it to trade freely
with the world to the benefit of all Iranians. And
for both Iran and the international community this
agreement is a chance to end years of enmity and to
begin a new era of cooperation on combating the spread
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, on ensuring
regional stability and on issues like counter-narcotics
and migration. Therefore, the United Kingdom will
continue to make every effort to implement the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action to help start this process.
We look to all parties involved to do the same.

