Mr. Sial (Pakistan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this open debate on the
working methods of the Security Council. We
appreciate the interest of Japan in the subject, as
reflected in document S/2006/507 and the in concept
paper for today's debate annexed to the President's
letter dated 1 April 2010 (S/2010/l65).

We avail ourselves of this opportunity to
acknowledge the role played by the group of five small
countries (8-5) on the issue of working methods. The
group that modestly calls itself the small five has
always provided big input on the subject.

We associate ourselves with the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of Egypt in his
capacity as Chair of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM), and endorse his letter (S/2010/189) dated 15
April 2010 addressed to the Presidents of the General
Assembly and the Security Council. We hope that the
NAM. position reflected in the comprehensive
negotiating paper (see A/51/47) and the relevant
paragraphs of the Sharm el-Sheikh final document
(S/2009/514, annex) will be given due consideration in
our collective deliberations.

Article 24, paragraph 1, of the United Nations
Charter stipulates that, in carrying out its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Council acts on behalf of the
United Nations Member States. Therefore, the
efficiency and transparency of the Council's work and
its decision-making process are issues of great interest
and importance to the United Nations membership. It is
therefore also essential for the Council to comprehend
the perception of the general membership of its work
and of the methods it employs to carry out its mandate.

My delegation wishes to share with the Security
Council our reflections on the Council's work. We will,
however, limit ourselves to three areas outlined in the
President's concept paper for today's debate, namely,
transparency, interaction with non-members and the
efficiency ofthe Council.

On transparency, we acknowledge some
improvement in the working methods with respect to:
presidential briefings on the programme of work;
post-presidency assessments by respective
presidencies; more frequent open debates; and
improved reporting practices of the subsidiary bodies.
These measures have, however, not comprehensively
addressed the exclusivity of the Council's work.

The Pakistan delegation underscores the need for
greater compliance with Articles 31 and 32 of the
United Nations Charter and rule 48 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

The transparency of the Council warrants a
semblance of balance between its open and closed
meetings. We find the equation tilted towards
confidentiality, even in areas where greater
transparency would certainly help. Open debates and
public meetings should not be a mere formality for
decisions taken in informal or closed consultations, but
should be a prominent factor in the Council's decision-
making process.

The Security Council's progress in its interaction
with non-member States will remain dependent on the
level of transparency it wishes to attain. More
structured interaction with the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission, as well as with troop- and police-
contributing countries, will broaden the existing
channels of communication. The consultation
mechanisms should involve timely, two-way exchanges
of information and views, which should be duly
reflected in the Council's decision-making.
In our view, enhanced interaction with regional
organizations can also be an effective channel of
communication with the wider United Nations
membership. In this context, the Council's increased
interaction with the African Union is a good example
to emulate with other regional organizations.

We agree with the assessment in the concept
paper that the efficiency of the Council is constrained
by the volume and diversity of its workload. However,
we do not share the view that the efficiency of the
Council is compromised by lengthy statements or the
time period required each year for the adjustment of
five new non-permanent members to the workings of
the Council.

The efficiency of the Council can be enhanced if
the necessary and due attention is paid to the issues on
the basis of their merit rather than narrowly focusing
on the national interests of those who matter. Besides,
the Council should focus on its primary role for the
maintenance of international peace and security instead
of taking up issues that are better dealt with by other
relevant bodies.

Efficiency is also closely linked to effectiveness.
In recent years, the Security Council has been
relatively effective in peacebuilding ventures and in
addressing internal crises. Its record has been less
impressive in resolving inter-State conflicts, where the
Council seems constrained either due to the use of the
veto or the failure to have substantive recourse to the
pacific settlement of disputes in the terms of
Chapter VI of the Charter.

Today's debate has underscored the fact that
transparency, interaction with non-member States and
the efficiency of working methods are interlinked and
mutually reinforcing. That also validates the most
widely held view that improving the working methods
of the Council in their entirety would make the Council
more democratic, inclusive and accountable to the
wider membership. Such a change could be brought
about by a process of election and rotation.

In the constructive spirit of today's debate, we
believe that the Security Council should continue its
introspection with regard to improving its working
methods. At the same time, this issue is also an integral
part of the comprehensive reform process that is
currently at the stage of intergovernmental
negotiations. We would like to conclude by stating that
the consideration of this issue must continue in both
forums, with a view to seeking fresh ideas. One track
should not obviate the scope and importance of the
other.
