Mr. Finlay: It is a great honour for me to address
this special meeting of the Security Council. Since
2004, my organization - the Stimson Center - has had
the distinction of supporting the work of six successive
Chairs of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). In those 12 years, hastened
largely by the forces of globalization, it is astonishing
to reflect upon the breadth of advancement witnessed
around the globe.

For millions, these advances have made the world
a far more hospitable place. In the past 12 years,
Governments and non-governmental actors alike have
conspired to help cut the world's extreme poverty rate
in half. More girls are in school, fewer children are
dying as a result of preventable illness, and the world
continues to make advances against the scourge of
global diseases like malaria and HIV/AIDS. Further,
despite the horrific and headline-grabbing conflicts
of today, the inexorable arc of conflict and violence is
bending, however gradually, toward peace.

Those accomplishments trace their lineage to our
growing global interconnectedness and the successful
efforts of this organ and others to steer the forces of
globalization towards universal benefit. Sadly, positive
advances in science and technology, along with the
democratization of modernity around the globe, have
also hastened non-State actors with ill intent, at worst
facilitating access to the world's most dangerous
weapons and technologies of mass destruction.

In that regard, resolution 1540 (2004) has provided
a near unprecedented rallying point for global efforts to
prevent terrorist acquisition of these heinous weapons.
In a global security environment experiencing a poverty
of optimism, the resolution and the 1540 Committee
have demonstrated an enviable return on our joint
political and financial investment. I believe that when
the history of our time is written, the Committee's
efforts on our behalf will be recognized as a glowing
example of what is best about the human spirit - a
willingness to accept our common and interconnected
interest in peace, security and mutual prosperity.

Regrettably, even as globalization has extended
the benefits of prosperity, so too has it fundamentally
altered the drivers of proliferation and insecurity.
Today, the value of global trade has doubled, driving
access to nefarious technologies to distant corners of
the globe. In the past 12 years, private capital flows
have doubled, opening new opportunities for malicious
actors to conceal illicit financial flows. Today,
47 per cent of the world's inhabitants have access to the
internet and, prospectively, illicit intangible technology
transfers - up from just 12 per cent in 2004, and we
have witnessed a steady increase in nuclear, biological,
and chemical incidents around the globe - including
notably, by non-State actors.

Accordingly, it is clear that despite the progress
Committee 1540 has engendered, our central challenge
remains unmet. However, it is not a moment for
despondency. Rather, it is a clarion call to celebrate our
successes in the face of overwhelming challenges, and
to redouble our efforts with the clear-eyed knowledge
that a weapon of mass destruction incident anywhere
in the world will have both sweeping security and
economic ramifications for every State represented in
the Chamber.

The Government of Spain should be deeply proud.
Under your leadership, Mr. President, the Council
has widened interest in and access to the resolution
by constituencies beyond national Governments once
thought tangential to the objectives of the resolution.
That is an extraordinary accomplishment. Yet, even as
we celebrate these advances, there are two key priorities
that remain unaddressed.

First, it is clear that the institution of the United
Nations, in the face of this impossible mandate, is
wildly overburdened. With a global mandate, the 1540
Committee and nine experts cannot hope to keep pace
with the evolving proliferation landscape, nor the
activities and demands of 193 Member States.

In the course of that review, the Government
of Canada presented a proposal calling for targeted
implementation support of the 1540 Committee.
Assistance can come not only from official
entities - law enforcement, customs and border
control agencies - but also from legal specialists, civil
society analysts, industry leaders and, as we have seen,
even student scholars who represent the next generation
of global leadership. I believe that civil society could
present a no-cost additive support mechanism that
would work with national authorities to identify critical
risks and capacity gaps, develop actionable requests
for assistance from Member States, and work with the
Committee to match those requests with donors or even
provide that assistance directly.

Secondly, it has become trite to note that the
proliferation threat has grown, but we have yet to
concede that no Government - not even a confederation
of like-minded Governments - can hope to address
the inexorable march towards proliferation. Only by
inculcating civil society, industry and the general public
with shared values and a recognition of mutual benefit
can we hope to meet the tide of proliferation concern.

Here, too, there is progress. The Government of
Finland paved the way with an innovative whole-of-
society approach to implementing the resolution,
particularly in countries of the Global South. Their
dual-benefit approach allows for a better pairing of
assistance offered in the name ofresolution 1540 (2004)
with other higher-priority security and development
objectives of Member States. The Government of
Finland's approach should be scaled and replicated,
and Helsinki should be commended for its innovation.
In closing, we know that the world can change in the
blink of an eye. I commend this organ for doing what
it can, where it can to keep the world's most dangerous
weapons out of the world's most dangerous hands.

