Mr. Oshima (Japan): Allow me first to convey
the regrets of my Foreign Minister, Mr. Aso, to the
President, the Foreign Minister of Greece, and
ministers present at not being able himself to
participate in today's meeting due to important party
events back home.

We would also like to express our gratitude to
Greece for its initiative to convene this open debate
today. We are fortunate to have the Foreign Minister of
Greece presiding in person over this important
meeting.

We also welcome the participation in the debate
of the representatives of important regional
organizations.
The role of regional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security has
indeed been growing, and the cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations has become
an essential factor in that regard.

Although the United Nations, and especially the
Security Council, have been playing the central role in
the area of the maintenance of international peace and
security, complementary measures by regional
organizations have become increasingly substantive.
The involvement of regional organizations, with their
intimate knowledge of local conditions, resources,
expertise, and regional ownership in the efforts for
peace and security, is a clear advantage and serves as a
key factor in conflict resolution and the subsequent
peacebuilding process.

There is also a need for the Security Council and
its subsidiary bodies to strengthen their cooperation
with a variety of organizations having wide-ranging
networks in implementing Security Council
resolutions. From those points of View, too,
cooperation and coordination between the United
Nations and regional organizations is essential. In that
regard, I wish to touch upon a few areas.

First, the role played by regional organizations in
addressing conflicts has produced some tangible
results, which can already be seen in the activities of
the African Union and the European Union, as
manifested, for example, in the activities of the African
Mission in Burundi, the African Union Mission in
Sudan and the European Union Force in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is our view that
cooperation to facilitate the rapid deployment of
peacekeepers will enable us to cope with conflicts with
greater speed and efficiency. There are various options
available for the enhancement of such capacities - for
example, through possible arrangements between the
United Nations and regional organizations or their
member countries - under which the United Nations
would more efficiently provide, with the assistance of
the donor community, training, equipment and other
capacity-building assistance to the troops of regional
organizations or their member countries. Although such
capacity-building assistance has already been provided
through bilateral and G-8 frameworks, if we could
systematize assistance already provided by some donor
countries in this field, thus assuring a stronger link
between those activities and the United Nations,
efficiency would be dramatically increased.

Secondly, an important aspect of the role played
by regional organizations in peacebuilding lies in
encouraging regional ownership of the post-conflict
process. Japan supports the participation of regional
organizations in the Peacebuilding Commission and
welcomes the active involvement of relevant regional
organizations, such as the African Union, the Economic
Community of Central African States and the
Economic Community of West African States, in the
country-specific meetings of the Peacebuilding
Commission on Sierra Leone and Burundi.

Thirdly, there is a need for enhanced dialogue
between those organizations and the Security Council.
Japan has offered two proposals as specific measures to
facilitate closer cooperation between the Council and
regional organizations. The first is that, when they are
Visiting on Security Council missions, representatives
of the Council should arrange to meet with
representatives of regional organizations. The second is
that more opportunities should be made available for
representatives of regional organizations to brief the
Security Council on their activities.

With regard to the first proposal, we welcome the
very first meeting between a Security Council mission
and the AU Peace and Security Council, which was
held in Addis Ababa during the mission's visit to the
Sudan and Chad in June. Concerning the second
proposal, we were pleased to learn that opportunities
for regional organizations to brief the Security Council
are steadily increasing, as exemplified by the briefing
by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development on
the situation in Somalia that is planned for later in
September.

In order to enhance the implementation of
Security Council resolutions, the Council and its
subsidiary bodies should establish cooperation with a
wide range of organizations. We value the fact that
subsidiary bodies of the Council, including the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), are
seeking to strengthen their cooperation, not only with
regional organizations such as the AU, the Association
of South-East Asian Nations, the Organization of
American States, the EU, NATO and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, but also with
other international organizations, including the
International Civil Aviation Organization, the World
Customs Organization and the International Criminal
Police Organization.

Japan pays high tribute to the African Union for
its many efforts aimed at conflict prevention and
conflict resolution as an expression of African
ownership, including the highly commendable efforts
of AMIS in Darfur. In order to support those efforts,
Japan has provided various forms of assistance to
promote the capacity-building of the African Union
and its operations. We will continue that support as
appropriate.

Finally, we would like to thank the delegation of
Greece for its preparation of the draft presidential
statement, which we support. Japan will support
existing and new initiatives aimed at strengthening
cooperation between regional organizations and the
United Nations.

