Mr. Moussa: First of all, I wish to take this
opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the Council presidency this month, and
to wish you full success.

I am honoured to address the Council in my new
capacity as the first Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African region and
Head of the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA). Sitting next to me is my senior
political advisor, Mr. Paul Zoumanigui.

I am grateful for the spontaneous and warm
welcome extended to me since my arrival in Libreville
on 15 June by States of the Central African subregion,
the United Nations country team and in particular our
hosts, the Government Gabon and its people, Whose
continued and generous support has greatly facilitated
the successful establishment of UNOCA.

Cognizant of the fact that responsibility for
conflict prevention rests with national Governments
and other local actors, as reiterated by the Security
Council, we launched our work with ongoing courtesy
visits to States of the region. We did so with a view to
establishing contact with Government leaders, the
United Nations country teams, members of diplomatic
corps and representatives of regional organizations
present in the subregion in order to familiarize
ourselves with developments in the region and the
priorities of the leaders, particularly those relating to
assistance for national Governments and their local
stakeholders in finding lasting solutions to their
2

problems, and to support for the development of
national and regional capacities for early warning,
conflict prevention and long-term peacebuilding.

During our visits paid to Chad, Equatorial
Guinea, Cameroon and the Central African Republic,
coupled with our discussions with the authorities in
Libreville, we discussed issues pertaining to
cooperation between UNOCA and leaders of these
Member States, United Nations country teams and
other international partners represented in these
countries for the promotion of greater peace, security
and development in the Central African subregion.
Through interaction thus far with United Nations
country teams, the United Nations special political
missions on the ground, in particular the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central
African Republic and the United Nations Centre for
Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa, we
are laying the basis for framing an effective
coordination mechanism for the United Nations
presence in the subregion.

We intend to pursue and complete the courtesy
visits to Member States in the coming weeks. However,
our preliminary observations from the discussions
during the visits conducted thus far reconfirm the
initial assessments of Member States and the United
Nations that warranted the establishment of UNOCA.
These include the need for enhanced United Nations
support in the subregion to help Member States address
security, peacebuilding and conflict-prevention
challenges; the need to strengthen United Nations
support for internal political dialogue within relevant
Member States as a conflict-prevention measure; and
the need to support the capacity-building of
subregional institutions, including the Economic
Community of Central African States and the Gulf of
Guinea Commission.

Most recently, the need to build capacity for
tackling specific trans-border security challenges, such
as piracy in the Gulf of Guinea and the threats posed
by such rebel groups as the Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA) and Baba Ladde in the Central African
Republic, has become a shared concern of the United
Nations, the African Union and the subregion. UNOCA
has assumed the responsibility for the coordination of
the efforts of United Nations family on the ground with
a view to supporting existing efforts initiated by the
African Union.
11-45727
In this regard, I intend to visit Addis Ababa as
soon as possible for discussions with the African Union
on the issue of the LRA and other pertinent subregional
matters of common concern. To this effect, we intend
to convene a meeting of the Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General and all the resident coordinators
in the subregion once we complete our courtesy visits.

I would, in particular, like to draw the attention
of the Council to the fallout of the situation in Libya,
which presents new challenges for neighbouring
countries in the Central African subregion. So far,
reports are that, of the more than 500,000 Chadians
estimated to be living in Libya prior to the current
conflict, close to 80,000 had returned home by the end
of July. Their return presents several challenges for
Chad, particularly the loss of remittances. The
vulnerability of returnees to the pervasive illicit
trafficking and the circulation of small arms and light
weapons by armed groups, including the LRA, are
increasingly worrying for the Governments of Chad
and the Central African Republic.

It is also not inconceivable that some returnees,
particularly those who may have participated in
military or security operations in Libya, could be
recruited as mercenaries or even as fighters for armed
groups in the Central African subregion. It is feared
that stolen weapons from Libya, which may be moved
into the porous areas in the subregion, could fuel
criminality and undermine recent developments
designed to enhance cooperation and security between
Chad, the Sudan and the Central African Republic.

However, the arrival of a new Resident
Coordinator in Chad and the deployment of a peace
and development adviser to his Office in N'djamena
will be helpful in providing analyses of the evolution
of the situation within Chad and along its borders with
Libya, the Sudan and the Central African Republic.
UNOCA will work closely with the United Nations
country team to address peace consolidation
opportunities that may arise.

We are also encouraged by the prevailing climate
of renewed determination of countries of the subregion
to work together to foster cooperation and diplomatic
ties towards addressing common threats to peace and
security in the subregion. In this connection, the
establishment on 23 May by Chad, the Sudan and the
Central African Republic at their tripartite summit
meeting in Khartoum of a joint mechanism to promote
11-45727

border security and stability and strengthen economic
ties among themselves testifies to the positive posture
and determination of leaders of the subregion to
eliminate the persisting peace and security threats that
have terrorized the people, including the activities of
the Lord's Resistance Army and other criminal groups
roaming the countryside in the Chad-Sudan-Central
African Republic triangle.

In the same vein, despite its wealth, the Gulf of
Guinea area is facing what is often referred to as the
"natural resource curse" or the "paradox of plenty".
The countries of the area continue to face low growth
and persisting poverty as a result of multifaceted
domestic, regional and international threats and
vulnerabilities, such as the increasing threat of piracy.
Border insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea is further
aggravated by the perpetration of unlawful activities in
the area by groups that use the area as a transit route,
posing threats and committing criminal acts such as
poaching of its rich water resources, piracy and related
criminal attacks, and the use of the Gulf as a
trafficking hub for the transshipment of narcotics.

The countries of the region have always
recognized the wide-ranging benefits of enhanced
cross-border security, and have initiated negotiations
towards resolving cross-border security issues that
arise and preventing the reoccurrence of related
incidents in the future. It is no wonder that the
Government of Gabon, at its fifty-first Independence
Day celebration on 17 August, dedicated its military to
"the participation of Gabon in the security of the Gulf
of Guinea". In the coming period, we will be working
to translate the mandate of UNOCA into cohesive
subregional initiatives to facilitate coordination and
information exchange between United Nations entities
and other partners towards supporting such
peacebuilding and preventive diplomacy initiatives in
the subregion.

We are counting on the support of the Council in
order to muster the requisite political will to promote
preventive diplomacy as an effective tool for peace and
security in the subregion through concrete activities
with Member States and other partners in the
subregion, which will demonstrate the early added
value and relevance of UNOCA on the ground.

Following the establishment of UNOCA, and
with a view to building synergies within the Central
Africa subregion, the Secretary-General transferred the
3
secretariat functions of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Issues in Central
Africa from the United Nations Regional Centre for
Peace and Disarmament in Africa in the Office of
Disarmament Affairs to the Department of Political
Affairs, to be assumed by UNOCA. UNOCA is
therefore pursuing preparations for the 33rd meeting of
the Committee, to be held later this year in Bangui, the
Central African Republic.

As we assume that important function, we will
work with Member States, the Office for Disarmament
Affairs, other United Nations entities and relevant
international partners to ensure that the Standing
Advisory Committee's important policy
accomplishments in the area of disarmament in the
subregion are implemented, and to facilitate the work
of the Committee in addressing the items that it has
listed on its agenda for greater peace and security.
Those include the growing threat of piracy and
maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea, the situation
and activities of Mbororo nomads in the Central
African subregion, climate change and conflict, cross-
border security, small arms and light weapons, the link
between the illegal exploitation of natural resources
and conflict in Central Africa, human rights, in
particular trafficking and child labour, and women and
peace and security in the subregion.

To that end, I intend to organize a dedicated
capacity for secretarial support to the Standing
Advisory Committee in my Office in order not only to
tackle the preparation of the biannual meetings of the
Committee, but also to help Member States to translate
the policy instruments that it has developed into
national and cross-border initiatives for peacebuilding
and conflict prevention. Such instruments include the
Central African Convention for the Control of Small
Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and All
Parts and Components That Can Be Used for Their
Manufacture, Repair and Assembly, known as the
Kinshasa Convention, adopted at the 31st ministerial
meeting of the Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa, held in
Brazzaville, the Republic of Congo, in November 2010.

The Kinshasa Convention indeed represents a
major legal breakthrough in the fight against the
trafficking of small arms and light weapons in the
subregion, which contribute to the prolongation and
exacerbation of conflicts within the subregion. The
Convention provides the States parties with a common
reference point to coordinate their efforts and to end
the uncontrolled proliferation of small arms and light
weapons in Central Africa. We therefore intend to work
with the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Africa, in collaboration with the
ECCAS Secretary-General, in lending our support to
the Committee for the ratification process with a view
to ensuring the Convention's early entry into force and
implementation.

Finally, we are grateful to the Council and to the
various components of the Secretariat for their valuable
support of efforts to establish the Office since its
inauguration on 2 March. Tremendous progress has
been achieved in that regard, with almost 80 per cent of
its staff complement on board and continued
improvement in its operational environment.

Yet, still more challenges lie ahead. Nevertheless,
we trust that, with the Council's support, we will
certainly be able to deliver on our mandate.

