Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We wish at the outset to welcome
the participation in today's meeting of the High
Representative of the European Union on Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Ms. Federica Mogherini.
In the statement she made during the seventieth
anniversary of the United Nations, she underscored
that no one alone can carry the weight of the world on
their shoulders; today she elaborated on this idea. We
fully agree with this view and note the intention of the
European Union (EU) to strengthen multilateralism
under the United Nations.

Russia has consistently called for the development
and improvement of cooperation with the United
Nations and regional and subregional mechanisms on
the basis of the Charter of the United Nations, first and
foremost Chapter VIII. It is on that basis, as well as
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 65/276, of
May 2011, that interaction between the United Nations
and the European Union should take place.

The European Union objectively is an important
political and economic player in the international arena
and contributes to the resolution of many international
issues. That is the reason that in spite of the ongoing
crisis in Russian-European Union relations, in many
areas our cooperation with the EU is ongoing, including
in the context of the United Nations. Examples here
include combating such global threats as terrorism,
religious extremism, piracy, drug trafficking,
transborder organized crime and illegal migration.
Russia and the EU traditionally cooperate in
the framework of the Quartet for the settlement of
the Middle East crisis. We welcome the role of the
European Union in attaining agreement on the Iranian
nuclear issue. The Russian Federation and its diplomacy
worked hard here as well.

We expect that the States members of the European
Union will constructively participate in international
efforts to move forward on a political settlement for
Syria on the basis of agreed-upon parameters. These
should be implemented fully and without preconditions.

Putting an end to the conflict in the country
would be a major jumping-off point for de-escalating
tensions in the Middle East, which are spreading to
all neighbouring regions, including Europe. Some
members of the EU participate in the International
Syria Support Group (ISSG). We expect from them
impartial and honest work that will enrich our collective
efforts. We deem it important that the EU remain an
open channel for dialogue with the Syrian Government.
We welcomed the meeting of Ms. Mogherini with the
head negotiator of the Syrian Government, Mr. Ja'afari,
on the margins of the March round of talks in Geneva.
Such contacts are totally necessary.

At the same time, as demonstrated in discussions in
the Security Council and elsewhere, European partners
often allow themselves to move forward with destructive
unilateral approaches, manipulating decisions made
by the ISSG and engaging in propaganda instead of
doing patient and careful joint work. It must be clearly
understood that pressure on Damascus will not produce
the desired effect. On whom should continued pressure
be brought to bear? On those who continue to support
terrorists, including A1-Nusra. All sides should show
flexibility during the talks.

A major obstacle in that regard on the political
track is the position of the so-called High Negotiations
Committee. The representatives of the radical wing
of the Committee are not thinking about obtaining
compromise; they are focusing instead all of their
ideas and actions on toppling the Government.
Nevertheless, Brussels has drawn the conclusion that
those people are the only ones who express the views
of the Syrian opposition. That is at the very least an
exaggeration. It is of the utmost importance to ensure
the broad representative nature of the Syrian opposition,
including Kurds from the Democratic Union Party,
which Turkey has openly obstructed. We hope that our
European partners will use their influence to resolve
this and other pressing matters having to do with the
selfish and destructive policies of Ankara towards
Syria. There is also a need to take decisive steps to
make Turkey end its encroachment on the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Syria, to close the channels
for foreign terrorist fighters and finally close the
Syrian-Turkish border.

We note the detrimental effect of unilateral sanctions
against Damascus, including those imposed by the EU.
It is Syrian civilians who suffer from them. It has been a
real factor that significantly restricts Syrians' access to
health services and medicines and serves as an obstacle
to United Nations active participation in infrastructure
projects to bring unified areas back to normal life.

We are carefully following our European partners'
steps to settle the crisis in Libya. We understand their
concern about security issues in the Mediterranean. We
welcome efforts for a swift restoration of the unity of
Libya and its State institutions, based on the Libyan
Political Agreement to form a Government of National
Accord, signed in Skhirat, Morocco. However, there
should be an understanding that there is no alternative to
a peaceful settlement, which must be exclusively Libyan
led. We expect that the composition of a Government of
National Accord will soon be approved by the House
of Representatives, as provided in the Agreement,
and that it will be supported by key influential forces
in the country, thereby becoming a truly functional
executive body.

We were therefore bewildered by the European
Union decision to include key Libyan players on the
EU sanctions list. We are worried that the attempts to
punish Libyan politicians will simply further deepen
the division. We are also concerned about the growing
threat of terrorism in Libya, especially the spillover of
activities of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant from
other States. However, that threat cannot be used as a
pretext for intervention in the domestic affairs of Libya.
While there is a need to help Libyans, it must be within
the framework of international law. One of the major
aims would be to unify Libya's forces. More broadly,
the need for tighter coordination of international and
regional initiatives on Libya should be emphasized.

In due time, we have supported the decision
authorizing EU Operation Sophia in the Mediterranean
Sea to actively counter the flows of illegal migrants.
We value the work of the navies that have saved many
lives. However, according to solid statistics, so far in
2016 more people have drowned while trying to reach
Europe than during the same period last year. On the
one hand, that suggests that resolving the root causes
of the problem remain remote. On the other, it poses
a legitimate question: Is it advisable in this situation
to extend the mandate of Operation Sophia with
additional oversight functions to monitor the illegal
flows of weapons?

The situation of the mass arrival in Europe of
refugees from the Middle East and North Africa
regions is necessarily a serious concern. We agree
with the High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Filippo
Grandi, that the migration problem is not unique to
the EU; other countries are hosting far more migrants,
while having less capacity than that of the EU. We
note that the recent agreements on the collective return
of migrants from the EU, without clear safeguards
to ensure the protection of their rights in accordance
with international law, has been a serious concern for
a number of specialized international organizations,
non-governmental organizations and public players.

We call upon our European colleagues to take a
more conscientious approach towards their international
obligations in that area. We believe that, even in the
context of the extraordinary massive flows of people,
we cannot dilute the institution of asylum, which, in
line with the 1951 United Nations Convention relating
to the Status of Refugees and the 1967 Protocol, clearly
distinguishes refugees from illegal economic migrants,
the latter of whom have been simply using the situation
to their own ends.

As we consider the issue of cooperation with the
EU, we must necessarily think about the serious crisis
in the European region, in Ukraine. Unfortunately,
Brussels has played a very unseemly role, categorically
insisting on the signing of an agreement and, in so
doing, enabling those who have sought to forcibly
seize power. We hope that in Brussels and European
capitals the sad experience of the Ukrainian crisis will
not just be carefully and objectively studied, but will
lead to constructive steps. At the moment, the most
important task is to implement the package of measures
for the implementation of the Minsk agreements; there
is no alternative. The unstinting, consistent and full
implementation of the provisions of that document
is the only way to resolve the conflict in the Donbas
region and to solve all related issues. We hope that the
European Union and European capitals will continue
their efforts to ensure that Kyiv will fulfil its obligations
under the Minsk package of measures in full.

Furthermore, we cal1 upon Brussels not to lose
sight of the difficult situation in Ukraine as a whole,
especially as it pertains to the rule of law. Much has
been said about it in the reports on Ukraine by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, including the most recent report issued
last week. There is no progress in the investigation of
such high-profile tragic events as the shooting of people
in the Maidan, the killing of civilians in Mariupol and
the fire in the trade union building in Odessa. The truth
must be told, and the perpetrators must be brought
to justice.

The growing tension in the world and the emergence
of new threats and challenges are a compelling
argument to strengthen the coordination and interaction
of the international community. Russia is interested in
meaningful cooperation based on common strategic
goals shared with the EU, but that must be done on
equal footing, taking into account the interests and
concerns of one another.

