Mr. Gutierrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having promoted
the convening of this open debate, and to express
Peru's gratitude to Valerie Amos and Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretaries-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Peacekeeping Operations, respectively, for their
briefings on the subject before us today. I also wish to
highlight the statements made by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Director-
General of the International Committee of the Red
Cross. We thank the Secretary-General for his latest
report on the protection of civilians (S/2010/579).
However, it would have been very helpful to have the
report far enough in advance to enable us to better
evaluate it.

The issue of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict has been addressed in this Chamber for over
10 years, and we have seen the subject evolve and
develop in that time. In this respect, we believe that
resolution 1894 (2009) and last year's presidential
statement (S/PRST/2009/ 1) to be of great value.

These debates are a useful opportunity to carry
out a critical reflection leading to a more analytical and
profound assessment of the progress made to date. To
that end, it is important that we be guided by the five
core challenges identified by the Secretary-General in
his 2009 report (S/2009/277), which clearly remain
valid, as reflected in the latest report. They are
enhancing compliance by parties to conflict with
international law; enhancing compliance with the law
by non-State armed groups; enhancing protection
through more effective and better resourced
peacekeeping and other relevant missions; enhancing
humanitarian access; and enhancing accountability for
violations of the law. In the same vein, we must take as
a basis the aide-memoire annexed to last year's
presidential statement.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
identifies various areas where progress has been made,
but it also clearly notes that most of this progress is
still taking place within a normative or legislative
framework. Such progress contributes to the
development the common of conceptual framework we
all seek as the basis and guide for the protection of
civilians tasks that peacekeeping operations must carry
out.

However, we must remember that we have no
time to lose in improving protection on the ground. We
need to keep in mind both the multidimensional nature
of peacekeeping operations and their various civilian,
military and police components, as well as the essential
political commitment that such missions require. Such
commitment should be strengthened not only by the
parties to a conflict, but also by Headquarters, and
primarily the Security Council. The Council must
shoulder its main responsibility, which is the
maintenance of international peace and security, by
establishing clear mandates that facilitate the
preparation of operations in all their aspects and help
missions to fully accomplish their tasks.

As we have reiterated on several occasions, the
protection of civilians has become an essential element
for achieving peace and for the credibility and
legitimacy of the Organization. In that regard, the
Security Council has the capacity to adopt specific
measures coherently to promote orderly and systematic
compliance with international law by all actors in a
conflict, in particular the parties to the conflict and
armed non-State groups. This was illustrated by the
various examples provided by the Secretary-General in
last year's report and in the preparation of the
aforementioned aide-memoire.

Other important measures are those taken to
punish non-compliance with international humanitarian
law in order to put an end to any possibility of
impunity. In the context of political support, of equal
importance are the role of regional organizations and
the contribution they can make to prevention, planning
and operations, as well as the support they can provide
to national capacity-building for the protection of
civilians.

Peru reiterates its support for the promotion of
and respect for international humanitarian law by all
parties to a conflict, particularly non-State armed
groups. Peru is a party to the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War and its Additional Protocols
relating to the protection of victims in international and
non-international armed conflicts, which are the
cornerstones of international humanitarian law on the
protection of civilians. That is why we reiterate our call
on States that have not yet become party to these
international instruments to do so.

In fulfilment of its international obligations, and
with the aim of raising awareness of the framework for
the protection of civilians in armed conflict among
public officials and civil society, my country has
implemented a policy of dissemination of international
humanitarian law across the board. We have stressed
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We also
recently presented a detailed report to the Secretary-
General concerning the Peruvian Government's actions
in this regard.

We consider it extremely important to develop the
preventive, analytical dimension of a mission before it
is deployed in order to best protect civilians and
achieve an optimum understanding of the parties,
reasons and circumstances of the conflict in relation to
the civilian situation. More specific and appropriate
mandates can be arrived at when they are developed on
a more informed, case-by-case basis. This will also
make it possible to fill in the gaps in terms of political
guidelines and the planning and preparation of
missions. It will improve orientation on the ground in
the coordination needed to address problems that arise
with the arrival and deployment of humanitarian aid, as
well as with trafficking in small arms and light
weapons.

As part of this preventive analysis, it will also be
necessary to carry out an ongoing evaluation of the
risks faced on the ground both by civilians and by
those protecting them, particularly in peacekeeping
operations. In this regard, we thank the informal Expert
Group for its work. We suggest that the Group might
also assess the lessons learned from missions carried
out to date. It would also be helpful to continue to
strengthen coordination among the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Security
Council, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Field Support. We also believe
that the membership should have more information at
its disposal on the successes, challenges and lessons
learned along the way. That is why we would ask for a
briefing concerning these lessons in the framework of
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.

For the credibility of the United Nations, once the
task of protection is accepted and taught, it is of capital
importance to have clear, precise and adequately
resourced mandates that also reflect limitations and
existing conditions, in order not to raise expectations
that exceed a mission's capacities, particularly in
regard to the use of force. Coordinating the tasks of all
stakeholders involved, particularly the efficient
dovetailing of responsibilities relating to the need to
protect civilians, is also extremely important.

Finally, while Peru supports the adoption of
presidential statements at the end of debates of this
kind - believing that they are instruments of value
and utility to the matter under discussion - we also
believe it very important that, before any such text is
adopted, we also listen to and consider the opinions of
the membership on the issue at hand. My delegation
expressed this concern in the General Assembly's joint
debate on the report of Security Council and Security
Council reform (see A/65/PV.50). If it is our genuine
intention to give added value to these debates, they
should not be a mere formal exercise. On the contrary,
they should be substantial debates where the
presidential statement is drafted after the debate has
taken place.

