Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): Ijoin
others, Mr. President, in wishing you every personal
success in your translation to another part of the United
Nations family, in Geneva, where we know you will
carry out that function with the same distinction as you
have done in New York. I personally thank you for
both your welcome to me and the help you have given
me as a new member of the Council.

The discussion today is very welcome, and the
United Kingdom is very content with the background
paper you have set out. Today is the right opportunity
to pay tribute to the men and women who today are
undertaking, and have in the past put themselves at
risk, to carry out peacekeeping operations - in many
cases in more difficult circumstances today than in
yesteryear, where we have intra-State conflict as well
as inter-State conflict, as was pointed out by the
representative of Guinea earlier.

I will begin by locating peacekeeping in a wider
context. The international community needs effective,
efficient targeted efforts across a spectrum which
ranges from conflict prevention, the early warning of
impending crises through peacemaking, peacekeeping,
defence sector reform, peace-building - whatever you
call it - towards the creation of democratic, sovereign,
stable States. Let us face it: peacekeeping post-conflict
is a consequence of earlier failures. We need an overall
approach with constant surveillance so we get warning
of problems and the opportunity to act promptly and to
intervene as necessary.

I follow the logic of Ambassador Trautwein's
point: prevention is very much better than cure.
Peacekeeping itself has to be part of an integrated,
multidimensional approach covering all the aspects:
policing, humanitarian, civilian expertise, how to
develop a judiciary, and the social, economic and
political aspects, among many others. An essential
element is the development ofjustice in transition, with
all that entails - in effect, a continuum of peace
operations in a thoroughly integrated approach to
achieve the goal of a peaceful, stable State.

Who are the partners in peacekeeping? The
United Nations normally and properly takes the lead,
but works with regional organizations, the European
Union, the troop-contributing countries, countries in
need of help, their neighbours and so on. In our
discussions yesterday, the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) showed how the effort
on the ground can be much improved by regional input.
In our view, the regional contribution is crucial. But
picking up a point made by the Chilean representative,
let me say that where regional organizations undertake
peacekeeping operations, or where an individual State
does, it is of course preferable that they should be
covered by a resolution of the Security Council. But
that is not always possible. What is always necessary is
that anybody acting should do so in a way consistent
with the United Nations Charter.

Are we doing enough to help regional
organizations? Is there enough practical military
support, training in issues such as doctrine,
communications, command and control and means of
deployment? Those are among the many aspects which
you need actually to cover in order to deploy a
coherent military force, and to do so in a way that
when it hits the ground, as a multinational presence, it
can operate militarily, and in such a way that the
security of the people you deploy is actually
guaranteed. It is a formidable task, and the question is
whether we are giving enough support to the regional
organizations, for example, to the efforts of the African
Union. Where people are prepared actually to come
together, we ought to be absolutely sure we are doing
what we ought to be doing. What do we need to do?
We need readily deployable trained troops with clear
rules of engagement as robust as necessary for a given
situation. We need early preparation, firm good
leadership, prompt decisions by the Council, and above
all a strong political will. History demonstrates only
too clearly that prompt intervention can actually
quench the appetite for conflict.

You posed the question, Mr. President, of how the
Council can help. We certainly need to use the tools at
our disposal to identify and address the root causes of
conflict: better early warning and analysis. Mandates
for peacekeeping operations need to be realistic, but
with clear objectives. Resolution 1493 (2001) on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo was a good example
of a robust and comprehensive mandate which should
give the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) the
necessary tools. The Council can and should contribute
more in the critical planning stages. Recent dialogues
between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) and the Security Council members on Bunia
were extremely beneficial in their result. Perhaps we
could repeat that on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and on Liberia.

There is a case to be made for extending
consultations on strategic assessments and the planning
and concept of operations at critical stages of the
preparation of the mission. We very much applaud the
renewed focus on the accumulating of existing
expertise by the Best Practices Unit within DPKO.

The United Kingdom supports very strongly the
efforts of DPKO to ensure that thorough pre-
deployment United Nations mission headquarters
training is undertaken. The use of pre-mandate
authority within the Secretariat to effect rapid
deployment is very welcome. Similar pre-mandate
action would also be required by troop contributing
countries on occasion, if challenging timelines are to
be met.

At the heart of this, the essence is that
contributing countries need deployable troops who can
be made available at very short notice. That is the
essence of the sort of defence sector reform that we all
need to undertake in order to be up to the job.

Finally, the United Kingdom fully supports the
efforts made to ensure that not only human rights in
general but, specifically, the rights of women and
children are respected in conflict situations and are
addressed in peacekeeping mission activity across the
board.

Sadly, the demand for peacekeeping operations is
more likely to increase than to decrease. Our challenge
is to profit from experience and to strengthen the
peacekeeping efforts of the United Nations, so that
where the need exists, operations can be speedily
agreed upon and implemented. That will require,
perhaps above all, political will as well as resources
and capabilities. But discussions such as this one and
the efforts of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations are helping to identify the goals and the
systems we need. We have to work together to achieve
now the ends and to do even better. But the bottom line
is that the United Nations itself can do only so much.
In the end, confronting crises out there depends on the
political will of the nations to deliver in response to
what the United Nations asks.

