Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the presidency of Guatemala for convening
today's meeting. Chile attaches great importance to
the debate on peace and justice, with a special focus on
the role of the International Criminal Court, under the
agenda item "The promotion and strengthening of the
rule of law in the maintenance of international peace
and security".

We believe that without justice there is no peace.
Peace cannot exist without justice, and justice must
be exercised with the objective of ensuring peace.
Chile therefore considers that this debate is extremely
important, as we are convinced that the relationship
between the International Criminal Court and the
United Nations, through the General Assembly
and the Security Council, promotes the rule of law,
encourages respect for human rights, and contributes
towards attaining international peace and security, in
accordance with international law and the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Chile considers the International Criminal Court to be
the most advanced expression of the development of
international criminal justice, and that it represents one
of the most important initiatives of recent times.

From the perspective ofprotecting human rights, the
creation of the Court was an important step in the fight
against impunity and a clear sign that States parties are
committed to the international community in making
progress in that direction. For that reason, our country
strongly supports the work of the International Criminal
Court, and takes this opportunity to highlight the tenth
anniversary of the entry into force of the Rome Statute.
We also welcome the Court's first judgment this year,
which demonstrates its proper functioning.

The main connection between the Security Council
and the International Criminal Court resides in the
capacity of the former to refer situations or to suspend
investigations in accordance with articles 13 and 16 of
the Rome Statute. Nevertheless, our view is that the
Security Council should exercise its power to refer
situations to the Court or to suspend investigations
on the basis of consistent parameters, showing that
its decisions are not arbitrary. We are also convinced
of the need for the Security Council, in addition to
supporting its own decisions on the matter, must follow
up its referrals to the Court. Likewise, in respect of
its referrals, the Security Council must pay special
attention to refusals to cooperate with the Court.

The principle of complementarity is the
cornerstone of the Rome Statute, whereby it is the
primary obligation of national courts to investigate,
prosecute and punish the perpetrators of the most
serious crimes of international scope, identified in the
Rome Statute. In that regard, the Court is called upon to
intervene in cases where crimes have been committed
within national jurisdictions but the State concerned is
unable or unwilling to carry out the respective judicial
proceedings.

Finally, we believe that cooperation is critical
to the work of the Court. For that reason, within the
framework of the High-level Meeting of the General
Assembly on the Rule of Law at the National and
International Levels that took place on 24 September,
my country, Chile, pledged to develop legislation aimed
at cooperation with the International Criminal Court.
