Mr. Jagne (Gambia): The situation in Abkhazia,
Georgia, is still extremely volatile, notwithstanding the
efforts of the international community to bring about
peace in the area. My delegation was deeply disturbed by
the recent events in May in the Gali district. We are
particularly disturbed by the burning of houses
constructed at a cost of $2 million out of funds of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR). These events led to an outflow of
approximately 40,000 refugees for the second time. This
undesirable situation is being further exacerbated by
attacks on United Nations personnel. My delegation calls
for a condemnation of these activities and demands that
the parties put a stop to such activities.

The success of the peace initiatives to resolve the
conflict in Georgia will depend mainly on the parties
themselves. By their activities, the efforts of the

 

international community to move the peace process forward
have been continuously frustrated. The two sides owe it to
the international community and to their people to listen to
the voice of reason. While we call on them to honour their
obligations, we deem it pertinent, at this juncture, to
congratulate the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the members of his team, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the Russian
Federation as facilitator, the members of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) peacekeeping
force and the group of Friends of the Secretary-General for
their relentless efforts for a peaceful settlement in
Abkhazia, Georgia.

My delegation notes that the presence of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) in the
area is essential. It not only serves as a stabilizing factor in
the area, but also provides useful support for the political
process and helps to create a sense of confidence and
security among the residents of the area. As its mandate is
about to expire, my delegation would support its extension
for a further period of six months until 31 January 1999. If
this is not done, the already volatile situation in the area
may degenerate into an extremely uncontrollable
conflagration.

As the Council is considering, through the draft
resolution on the table, the extension of the mandate of
UNOMIG, we would like to take this opportunity to remind
both sides to the conflict that they cannot continue to hold
the international community hostage to their unwillingness
to resolve their differences peacefully and to renounce the
use of force. We urge the belligerents to summon the
necessary political will to settle their differences peacefully.
We also take this opportunity to call upon them to
implement fully and without delay their commitments under
the Moscow Agreement and all subsequent agreements.

In this context, my delegation welcomes the recent
meeting that was held in Geneva. We hope that the parties
concerned will continue negotiations with a view to
resolving their outstanding differences and proceed to
implement the agreements reached at the Geneva meeting.

My delegation has carefully studied the draft
resolution before us. We attach great importance to
operative paragraph 7 of the draft resolution, which
reiterates that the primary responsibility for achieving peace
rests upon the parties themselves and reminds them that the
continued commitment of the international community to
assist them depends on the progress they make in this
regard. This provision sends the right signals to the two
sides.

Also of significance to my delegation is operative
paragraph 11, which condemns the acts of violence
against the personnel of UNOMIG and places
responsibility squarely on the parties to

"take determined measures to put a stop to such acts
which subvert the peace process". [S/1998/699,
para. 11]

We hope that the two sides will heed the call of the
Council.

On the whole, we find the draft resolution to be in
the right direction and we will vote in its favour.

