Ms. Mueller: I thank you, Mr. President, for
the opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine.

Since I briefed the Council two months ago (see S/PV.8461), the conflict in Ukraine has remained an
active one. The daily impact on civilians on both sides
of the contact line is increasing as coping mechanisms
are being stretched to their limits. After five years of
conflict, which have seen more than 3,300 civilians
killed and up to 9,000 injured, 3.5 million people still
need humanitarian assistance and protection. Half a
million people, many of Whom are elderly, women and
children, live Within only five kilometres of the contact
line, where shelling, gunfire, landmines and unexploded
ordnance put them in danger. Many of these people live
in settlements that have been isolated by the conflict,
making it difficult to access markets, livelihoods, health
care and schools.

Shelling damages and disrupts critical civilian
infrastructure, even though it serves both sides of the
contact line. Since the beginning of 2019, 24 incidents
have affected water and sanitation facilities and 12
incidents have affected schools. For instance, the first
lift pumping station of the South Donbas waterway,
which supplies water to more than 1.1 million people
on both sides of the contact line, has already been
affected by 16 separate incidents, including shelling,
this year. It must be underscored that attacks against
civilian infrastructure increase the risks communities
face when their access to water, energy and education
services is interrupted.

Since I last briefed the Council, civilian workers
came under small-arms fire while conducting emergency
repairs of impacted power lines in Marinka and water
pipelines damaged in the area between Berehove and
Olenivka. While no casualties were reported as a result
of those incidents, the repair works were suspended
and further delayed as the workers were forced to
evacuate to safe areas. Parties to the conflict must take
all precautions to avoid, and in any event minimize,
civilian harm. International humanitarian law must
be upheld by all parties to protect civilians and their
access to critical services at all times.

In addition, I have previously commended
the Government of Ukraine in the Council on
the adoption of its national strategy on internally
displaced persons (IDPs) - as 1.5 million people are
registered as IDPs - and continue to encourage the
Government to make sufficient funding available for
the implementation of the strategy. The United Nations
will continue to support those important efforts for the
internally displaced.

I have three messages for the Council's
consideration today.

The first is that the freedom of movement of people
affected by the crisis must improve. Since April 2014,
over 1,000 civilians have been killed or injured by
mines and explosive remnants of war. Mine-related
incidents were the leading cause of casualties among
children last year. That is unacceptable. I implore all
parties to immediately cease using landmines and to
work with mine-action partners to provide awareness
to civilians and plan for demining.

While overall the crossing conditions have improved
since last year, essential services at checkpoints need
to be further enhanced on both sides of the contact
line and delays in crossing must be reduced. Since my
most recent briefing to the Council on this subject,
12 civilian deaths were reported at the checkpoints
in eastern Ukraine, mainly owing to health issues
complicated by delays, bringing the total number to 22
civilian deaths since the beginning of 2019. I must again
inform the Council, as I did in February, that there has
been no progress on repairing the pedestrian bridge of
Stanytsia Luhanska, which civilians - many disabled
or elderly with limited mobility - must cross to reach
essential services, including health care or access to
their pensions, which for many is their only means of
support. I regret that I have to encourage again the
immediate rebuilding of the bridge and simultaneous
improvement of the conditions at the bridge. Speedy
passage, in particular for those who are suffering from
health issues, must be ensured.

The second message concerns support for
humanitarian access in eastern Ukraine, which
remains unpredictable, particularly in areas beyond
Government control. Humanitarian assistance should
not be politicized. The United Nations and its partners
provide assistance in accordance with the universally
recognized principles of humanity, impartiality,
neutrality and independence. As they seek to reach the
most vulnerable civilians, humanitarian organizations
require unimpeded and sustained access.

The third message is that every effort must be made
to increase humanitarian funding. More resources are
urgently required to meet people's needs. Through the
2019 humanitarian response plan, which aims to provide
2.3 million people with protection and assistance to
restore their access to livelihoods, essential services
and critical infrastructure, the United Nations and
its partners require $162 million. Humanitarian
organizations remain committed to providing relief to
the people of Ukraine, but unfortunately, as of today,
only 9 per cent of the funding they require has been
received. Donors have been generous over the years and
the recently established Ukraine Humanitarian Pooled
Fund is receiving support from donors, but more is
needed. I encourage increased engagement and support
for humanitarian action in Ukraine.

The people of Ukraine continue to suffer the effects
ofthis conflict. We must redouble our efforts to provide
them with all necessary assistance and protection. I
also call on the parties to find solutions to this crisis in
order to avoid further suffering. The people of Ukraine
deserve nothing less.

