President Kagame: I am grateful for this
additional opportunity to talk about the very important
issues that have brought us here today. I have listened
with great interest to the various serious concerns so
well articulated by members of the Council with
respect to the situation in the Great Lakes region, and
to proposals concerning how we should be dealing with
that situation.

I would respond by saying that most of those
concerns are genuine; some of them are correct, others
are not fully correct, and still others are perhaps
lacking in facts or information. I shall try to address as
many as I can on that basis.

First of all, in my view, most of the concerns that
have been raised will in fact be addressed and dealt
with if we focus on implementing the peace process
that was agreed on at Lusaka. Sometimes, taking up
issues in a very fragmented way is not very helpful in
addressing the whole situation in a comprehensive way.
Lusaka talks about all the things we have been
discussing: it talks about disengagement; it talks about
withdrawal of forces.

With withdrawal and other things taking place,
most likely there will be no forces on the ground to
blame for one thing or another. I think that some of the
problems exist because we have failed to do the most
important thing: to try to focus all our energy on
making sure that the peace process is implemented.
Sometimes we have not been able to differentiate
between those who openly and clearly are violating the
ceasefire and the peace process and those who have
tried to meet their obligations. Sometimes measures
have been taken that in actual fact cause, in one way or
another, a delay in the whole peace process by trying to
revise what had been agreed to by everybody f the
signatories ofthe peace process.

For example, we spend so much time talking
about "invited" and "uninvited" forces, when in actual
fact the peace process, signed by everybody, says that
all forces must withdraw. Then somebody decides to
begin an argument about "invited" and "uninvited"
forces; this adds to the length of time that should be
spent on discussing the most important issues and on
perhaps reaching an agreement on them. I think the
issue is clear under the Lusaka peace process.
Everybody, including the President of the Congo and
the Government of the Congo, is a signatory; they
agreed to the total withdrawal of forces. Actually, that
is the most crucial thing - if it had happened at the
time it was supposed to have happened. The issues of
who goes first, who goes last and who does what have
been introduced by somebody; that causes delays of its
own, and we accept that. That is one problem.

On the issue of withdrawal, Rwanda is ready to
withdraw its forces as agreed under Lusaka, and in
conjunction with other problems being resolved -
because forces came into the Congo for a certain
reason, and Lusaka also addresses that reason. This
should be taking place if we are serious about the
implementation of the peace process - and Rwanda in
particular is serious about the implementation of that
process. At one point we even offered suggestions for
trying to speed up implementation. For example,
somebody talked about the proposal put forward by
Rwanda when the disengagement that had been agreed
on was not taking place: Rwanda decided unilaterally
to take measures that would support the peace process
by withdrawing its forces 200 kilometres, pulling them
back towards Rwanda's border. Failure of that was
caused by the Government of the Congo. In fact, the

Congo itself did not even deny it; it was clear and
open.

We are still ready to take some of these
initiatives, which would help advance the peace
process. But that is not an end in itself; our pulling
back or doing other things does not constitute an end in
itself. The end is for everybody eventually to do what
they are supposed to do and what they are asked to do
in the peace process.

I want quickly to address some of the other
concerns that have been voiced, for example the human
rights problems that have been talked about.

This is a problem. In actual fact, the background
ofthe problem we have in the Congo is the violation of
human rights. That is the background. That is what we
are trying to address, but I would rather look at it more
comprehensively by saying that the human rights
violations in eastern Congo are as bad as those in the
west, north and south of the Congo. I would not advise
the Council to discriminate about violations of human
rights. The violations of human rights have been taking
place in different forms throughout the territory of the
Congo - in Kinshasa, in Lubumbashi, in northern
Katanga and in northern Kasai.

One of the reasons for the failure of our
withdrawal, when we tried to do it, was actually the
violations of human rights by the Government. This
withdrawal failed because of a number of things. We
wanted and requested United Nations observers to
come and be placed in some areas. Clearly, their
numbers were not sufficient, so perhaps they needed to
be brought into some specific, important areas to
observe our withdrawal and events following it. The
United Nations was not able to deploy in time, so we
asked whether we should actually continue and do it
without the United Nations deployment. There was an
agreement that we could withdraw. When we withdrew
our forces, the forces of Kabila moved into areas where
we had been and killed people in northern Katanga and
northern Kasai because the population was being
accused of having been collaborators with the rebels
who are fighting the Government or with Rwanda.
There was therefore a mass movement of people
following our forces, running away from the areas from
which we had withdrawn. This was something we had
expected; we had wanted the United Nations observers
to be there, to observe and to be able to apportion
responsibility and place it where it belonged.

So violations are taking place throughout the
Congo. When we see on television people being shot
and thrown in the rivers in Kinshasa, this must be
talked about. These are very serious violations of
human rights. In the eastern Congo, where we are
deployed, there have been violations of human rights
by the many forces that are operating in that area,
which we have actually been fighting: the Mai-Mai, the
members of the former Rwandan Armed Forces, the
Interahamwe and the other groups. We have sometimes
asked the rebel forces to look into that and to bring to
book their own forces who may have been involved in
it. The Government of Rwanda does not hesitate to take
action against any of its members who get involved in
any violations of human rights. This can be attested to
by the courts in Rwanda that handle these cases.
Individuals who have committed human rights
violations are apprehended, brought to Rwanda and
tried by the courts. This is done in broad daylight. We
do not condone violations of human rights.

We have not been able, however, to control every
household, every road and every forest to ensure that
nothing happens. Most of the things that happen are
happening because of the forces that are not controlled.
Unfortunately, this is a situation that we have had to
live with for quite a long time and that is the
background of why we are in the Congo in the first
place. It has been to try to fight this kind of thing and
to ensure that it does not happen.

On the question of humanitarian aid workers, I
am surprised that it is not known that the forces from
Rwanda are actually about the only friends they have in
that situation. They are the ones who are on their side,
protecting them. The other problem is that they are not
even there; actually, they do not come. I wish these
humanitarian workers were there to help the
population. They are not there. They are scattered; they
are very few. There should be more than there are
today to help in that situation, and we shall continue to
try and help as much as our limited capacity allows.

Of course, sometimes people hear of violations of
human rights. They do not fully understand to whom
they are attributed. The other day, not long ago,
somebody was accusing our country of violating
human rights in Bunia, killing the people there. It took
me a long time to convince these people that there is
not a single Rwandan deployed in Bunia. This is an
area that is totally different from where we are
deployed, but somebody there is writing accusations
that Rwanda is violating human rights in Bunia. Yes,
there are violations of human rights taking place in
Bunia, problems between the Lendu and the Hema that
we have all read about in the papers. We are not there.
Rwanda is not deployed in Bunia - not a single
soldier.

I really wish to put some of these things in the
right perspective because this Council, unfortunately,
does not always have credible sources of information.
The United Nations has a presence in the Congo - a
Mission authorized by this Council. I think some of
these things should be brought to light in a better way.

As to the exploitation of resources, which many
people have talked about - it should not be there. I
would also ask the Council, when it finds the time and
if it finds it appropriate to do so, to help us to define
what the term "illegal exploitation of the resources of
the Congo" means. It seems that people have different
understandings about this term. I am sure there may be
people rightly accused of exploiting resources in the
Congo, but from the stories I have heard it is not really
black and white. I think there is a grey area that needs
to be sorted out. For example, there has been talk about
exploitation of diamonds and gold. We shall convey all
the information we have to the commission that has
been established. I am glad that the commission has
been established to look into that, but it will serve this
Council very well if the commission acts
professionally, thoroughly and objectively, and not
politically, in looking at the problem. It is my personal
View that, sometimes, some of these problems have
tended to be diversionary * they take us away from
the real issues that we should be addressing and do not
help us to prevent some of these things from
happening. We know of some cases - and we shall be
happy to inform the committee
concerned 4 in which there have been people trading
in diamonds and gold for the last 15 years in the
eastern Congo - going through Burundi, going
through Rwanda, going through everywhere - and
they are still in that business. They are doing it with the
Congolese. If the rebels who are in the Congo are also
illegal Congolese and cannot therefore do anything in
that territory with people who have been doing that
business all the time, it is an issue and an area that the
Council could help to clear up, so as to really know
what we are talking about when everybody is on board.

We shall be glad to make our own contributions
to clear the air about illegal exploitation of resources,
which has tended to take us away from dealing with the
main theme: the peace issue, with the security issues
and with the withdrawal of forces, and getting out of
this situation. We shall be able to engage the committee
and provide whatever support and information they
require from our country. They have already learned
that. They have come, and we have talked to them. I do
not know whether they found us lacking in any
way - I have not been informed about that. We are
ready to continue.

The other thing is that they could be very helpful
if they, in our case, have things to really compare. If
today they have figures about how many suspect
diamonds or how much suspect gold is being exported
by Rwanda, then we would very much appreciate that
information, because this can easily be looked for and
found. This would help us to know the actual extent to
which the issue that is being highlighted has gone.
Insofar as Rwanda is concerned, I think that there has
been an exaggeration about this issue. I think that there
is a grey area that is not well defined and that I would
request the Council to help us define so that we all
fully understand what we are talking about and so that
we can see whether we are rightly being accused or
whether more explanation is needed.

If I may talk about the former Rwandan Armed
Forces (ex-FAR) and Interahamwe, somebody was
interested in the numbers. The numbers are one
important aspect to find out about and to know. But the
other very important aspect that is important to know is
not so much the numbers as it is the very fact that there
are Governments and people that are turning these
numbers into a threat by giving arms and training and
by associating with it. I think that this is very crucial,
and we should not lose track of that by just talking
about numbers. This Council has been involved with so
many resolutions about the ex-FAR and Interahamwe,
the genocide suspects and how past resolutions to deal
with that are to be put in practice.

I have always wondered why there have been
shortcomings in even following up, as one way of
actually dealing with this problem, to make sure that
nobody actually associates with these groups. This
Council has done that in the case of Angola, with
UNITA. They have threatened sanctions. They have
done everything for the countries, for individuals and
for groups that we associate with UNITA, and they
think that has helped in that situation. When it comes
to the ex-FAR and Interahamwe, there is condemnation
and understanding that they create security problems,
but it always falls short of having clarity on the
question of how you deal with the people who
associate with these groups and that make them a
security threat to Rwanda.

So, I really hope that the Council will also help us
to address that problem; otherwise, with numbers it is
hard to be very specific. I am sure that the precise
numbers are mainly with those who are using them or
who have been helping them. I am sure that in giving
them arms and giving them clothes and food, they have
numbers. We do not have precise information, but we
think that, given what we have been noticing on the
ground and what we get from those we have been able
to capture at the front line when they are fighting, the
figure would be about 15,000 ofthem.

But again, this is not the only issue. The issue is
taking this 15,000 and adding other forces that
constitute a problem for our country. If it were just
about numbers this would be easy. In 1997 we
repatriated 2 million of our refugees; among them there
were over 40,000 ex-FAR and militia. We reintegrated
them into the rest of the society. We have reintegrated
over 15,000 former soldiers in our own army. So this is
not a problem. The problem is that these others stayed
out, and they are being helped to become a threat to our
country. That is where the issue lies. That issue must be
addressed if we are to finally realize security on both
sides. We need to look at security issues on all sides,
and that is really something that would be easier to do.
We are ready. Once we have gone through with
the implementation of the Lusaka peace process, the
big countries in the region should get together and
think of how we can create a framework on a
permanent basis that will address security issues in the
region. This has happened in other regions; I do not see
why it cannot serve us as well. But this is something
that will come once we have overcome this crucial
stage of moving ahead to implement what we have
already agreed to in the peace process. Otherwise, we
will continue with our endeavours to try to achieve
peace, whether it is through the Lusaka framework or
through talking to different individuals that can make a
valuable contribution to realizing final peace. We shall
continue to engage the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, under Joseph Kabila. We shall
always be open, and we shall be ready to work with
other countries in the region towards this objective of
realizing peace in our region.

Once again, I am very happy for this opportunity
to clear up some ofthe issues that have been raised, but
I remain available to go on with whatever I might not
have covered fully.

