Mr. Morales Troncoso (spoke in Spanish): We
have come to the Security Council today at the
generous invitation of its President, who opted to take
advantage of his successful presidency to convene this
open debate on the situation in Haiti. On behalf of my
country, I would like to express to you, Mr. President,
my warmest congratulations for this initiative, which
we applaud and commend as a welcome and timely
one. Allow me to extend my country's congratulations
to the President-elect of Haiti, Mr. Rene Garcia Preval,
and to reiterate the commitment of our President,
Mr. Leonel Fernandez Reyna, and of all of us, to
contribute to the efforts that Haitian society and the
international community are making to promote
institutional development and economic and political
stability in Haiti.

We have seen as a promising sign the fact that the
President-elect of Haiti, Mr. Rene Preval, chose our
country to make his first goodwill visit abroad after his
election. We reiterate once again the firm commitment
of our country, the Dominican Republic, to raise in
every forum to which it is invited the issue of Haiti's
urgent need for solidarity on the part of the
international community.

We have to acknowledge the fact that the
attention paid by the international community, led by
the United Nations, to the strife in that nation is
already starting to bear fruit. I would like also to take
this opportunity to join in the expressions of
congratulation and to praise the work that has been
done by our great friend, Mr. Juan Gabriel Valdes,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

We have seen the formation of a group of donor
countries and institutions that have made a
commitment to providing Haiti with resources for
institutional revitalization and to rehabilitate and build
the infrastructures that are essential to revitalize the
economy and guarantee basic public services for the
country and for the population as a whole. We have
also seen a long-term commitment to helping the
Haitian people and leadership to institutionalize
democracy and to lay the foundations for sustainable
economic development. The work done by the military
forces of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) has made it possible to control
public order, enabling the Transitional Government to
function and allowing the organization and holding of
free elections.

There are four other crucial questions. The first
involves alerting the elected authorities to the need to
incorporate, as they have been doing, all political
movements in the effort to stabilize the country and, in
the process, to restore democracy, reduce poverty and
to seek the social consensus necessary to ensure
dialogue and solidarity. Secondly, there is a need to
view assistance to Haiti as a process that involves the
leaders of every sector of society and the Haitian
community as a whole, so that they can feel truly
committed to the institutional, physical, political,
economic and social recovery of their country. Thirdly,
the Organization must maintain MINUSTAH's military
forces in Haiti for as long as necessary, until a climate
of public safety is restored and the Haitian authorities
can effectively assume their duties. Fourthly, we join in
a call to Haiti's creditor countries to take the decisive
step of forgiving its debt so as to lift that tremendous
burden on the country's depleted public finances.

To conclude, I heard today from the Ambassador
of the Congo that Haiti is the second oldest nation in
the hemisphere, dating back to 1 January 1804. Haiti
has enough historic and patriotic spirit to give rise to
optimism with respect to its overcoming the many
calamitous difficulties afflicting the Haitian people.

We would also like to propose the establishment,
under the Government of President Rene Garcia
Preval, of a commission made up of representatives of
friendly countries, international institutions and non-
governmental organizations, among others, that would
cooperate with the authorities in developing and
following up on projects for the economic and social
reconstruction of Haiti. The primary objective of such
a commission would be to ensure the disbursement of
the remaining 74 per cent of the $1.085 billion
collected at the donor conference in July 2004, and to
establish priorities among initiatives that would have
an immediate impact on job creation.

In this respect, we are ready, as we said to
President-elect Preval, to reactivate, as soon as
possible, the joint bilateral Dominican-Haitian
commission as a body for consultation on and
discussion of all of the issues that concern our
relationship. We are also ready to work together with
the new Haitian Government on common issues
relating to environmental protection, migration, trade
regulation, business exchanges and border security.

