Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Since this is the
first time I am speaking to the Council under your
presidency, Sir, I would like to congratulate you on your
leadership of the Council this month and pledge our full
cooperation. I would also like to acknowledge the role
of your predecessor in leading the Council last month.

The Government of South Sudan has officially
expressed its position and given its response in writing
on the mandate adopted today, and therefore there
is not much more to be said other than yo reiterate
some important points. I would particularly like to
express my Government's rejection of the just adopted
resolution 2304 (2016), as it does not take into account
or even consider the points of view of South Sudan. It
is unfortunate that the Council chose to take this route.

The Government of South Sudan accepted in good
faith, in principal, the deployment of the protection
force, as stated at the second Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) Plus Summit on
5 August in an IGAD communique. It is important
to underline that South Sudan does not object to the
entire resolution on the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, but only to the new elements of the
protection force and the pre-empting of the meeting
between the Government of South Sudan and the
Regional Chief of Defence Staff, as stated in the IGAD
communique, is meant to give room for discussions on
the modalities of the implementation of the protection
force. The communique clearly outlines the fact that
the modalities of the force, including its composition,
mandate, armament, deployment, timing and funding,
shall be agreed upon by the Transitional Government
of National Unity and the troop-contributing countries.
It is also unfortunate that the resolution contains
an annex on an arms embargo, given that it is a
peacekeeping resolution.

The adoption of the resolution goes against a basic
principle of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
which is the consent of the main parties to the conflict,
and against the Charter of the United Nations, which
urges Members to respect the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of other States.
The consent of South Sudan to the mandate and
operational modalities of the protection force outlined
in the resolution would have been important, as it would
have given the force all the necessary freedoms to carry
out the outlined mandated tasks.

Finally, I would like to thank all the Council
members that respected the concerns of South Sudan
and engaged with South Sudan with the aim of
reaching a text that would have been acceptable to
my Government.

The meeting rose at 4.15 pm.
