Ms. Landgren: Ten years ago, on 18 August 2003,
the last in a long series of Liberian peace agreements
was signed in Accra. Liberia is celebrating 10 years of
uninterrupted peace, and commitment remains steady,
as described in the report of the Secretary-General now
before the Council (8/2013/479). Liberia deserves praise
and, more importantly, continued support. A decade is
a long time to keep the peace, but a decade is a short
time to reverse the effects of a war that left the country
shattered or to overturn over a century of social and
political exclusion and poor governance. Many potential
drivers of conflict remain to be addressed through
long-term reforms coupled with inclusive development.

Recent months have seen an increasingly vigorous
public discourse among civil society, youth groups and
political parties about how far the country has come
and how best to meet its current challenges. This was
partly driven by contemplation of the tenth anniversary
of peace and partly coalesced around current events,
such as the recent court-ordered incarceration of a
prominent newspaper editor. Liberia's stability is
sufficient to provide an environment conducive to the
reforms being undertaken by the Government. The
importance of those reforms to consolidating peace has
been recognized by the Council, notably in the security
and justice sectors and in the areas of decentralization
and more transparent and accountable Government. I
will say a few words about where these stand.

The Constitution Review Committee has been
working, with the support of the United Nations,
to prepare the ground for the necessary national
consultation. In the coming weeks, civic educators will
begin working to inform and educate the public. The
Committee still faces serious financial and capacity
constraints, in addition to the broad buy-in that it needs
to forge, which could affect its ability to adhere to the
timeline, which is tight, despite the one-year extension
of the mandate through 2015. The United Nations will
continue to support the Committee and the broader
constitutional review process.

In July, the Government established a
decentralization support programme board for the
overall coordination of the financial and human capital
being invested to make decentralization a reality in
Liberia. The board consists of Government ministries
and international partners, including the United Nations
family. Decentralization is expected to promote more
inclusive and accountable governance. It will also take
time for it to begin functioning fully, both legislatively
and in the light of the country's limited human and
institutional capacity.

Decentralized governance structures also feature
in the National Reconciliation Road Map. President
Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf launched the implementation
of that 18-year framework in June, placing it under
the leadership of the Ministry of Internal Affairs.
Continued clear leadership of the Road Map will
be important. It is comprised of some 12 different
initiatives, including those aimed at shaping a common
narrative on national identity. Recent discussions
on a national history project have opened the door to
preparing a national history curriculum for Liberia's
schools. And a technical team of Government, civil
society and United Nations representatives is assessing
how best to partner with peace committees, traditional
leaders and civil society in order to make the Palava
Hut initiative a reality, as also recommended by the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission.

As the Secretary-General's report notes, land
reform has advanced, with a new land rights policy to be
followed by draft legislation. Land and the exploitation
of Liberia's abundant natural resources remain
cornerstones of the country's economic development,
as well as powerful sources of potential conflict.
The Government and many development partners
acknowledge the need for transparent, responsible
management and regulation of concession agreements
and the resources they yield, including those intended
for local development. This remains an important area
for the country that requires priority attention.

In August, the Government issued a directive
that 10 counties are to be audited, including those
administering social development funds provided by
concessions. And in June, the Forestry Development
Authority issued letters of intent to terminate almost
half of the 62 irregular private-use permits issued in
the forestry sector. The lack of adequate consultation
with affected communities remains an issue, and a
study is under way on citizens' engagement in natural
resource management, at the Government's request.
It will be important to institutionalize mechanisms
allowing consistent dialogue between concessions
and communities. The report notes the good progress
made by the five land coordination centres, whose staff
are being trained in alternative dispute resolution and
mediation skills.

Corruption in general remains a very significant
handicap, affecting the functioning of national
institutions, public confidence in those institutions and
the pace of economic development. The President's
recent dismissals of senior Government officials are
described in the report. Since then, 18 officers have
been dismissed from the Liberia National Police for
extortion and excessive absenteeism; numerous others
have been suspended. It is hoped that such resolute
steps will send a strong message to those carrying the
public's trust at all levels.

One year ago, the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL) initiated a calibrated, three-phase
military drawdown process endorsed by the Council.
The Mission has focused on executing a steady,
well-planned and responsible military drawdown. It
completed the first phase on 30 June, with all designated
personnel and equipment repatriated in good order and
on schedule. UNMIL no longer has a fixed military
presence in four of Liberia's counties, and has deployed
formed police unit personnel to areas considered
potential hotspots for insecurity and to serve as backup
to specialized units of the Liberia National Police. The
first of the Mission's three newly appointed formed
police units, from Nepal, has been on the ground for
six months; the second, from China, is due to deploy in
October. That police presence remains essential, both
to enable the Mission to serve as a needed backup to
national authorities and to maintain public confidence
in Liberia's security during the transition. The Mission
has also retained its civilian and United Nations Police
advisory presence in all counties in order to continue
supporting local Government and police structures,
which remain weak.

This phased approach to drawdown has permitted
the Government and UNMIL to develop close, routine
and effective joint transition planning mechanisms.
UNMIL has now closed 11 locations and handed over
eight to Government entities. However, the Liberian
security forces have not been able to scale up their
presence and operational effectiveness in order to
assume the increased security responsibilities, and
they remain severely constrained by weak mobility,
resources and administration.

Demands on the Government will become more
acute as this transition progresses. The UNMIL military
contingent expects to vacate a further three counties by
April 2014. That will require the Government to sustain
an effective security presence in more of the country
and across a broader range of vital duties, including
static guarding and cash escorts.

However, the 2013-2014 national budget reduces
allocations for the police, and limited transition-specific
funding has been set aside. Even though the National
Police Training Academy has been physically expanded
to train 600 recruits a year, only 99 officers have
graduated in the past 12 months. The graduation of
another 148 has been delayed since May, in part due to
budget constraints, while the current class of 293, which
is in field training, is due to graduate next February.

The immediate challenges posed by the UNMIL
drawdown and the long-term importance of the rule
of law for a stable Liberia make it essential that the
Government and its partners redouble their efforts to
develop capable and accountable justice and security
sectors. A more focused, prioritized approach to
institutional development is needed. To that end, a
high-level retreat on the security sector will be held
next week, co-organized by the Government, the
United Nations and the Government of Sweden. The
retreat will bring together a wide range of national
and international actors involved in security sector
development, including Ambassador Tillander of the
Peacebuilding Commission. The retreat will consider
recommendations of several joint studies, including a
baseline capacity assessment of the Liberia National
Police, a review of management and accountability
mechanisms within the police, judiciary and
prosecution, and a United Nations mapping of gaps in
Liberia's security sector.

The legislature has begun following up on the very
many audit reports it has received from the general
auditing commission over the years. That and regular
dialogue between the executive and the legislature are
particularly important for the role of the legislature
in policy development and oversight, as well as in
representing the interests of its constituents. In July,
UNMIL and the legislature initiated a periodic direct
dialogue on a range ofissues central to Liberia's reform
agenda.

Looking ahead, Liberia's next presidential elections
in 2017 will be a political watershed moment. A foretaste
of the tenor of those elections may come in October
2014, when 15 senatorial seats, or one per county,
will be contested. As well, Liberia's security remains
intertwined with that of its neighbours. Strengthening
regional approaches remains imperative to security as
well as to development.

The situation along the border with Cote d'Ivoire
has remained calm for the past six months and tensions
have eased. Eight Ivorians suspected of alleged
involvement in cross-border attacks from Liberia into
Cote d'Ivoire, including the June 2012 attack that killed
seven peacekeepers of the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI), still await a ruling on whether
Liberia will accede to an Ivorian extradition request.

Since the second quadripartite meeting in April
among the Governments of Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire,
UNMIL and UNOCI, the parties have worked to deliver
on agreed commitments, including successful high-
level strategic engagement and increased operational
cooperation on the ground. The four parties met in
June in western Cote d'Ivoire and again last week
in Monrovia to plan joint security operations along
the border, which will take place this November and
in January 2014. Preparations have also advanced
for the first-ever cross-border meeting of chiefs and
elders - another quadripartite meeting outcome - and
the meeting is on track to be held next month.

The April quadripartite meeting also agreed to
revive a tripartite commission on humanitarian and
refugee issues comprising the two Governments and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees. This year, over 11,000 Ivorian refugees
have repatriated voluntarily, leaving fewer than 59,000
Ivorian refugees in Liberia, down from over 200,000
at the height of the crisis. Some new arrivals continue
to be registered in Liberia, and continued efforts are
needed to create conditions favourable for return to
care d'Ivoire.

The anniversary of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement has been an opportunity to celebrate just
how far Liberia has come. The country should be proud
of its significant achievements. And yet it remains
fragile, with a sense ofa unified nationhood still a work
in progress and small-scale outbreaks of violence still
routine. Important underlying cleavages and tensions
await resolution. Increased economic activity and
growth bring with them new challenges of management,
oversight, the judicious use of financial resources and a
fair distribution of national wealth.

Speaking at the recent launch of a high-level panel
on fragile States, President Johnson-Sirleaf underlined
the importance of going beyond conventional growth-
driven poverty reduction and addressing the linkages
between peacebuilding, State-building and governance.
It is helpful that Liberia's development partners
increasingly employ a fragility perspective in their
work. Liberia will need to stay the course, now and for
decades to come. The United Nations stands with the
Government, partners, civil society and others in our
shared dedication to preventing any return to the ways
of the past.

