At the outset, I would like to thank the Estonian presidency for convening this open debate. We thank the Secretary-General, the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross and Ms. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf for their briefings. The grave and systematic targeting of civilians in armed conflict that the world has witnessed proves the need for adherence to international humanitarian law enshrined in the four Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their Protocols Additional, and other relevant international instruments. The breaches of international humanitarian law are an infringement on human values and a violation of the international covenants that have been agreed upon by the world, notably the Charter of the United Nations. At a time when the world is facing an unprecedented global health crisis due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, we need to be reminded that more than 70 million people have been forcibly displaced by armed conflict and are now more vulnerable to the threat of the pandemic. Immediate action by the international community is therefore needed to protect civilians exposed to the risks of COVID-19. In the same vein, it is critical that all parties to armed conflicts seriously respond to the appeal launched on 25 March by the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire. The Security Council has underlined the importance of conflict prevention in the context of a commitment to collective action in order to spare peoples around the world the suffering and devastation caused by conflicts, and towards the promotion of international peace and security. It is regrettable, however, that such an approach has not been pursued in many situations, including when it comes to the unjust and unlawful blockade against the State of Qatar, which will enter its fourth year on 5 June. This blockade is imposed under false and untenable pretexts, with total disregard for the disastrous consequences on the security and stability of our region, at atime when the Arab region is going through numerous crises and conflicts causing a tremendous amount of suffering. Instead of seeking to contribute to solving and settling those crises and their root causes, the blockading countries have chosen a path that violates the provisions of international law and runs counter to the desired intentions of the international community. The State of Qatar is proud of its strong partnership with the United Nations system to improve its capacity to quickly respond to the millions of civilians in need in armed conflict. Besides our multi-year unearmarked contributions to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the State of Qatar is also an active member of the OCHA Donors Support Group and will assume the presidency of the Group in July. We have also supported OCHA country-based pooled funds since 2016 by providing unearmarked and rapid financing to close the funding gaps, including by providing support to humanitarian efforts in Syria, Yemen, Afghanistan, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Turkey and Nigeria. In line with the State of Qatar's intention to support the International Committee of the Red Cross, a joint declaration of intent was signed - the first of its kind in the region - to support civilians affected by armed conflict, thereby contributing to promoting respect for international humanitarian law. Within the framework of shared responsibility and international cooperation to face the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, we would also like to note the cooperation between the State of Qatar and NATO in support of the Secretary- General's call to address the humanitarian impact of the pandemic. The State of Qatar has supported OCHA's global appeal to provide support for the transport of humanitarian and medical supplies by air through NATO's Euro-Atlantic Disaster Response Coordination Centre. In conclusion, the State of Qatar is proud to co-chair, alongside Denmark and Costa Rica, the cross-regional Group of Friends on the Responsibility to Protect. On the fifteenth anniversary of the enshrinement of this landmark principle in the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1) we continue to seek to ensure that the international community never again fails to halt the mass atrocity crimes of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
