Mr. Fedotov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian Federation reiterates its firm
position: it strongly rejects the evil that is international
terrorism, in all its forms and manifestations. We stress
without equivocation that our country, in the struggle
against this new and extremely dangerous threat to
international peace and security, stands ready to work
constructively alongside all States and international and
regional organizations to solve the global problem of
establishing the necessary conditions for eradicating
terrorism worldwide.

In conformity with its position of principle on this
issue, the Russian Federation delivered its firm
condemnation of the attempt to assassinate the President of
Egypt, His Excellency Mr. Hosni Mubarak, in Addis Ababa
on 26 June 1995. We are deeply convinced that the
investigation of this abhorrent crime must be brought to a
successful conclusion, with the perpetrators brought to
justice. There is no room for doubt: this can be done
effectively only if there is close cooperation between all the
interested parties, and this includes bilateral cooperation.

Given that the Organization of African Unity has
adopted a number of important decisions designed to help
solve the problem of the extradition of the suspects, we are
convinced that the greatest possible involvement by the
regional machinery, in this case the OAU, is the best way
to go. At the same time, though, we welcome constructive
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, and also the Security Council's becoming
involved, where necessary, in support of these
organizations. However, we believe that there is no
justification for the Council's taking their place in this
issue. We believe that this form of cooperation between the
Security Council and the OAU is capable of yielding
positive results in settling the question of the Sudan too,
and that this would help build confidence and reinforce
stability in this troubled region of Africa.

In fact, this is exactly what we had in mind during the
work on finalizing the draft resolution, and we are gratified
that the sponsors took a number of our amendments, which
we made in that spirit, into account. We are sure that this
important Council resolution will receive an appropriate
response, first and foremost in Khartoum, and will give the
Sudan an additional incentive to step up its efforts to
uncover the three suspects. This would make it possible
to resolve the issue and allow the Council to close the
book on it.

We note with satisfaction the explanations by the
authors that the adoption of the draft resolution is not
aimed at isolating the Sudan internationally or at adopting
measures against it, and that the appeal to the
international community to encourage the Government of
the Sudan to respond fully and effectively to the OAU
requests assumes, first and foremost, that bilateral
diplomatic channels will be used to promote a solution.
This, in our view, is the method most likely to succeed.

As this is also the Russian delegation's
understanding of the text, it voted in favour of the draft
resolution.

We have noted the statement at today's meeting by
the Permanent Representative of the Sudan on behalf of
his country, and hope that the constructive steps
Khartoum has taken to establish the necessary cooperation
with the regional machinery and interested countries will
be given due attention and weight by the international
community.

