Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We have taken note of the ninth report on
the situation in Libya. We thank Ms. Bensouda for her
participation in this meeting and her briefing.

Following the destruction of its State institutions
in 2011, the situation in Libya continues to be a source
of multifaceted threats. It is enough to mention the
vivid spectre of terrorism, arms trafficking and the
unprecedented growth of the criminal business of
smuggling migrants across the Mediterranean Sea. The
breakup of the State has reached the point at which the
Libyan conflict has become a constant, roaring hotspot
on the global map of political instability. Under the
auspices of the United Nations, significant efforts have
been made to establish inter-Libyan dialogue aimed
at finding a peaceful solution to the crisis. That goal
seems almost impossible to achieve, but we hope that
the formula for a solution that would ensure the end of
violence and general stability will be found.

In this vulnerable situation, the use of the
international criminal justice mechanism should be
carefully considered and calibrated, both in terms of
its substance and timing. The idea of establishing new
formats for dialogue on the topic of Libya with the
participation of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
should be considered not only from the point of view of
its added value, but also in conjuction with efforts to
establish national dialogue in the country.

We feel that the reports on the situation in Libya are
becoming increasingly descriptive, akin to the materials
issued by monitoring missions. Almost nothing is said
in the report about the planned procedural steps. In
the past, the Court initiated proceedings against Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi and
issued warrants for their arrest in a very short period
of time - just four months after the Council's referral
of the situation to the Court. Since then, however,
no progress has been noted, although the former
Al-Qadhafi supporters are not the only parties to have
committed crimes in Libya that may fall under the Rome
Statute. We think that the experience of using the ICC
to address the situation in Libya in terms of ensuring
justice, encouraging prevention and contributing to
national reconciliation cannot for the time being serve
as an argument in support of proposals to refer other
cases to the Court.

We note a completely new aspect in the report,
namely, its mention of the crimes committed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
affiliated groups. The rising level of terrorist threat
and the strengthening of the capacity of ISIL in Libya
are both a cause for deep concern. An appropriate
response to terrorist crimes in which efforts are made
to bring perpetrators to justice could be a significant
contribution to the international community's fight
against this scourge. In that regard, we hope to
receive more detailed information on the actions the
Prosecutor's Office plans in this regard.

