Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): We thank you,
Mr. President, for scheduling this open meeting on East
Timor, and we thank you for the expression of
condolences on the death of the Bangladesh soldier in
East Timor, who lost his life in the cause of peace. Our
thanks go also to Assistant Secretary-General Annabi
for his comprehensive briefing on the latest
developments in East Timor.

Among the many daunting challenges faced by
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET), capacity-building in the field of
human resource development stands out. We fully
support the policy adopted by UNTAET of consultation
with the relevant United Nations agencies and other
development partners in determining the needs in this
field. The draft strategy for human resource
development and institution-building presented
recently in a workshop appears to be the correct step-
by-step approach.

We are very concerned at the recent encounters
between the UNTAET peacekeeping force and the
militia, which led to the loss of a number of
peacekeepers' lives. As regrettable as that is, the
broader implications, both for the scope of the United
Nations mission and for the repatriation of refugees, is
very disturbing.

The repatriation of refugees has almost ground to
a halt. The situation in the refugee camps remains
tense. The UNHCR personnel and other aid workers
continue to be targeted by the militia. As we have done
in the past, we strongly call for appropriate action to
stop such militia activities.

We have noted the decision taken by the
Indonesian authorities to close down refugee camps in
West Timor in a matter of months. It is our view that
this step should be taken if full coordination and
consultation with UNTAET and UNHCR. That way,
the solution would be sustainable and would contribute
to the ultimate goal of repatriation of East Timorese
refugees. We deem it indispensable that the registration
process be completed by UNHCR before the closure of
the camps. But for the interim, efforts must be made to
ensure security of the refugees as well as of the
international aid workers in West Timor.

We welcome the initiative taken by the
Government of Indonesia in speeding up the
repatriation process. We recognize that the success of
this initiative will depend on the financial aspect as
well as on creating conditions, both social and
economic, on both sides of the border that are
conducive to the process of repatriation and
resettlement. It is encouraging to note that offers of
assistance have started.

We were encouraged to hear at last month's
briefing that FALINTIL members had received interim
assistance from UNTAET while a definitive
arrangement was under study by a group from King's
College, London. We feel that the outcome of the study
should be the subject of prior discussion between
FALINTIL and UNTAET. We believe the security
arrangements of the territory must be determined by
informed decision of the East Timorese leadership.
UNTAET would play a facilitating role in making the
decision.

Tomorrow East Timor will celebrate the first
anniversary of the landmark referendum in which its
people decided in favour of independence. For some
time now we have seen a momentum slowly built
towards a process of transition towards independence.
This is only as expected, and we fully support the
preparatory steps being taken by UNTAET in this
regard. On their part, the East Timorese leadership is
also engaged.

Here, ifI may digress from my text, I express our
concern about the reported resignation of Mr. Xanana
Gusmao. Then subsequently we learned that he has
withdrawn his resignation. Maybe we can hear whether
there is any confirmation of this news from Mr.
Annabi.

In an ongoing first-ever multiparty congress the
people of East Timor have entered into a discourse
about the development of a constitution and the
divising of a national human rights action plan. We
believe these Timorese inputs are the most crucial ones
in the process of transition and should therefore
emanate from an inclusive and broad-based
participation of the people of East Timor.

