Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative ofthe Secretary-
General, for his briefing. I also welcome the presence
of His Excellency Mr. Tomislav Nikolic', President of
Serbia, and Ms. Atifete Jahjaga, President of Kosovo,
and thank them for their statements.

On behalf of Chad, I would like to offer to President
Nikolie and the Government and people of Serbia our
sincerest condolences following the flooding that has
taken so many lives and caused considerable material
destruction.
Chad welcomes the ongoing, active participation of
Serbia and Kosovo in the European Union-facilitated
dialogue and that encouraging progress has been
made in the implementation of the First Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations of
19 April 2013. I commend the parties for pursuing the
dialogue and for the progress that has been achieved.
We welcome the integration of 284 former officials of
the Serbian Ministry of the Interior into the Kosovo
police. We urge the parties to redouble their efforts to
establish the future association/community of Serbian
municipalities in Kosovo. We welcome the measures
that have been taken to establish the new municipal
community safety councils in northern Kosovo
following the 2013 elections.

We encourage the draft bill on general elections
and call upon the authorities to work to ensure the
integration and inclusion of everyone, particularly
the Serbian population of Kosovo, as well as the other
minority communities. The restoration of mutual trust
among the communities will be a yardstick for the
success ofthe ongoing talks. With regard to the initiative
to transform the Kosovo Security Force into the Kosovo
armed forces, all necessary precautions should be taken
to study all aspects of the question, without excluding
the possibility for Kosovo to create its own defence and
security forces in the long term.

On the justice front, we congratulate the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo for its work under
the authority the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in the overall framework
of resolution 1244 (1999). We welcome the decision
to renew its mandate. We particularly welcome
the agreement on the inclusion of Serbian parallel
judicial institutions into the Kosovo system and the
strengthening of the rule of law throughout Kosovo, as
evidenced in several prosecutions and judgements that
have been delivered in the area of organized crime and
corruption. We also welcome the initiative of the Kosovo
Government to create a special tribunal to consider war
crimes. We welcome the agreement on the integration
of Serbian parallel judicial institutions into the Kosovo
legal system. We hope that a final agreement will be
concluded under the European Union-promoted talks.

We note with satisfaction that with respect to security,
the situation in Kosovo is stable, despite continued acts
of theft, arson, attacks on property, and vandalism and
desecration of cemeteries. Chad condemns such acts,
which incite violence and hatred. We welcome the
efforts of UNMIK to facilitate communication between
the Kosovo authorities and INTERPOL and to establish
a strategic interinstitutional cooperation plan to fight
organized crime and corruption with the nomination of
an anti-corruption national coordinator.

We welcome and encourage the Working Group on
Missing Persons, which enjoys the participation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, UNMIK and
national and local authorities, although 1,712 persons
remain missing since the end of the war in Kosovo. We
also commend the Kosovo Government for approving
a strategy on communities and the return of displaced
persons for 2014-2018, guaranteeing all their necessary
rights.

Finally, Chad encourages the entire international
community, and the Security Council in particular, to
support the normalization of relations between Belgrade
and Pristina through the European Union-facilitated
dialogue. The resulting progress should inspire UNMIK
to meet expectations and better prepare in terms of
facing future challenges.

