Allow me first of all to congratulate Judge Carmel Agius and Mr. Serge Brammertz, President and Prosecutor, respectively, of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, namely the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, for the presentation of their detailed biannual report. It must be said that, in addition to reflecting the will of the international community to continue the work of the ad hoc Tribunals to advance international criminal justice, the establishment of the Mechanism undoubtedly responds to the need to maintain international peace and security. By adopting resolution 2529 (2020) in June, the Security Council reaffirmed its determination to combat impunity for serious international crimes and the need to bring all persons indicted by the International Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia to justice. To that end, Member States should provide their full support to that commitment through good cooperation with the Mechanism, in accordance with the principles that guided its establishment. We further welcome the renewal by the Secretary-General of the mandate of the President of the Mechanism, the appointment of a new Registrar and the reappointment, via resolution 2529 (2020), of the Prosecutor, all for a period of two years. We also wish to express our support for the actions of the President and other senior officials taken to mitigate the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic on the staff and work of the Mechanism. In that connection, my delegation expresses its gratitude to the judges for their dedication in carrying out their duties and continuing courtroom proceedings without hesitation despite the COVID-19 pandemic. My delegation also encourages the Mechanism to continue to discharge all its responsibilities with regard to the human rights of the detained persons under its care. We commend the Mechanism for the progress made, including on the amendment of protective measures and monitoring the enforcement of sentences, the protection of victims and witnesses, the search for the remaining fugitives indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and assistance provided to national jurisdictions, as well as the Mechanism's own internal management measures. In conclusion, we reiterate our appreciation of all the staff of the Office of Internal Oversight Services and encourage them to take steps to implement the recommendations of the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals, as set out in resolution 2529 (2020).
