Mr. Bamba (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
have just returned from Addis Ababa and took a taxi
directly to the Council from John F. Kennedy Airport,
so I would ask members to bear with me.

Mr. President, my delegation would like to
congratulate you on your accession to the presidency
of the Council for the month of July. My delegation
has taken note of the Secretary-General's report on the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (S/2012/506),
whose mandate ends on 31 July, pursuant to resolution
2000 (2011). We also listened attentively and with
interest to the briefing just delivered by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Koenders.

My delegation recalls the joy and great pride of
the people of C6te d'Ivoire during the working visit of
all 15 members of the Security Council to our country
a few weeks ago. At that time, every member had the
opportunity to understand and appreciate the gratitude
felt by the people of Cote d'Ivoire towards the Council,
whose commitment to and determined support for the
will of the majority of the sovereign Ivorian people have
allowed democracy to prevail in C6te d'Ivoire since the
elections and especially to provide effective protection
to the civilian population.

During that visit, the Council was able to see for
itself the progress that has been made on the ground
since the elections, as well as the challenges that still
lie ahead. The Council had transparent and exhaustive
exchanges with the President of the Republic of Cote
d'Ivoire, Mr. Alassane Ouattara, who presented his post-
crisis vision for Cote d'Ivoire and his plans to make it
an emerging country by 2020. He naturally responded
to the questions raised by the Security Council and
was able to clarify some issues. The Council also had
instructive exchanges with members of the current and
previous Governments, the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, and civil society.

Lastly, the Council made field trips, in particular
the west of the country and to an Ivorian refugee camp
on the border inside Liberian territory. The Security
Council is thus fully aware of the realities on the Cote
d'Ivoire agenda. That said, I would like to make a few
remarks on specific issues, especially in the light of
recent developments.

First, the security situation throughout the country
has improved considerably. Life in Abidjan and other
large cities has been revitalized, with a perceptible
sense of economic recovery and growth, as the report
underscores. However, the security situation in the
country's western region remains a source of concern.
Indeed, the attacks of 8 June and subsequent days in
villages of the Tai' region, perpetrated by armed groups
from Liberia and in which seven Blue Helmets from
Niger, several civilians and soldiers of the Forces
republicaines de C6te d'Ivoire (FRCI) lost their lives,
have harshly illuminated the nature of the action that
took place there and the objectives of those who would
destabilize the situation.

Clearly, the criminal acts of these armed groups
were perfectly planned and coordinated to exploit the
effect of surprise, and designed to strike fear into the
hearts of the civilian population. It is also well known
to all that such armed groups receive financial aid
from exiled Ivorians and illegal mining operations.
Some of those who funded and organized the attacks
have been identified and apprehended. In that context,
on 12 June the Minister of the Interior revealed the
existence of a plot against the State following the arrest
in a foreign country and extradition to Cote d'Ivoire
of a former minister and crony of Mr. Gbagbo. Here,
my delegation pays tribute to the memory of the seven
UNOCI soldiers and wishes to assure the Council that
the Government of Cote d'Ivoire has spared no effort
to find the perpetrators of these war crimes and bring
them to justice.

In the light of these attacks, my country has
strengthened its cooperation with Liberia in the areas
of defence, justice and law enforcement. The Special
Representative reported on cooperation activities
involving the missions in Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia.
Quadripartite meetings have been held to address a
joint response to the threats. It has also been decided
to convene a meeting of the Ivorian-Liberian Joint
Commission of Cooperation before the end of the year.
Meanwhile, it was agreed that judicial cooperation
should be strengthened, and that ajoint meeting ofchiefs
of staffand high-level officials in the communities along
the border would be held to promote reconciliation and
development activities.

As indicated in paragraph 56 of the report, we
welcome the new provisions for cooperation between
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL)
and UNOCI, and the fact that the United Nations
country teams in C6te d'Ivoire and Liberia will be
strengthened to enhance their responsiveness to any
possible attacks on either side of the border, especially
through cross-border cooperation. My delegation also
supports the Secretary-General's recommendation,
also in paragraph 56, to transfer to UNOCI three attack
helicopters currently deployed in UNMIL to improve
the mission's deterrent and anticipation capacities.

The regional dimension of the security situation
in Cote d'Ivoire is clear. Indeed, the early signs of the
crises in Mali and Guinea-Bissau have accelerated
the implementation of measures taken to respond to
subregional threats. At ameeting in Abidjan on 13 March,
the Mano River Union adopted an operational plan on
peace and security in order to respond to organized
transnational crime and trafficking in West Africa.
The plan provides forjoint border patrols, strengthened
information exchange and the establishment of joint
units. Another useful measure was the Mano River
Union summit held in Conakry on 15 June.

My second point, which is also a source of
concern raised in the report, concerns security sector
reform (SSR) and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR). In my statement of April 26 (see S/PV.6761), I informed the Council about the creation of
an SSR working group with a view both to identifying
a definitive response to the problem of implementing
DDR, and to undertaking serious consideration of
security and defence mechanisms, not to mention all
the various sectors involved in SSR.

In parallel with the efforts of the SSR working
group, the Ministers of Defence and of the Interior, in
their capacity as pillars of security sector reform, have
launched projects within their respective departments.
All of these groups have almost completed their work,
which they will submit to the SSR scientific committee
later this month. This period of intense reflection will
lead to significant reforms aimed at maintaining peace,
democracy and the safety and security of people and
property. Those significant reforms are the result of
work specifically focused on security sector reform,
defence policies, the reintegration of former combatants
and reform of the national police.

The SSR working group, in close cooperation with
UNOCI, the United Nations Development Programme,
the African Union and the Economic Community of
West African States, identified six pillars of SSR. They
are national security, the rule of law and international
relations, democratic control, post-crisis reconstruction,
economic policy and the social and human dimension.

After identifying challenges, needed reforms and
action plans, proposals were submitted to the steering
committee for consideration and validation. They
focused on four areas: a national DDR policy, new
strategies to implement it, a national SSR policy and
a unified vision for reforms. Meanwhile, a national
security council will be established to oversee DDR and
SSR efforts, under the direct control of the President. In
that way, DDR will be implemented by one single body,
the DDR authority, attached to the President's office.
SSR implementation will be assigned to a special
minister charged with pursuing reforms in cooperation
with focal points in the various ministries. Each
ministry will be responsible for reforms in its areas of
focus.

The third element, as mentioned in the Secretary-
General's report, is national reconciliation and political
dialogue. The Dialogue, Truth and Reconciliation
Commission is focused on long-term solutions, and is
endowed with the means to broaden its audience and
its actors. There is increasing ownership of grass-roots
initiatives through inter-community dialogue strongly
encouraged by the Commission. I note with pleasure that
the Ivorian diaspora here in New York is particularly
engaged in this issue.

As for the political process, the Council saw for
itself the extremism of the former ruling party, the
Front populaire ivorien (FPI). Fortunately, there have
been positive developments, and at the request of the
FPI a frank and productive exchange took place two
weeks ago between an FPI delegation and a Government
delegation led by the Prime Minister. It is to be hoped
that this will lead the FPI to participate fully in local
elections in order to build itself a platform to take
part in democratic politics, exercise its right to free
speech and make its expected contribution to national
reconstruction. In that context, my delegation seconds
the report's recommendations to lend Cote d'Ivoire
electoral support.

The fourth element is human rights. My delegation
takes note of the concerns expressed in the report
about human rights in Cote d'Ivoire. Without trying to
downplay its observations, my delegation believes that it
would be more appropriate to see things in their proper
context. As noted by the Independent Expert on the
situation of human rights in Cote d'Ivoire following his
two visits to the country, most human rights abuses are
less the result of Government actions than of its inability
to prevent them due, inter alia, to difficulties with SSR
and the restoration of State authority throughout the
national territory. We should not forget that it was not
long ago that, in the aftermath of the electoral crisis,
when President Ouattara and his Government took
effective power, they inherited a veritable no man's land
in the matter of human rights in cote d'Ivoire.

It is important to remember that the 10 years of
President Gbagbo's rule were a time of non-rule of
law. During that time, the people of Cote d'Ivoire were
the victims of the worst kinds of violations of human
rights, perpetrated by death squads who kidnapped and
summarily executed people on the sole suspicion of
being opposed to the regime or for the crime of being
from the North. Confiscations and beatings, notably of
an army colonel and a former Ivorian soccer star, were
the norm. I say this to recall that President Ouattara
took power in a country that had lost all respect for
human rights. It is therefore all the more commendable
that he showed the wisdom to immediately install a
Minister for Human Rights to restore that element of
society.

This situation, however, does not detract from
the commitment of the President to restoring genuine
rule of law in Cote d'Ivoire as soon as possible.
President Ouattara is irreversibly committed to a
policy of zero tolerance for impunity. That means
that all proven perpetrators of crimes or human
rights violations, regardless of political affiliation or
any other consideration, will be brought to justice to
answer for their actions. A strong military police unit
was instituted to respond to that concern, and it has
helped to fast-track prosecutions of troublemakers.
Two hundred and fifty members of the FRCI have been
arrested and will soon be tried.

Given the state of non-rule of law that prevailed
in the past, the highest priority of the Minister for
Human Rights was to work to train, educate and raise
consciousness on this issue in all sectors of society,
beginning with the police. I will cite some examples
of actions taken, with the support of UNOCI, that
illustrate the will of the Government to protect human
rights.

On 14 and 15 October 2011, a workshop was held
to train security, military and paramilitary forces in
human rights. From 1 March until July, a human rights
caravan traveled to the towns of Korhogo, Man, Gagnoa
and Adzope, and will reach San Pedro by the end of the
month. I also note the holding of a workshop to raise
consciousness in the press and media on national and
international human rights mechanisms.

Transitional justice is at work. Defendants accused
of various crimes during the post-electoral crisis are
included in human rights training and their rights and
dignity are entirely respected. Two days ago, a detained
former minister with a health condition that needed
attention was admitted to one of the best clinics in the
country to get the treatment she required. The Minister
for Human Rights visited her there and spoke with her.

It is clear that human rights can be enjoyed only within
a healthy legal and judicial environment. On 19 April, a
national strategy for the justice sector from 2012 to 2015
was adopted, with the support of the Government, the
United Nations and other partners in legal and judicial
matters. That plan represents significant progress on
judicial sector reform. UNOCI and the European Union
have worked in close cooperation with the Ministry of
Justice and other stakeholders involved in the strategy.
To implement it, the Ministry of Justice is in the process
of instituting, with the support of UNOCI, an action
plan that will also serve as a road map for international
partners supporting justice sector reform.

To conclude, I stress the importance Cote d'Ivoire
attaches to its cooperation with the United Nations.
Our Prime Minister reiterated that in a letter to the
Secretary-General wherein he stated Cote d'Ivoire's
request for the UNOCI mandate to be renewed,
including electoral support for upcoming local
elections. While we understand the constraints that
led the Secretary-General to propose a drawdown of
the military component of UNOCI by one battalion,
my delegation hopes that it will not be implemented
at the time of mandate renewal, given the security
situation and the need to avoid creating security gaps.
Based on that same concern, my delegation believes
that the francophone contingents of UNOCI should be
bolstered so as to better fulfil the communication goals
of the United Nations and UNOCI, in the interests of
reconciliation and country-wide political dialogue.

These are the elements of the report that I wanted
to bring to the Council's attention in the context of its
forthcoming deliberations on this issue.

