Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me, first and foremost, to thank
your country, Madame President, for having convened
this important meeting on the situation in the sister
Republic of Haiti. On behalf of the President of
Nicaragua, Commander Daniel Ortega Saavedra, I also
wish to convey a warm greeting to President Rene
Pre'val. I also welcome the presence of the Special
Representative of the Caribbean Community for Haiti,
Mr. Percival James Patterson, and I thank the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for their
respective briefings.

The history of the Haitian people continues to be
one of great suffering and martyrdom. From the
suppression of the independence movement led by the
heroic Toussaint Louverture to the tragedies of the
political and military intervention of various Powers
and the many natural and human disasters, Haiti
continues to face the demons of its past and the equally
daunting challenge of eradicating poverty and
achieving its right to development.

It seems that it took last year's devastating
earthquake for the international community as a whole
to understand the pressing need for reconstruction on a
new basis and the fact that without development, in the
broadest sense of the word, the dream of a better future
for the Haitian people would remain a fantasy. Now
that the emergency and the time for compassion have
passed, we have somewhat forgotten that Haiti remains
in intensive care. The focus of the international
community's assistance must change radically.
Nicaragua finds it surprising that, following five
peacekeeping missions in Haiti, it is still thought that
Haitian problems can be resolved without really
tackling the inherent problems of development facing
the country. We are doing the people and Government
of Haiti little service by maintaining a peacekeeping
mission, whose cost amounts to $854 million, without
adopting a holistic approach to underpin international
solidarity for Haiti.
The time has come to move from compassionate
rhetoric to concrete acts, to honour all pledges and to
genuinely launch a Marshall Plan for Haiti's
reconstruction on the basis of Haiti's requirements and
in full respect of its sovereignty, without impositions or
conditions on the part of donors. In that regard, we do
not understand why it would not be possible to
mobilize and disburse the $14 billion that, according to
the Inter-American Development Bank, are needed for
that reconstruction. At the end of the day, that
$14 billion only represents 1.45 per cent of the cost of
the war in Iraq. Such efforts can obviously not be
coordinated within the Security Council, but through
the General Assembly or the Economic and Social
Council.

After the earthquake, despite Nicaragua's limited
resources, President Daniel Ortega Saavedra did not
hesitate to respond immediately to the needs of the
people and Government of Haiti by providing teams of
civil defence doctors specialized in medical care in
emergency situations, who undertook more than 25,000
medical interventions in a single month. We continue
to offer our tireless solidarity to the people of Haiti and
the new Haitian authorities. We will further strengthen
our efforts so that the scourges affecting Haiti will
vanish from the daily lives of its people.

In addressing this matter, Nicaragua cannot fail to
mention the exemplary solidarity shown by the heroic
people and Government of Cuba, which once again
demonstrates that, with political will and a deep-seated
sense of solidarity, despite the unjust blockade, we can
help when we want to.

Nicaragua would like to conclude by paying
tribute to the selflessness of the staff of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti in fulfilling their
duty.

