Mrs. Onanga (Gabon) (spoke in French): I must
congratulate you, Mr. President, on two counts: first,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council; and secondly for your initiative in holding
this debate. I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-oon, for
his determination to make this cause a major focus of
his work. I would like to also thank Ms. Zerrougui for
her determination to advance our work to ensure that
children are not soldiers. I would also like to pay tribute
to UNICEF, whose contribution we welcome. Finally,
I commend Ms. Julie Bodin and Mr. Junior Nzita for
their respective statements.

Gabon strongly condemns all forms of violence
against children committed by parties to armed
conflict in violation of international law, including
the recruitment, employment, murder, mutilation,
abduction, sexual violence, attacks against schools
and hospitals and the denial of humanitarian access
to children. It is undisputable that the suffering of
children at the hands of non-State armed groups,
particularly extremist groups, shocks and casts doubt
on the humanity of their tormentors. Multiple violations
against girls, in particular, are a true abomination.

Already traumatized by war as a vulnerable
population, children are more directly involved in
armed violence as actors who are obviously being
manipulated. The real perpetrators of these crimes
doubly hurt their victims; they rob children not only
of their innocence, but also what is most dear to them,
namely, their dream of a world where they could
flourish in peace, security and respect for their dignity.
No cause, however important it may be, can justify the
abduction of children torn from the affection of their
families, as is the case in the sisterly republic ofNigeria,
where the Boko Haram terrorist network kidnaps, uses
and murders children.

The international community has a duty to act
quickly and vigorously to safeguard the future of
our children, first of all preventively, particularly
through education, in order to fight poverty, which is
a possible factor in the incitement of young people to
voluntarily join armed groups. Other factors include
discrimination, the affirmation of an ethnic, tribal or
religious identity or the attractiveness of the idea of the
heroic death of a martyr.

In addition, Gabon has readily responded to
the Council's call for support for the Principles and
Guidelines on Children associated with Armed Forces
or Armed Groups, known as the Paris Principles; we
fully support them and pay particular attention to
ensuring respect for all international instruments aimed
at the protection of children.

My country also welcomes the 17 September 2013
agreement signed by the Peace and Security Department
of the African Union Commission and the Office of
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict in close collaboration with UNICEF, which is
of paramount importance to better protecting African
children affected by conflict and to strengthening
protection mechanisms, while the African Union
plays an increasingly expansive role in mediation and
peacekeeping operations on the continent.

Finally, it is important to strengthen effective
measures to protect children that are adapted to the
circumstances in which they live. Where large parts
of a country's territory are beyond the control of the
State, the message of the international community
should be clear - the responsibility of non-State
armed group remains fully binding, and no impunity
should be tolerated including through sanctions
arrangements. Measures to extend State authority are
also essential, including through mechanisms for the
monitoring and communication of information in cases
of grave violations against children in armed conflict,
pursuant to resolution 1612 (2005), and for registering
perpetrators of violations of children's rights in the
lists annexed to the report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict - the so-called lists of
shame - in accordance with resolutions 1882 (2009)
and 1998 (2011).

The prosecution of perpetrators before national and
international courts, such as the International Criminal
Court and the Special Courts, as well as the care of
demobilized child soldiers, are also part of our effort to
fight against violence and rejection of which children
are victims. Furthermore, a good education, fair justice
and a decent job will in the end allow young people to
rebuild themselves, dream of a better future and break
the cycle of violence.
My delegation expresses the hope that today's
effort at mobilizing will be the expression of the
reassertion of an additional push for solidarity from the
international community on behalf of children, many
of them girls, who have unfortunately been forced to
endure the torments of armed conflicts which they do
not understand.

