Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Allow me at the outset to express my thanks to the
Secretary-General for the report we have received from
him on the situation in Tajikistan. I also thank the Special
Representative, Mr. Petrov, for his briefing.

The Islamic Republic of Iran is delighted to witness
the successful completion of the peace process and
achievement of national reconciliation in Tajikistan by
implementation of the main provisions of the General
Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and National
Accord signed by the Tajik parties in 1997. We
congratulate them on surmounting obstacles and
consequently putting their country back on the road to
peace, national reconciliation and development. They
should indeed be commended for their belief in the
peaceful settlement of the conflict, as well as for the
willingness and dedication they demonstrated throughout
the negotiations and the transitional period.

Undoubtedly, the restoration of peace and tranquillity
in Tajikistan should also be considered a success for
regional and international peace-making actors. Sustained
efforts under the auspices of the United Nations,
accompanied from the beginning by close cooperation and
active participation of regional Governments, began to
bear fruit in 1994 with the holding of the first round of
the inter-Tajik talks in Moscow, followed by the second
round in Tehran, resulting in the signing of the ceasefire
agreement in the same year.

Likewise, the restoration of peace in Tajikistan will
be remembered, I am sure, as one of the great
achievements of the United Nations in the latter part of
the twentieth century. There is no doubt that the
Secretary-General, his successive special envoys and his
colleagues in the Secretariat, as well as the men and
women who served in the United Nations Mission of
Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT), who worked in a
frequently difficult and hazardous environment, played a
decisive and commendable role in bringing about peace
in that country. Appreciation goes also to the Security
Council, as well as the Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS) peacekeeping forces and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) mission for
their steadfast support given to the peace efforts in
Tajikistan.

 

The Islamic Republic of Iran, as one of the peace
mediators and an active member of the Contact Group of
Guarantor States and International Organizations, did its
best to help maintain political dialogue and create a
favourable and conducive environment indispensable for the
smooth progress of the inter-Tajik talks. We have spared no
effort in helping to solve pressing issues from the very start
of the talks, and we hope that the cordial and friendly
relations existing between our two Governments and
nations, which share many commonalities, will continue to
grow steadfastly.

Although great success is at hand in Tajikistan and the
country is on the path to a comprehensive and lasting
peace, complacency should not be allowed. Due to the
remaining root causes of the crisis, the possibility of
renewed instability cannot be excluded. Daunting economic
and social problems have yet to be addressed. Therefore,
we totally agree with the Secretary-General that the
international community's continued support in the post-
conflict phase will be important for Tajikistan's ability to
sustain and build on the achievements of the peace process.

Moreover, the impact of the Afghan crisis, as an
external factor, on the still-fragile situation in Tajikistan
continues to be a major cause for concern. Afghanistan is
an ongoing destabilizing factor, adversely affecting peace
and security throughout the region. I would like to take this
opportunity to draw attention, once more, to the Afghan
problem and appeal to the international community to
increase its efforts aimed at putting an end to the regionally
destabilizing conflict in Afghanistan.

