Mr. Larrain (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish): At
the outset I wish to congratulate you warmly, Sir, and to
say that we are honoured by your presence here today for
this important Security Council debate. I congratulate you
also on this great initiative to devote an open meeting of
the Security Council to this item. As members know, the
delegation of Chile has consistently stressed that this
principal organ of the United Nations should accord high
priority to humanitarian issues.

Let me reiterate a number of ideas that my delegation
has expressed in the past, to define the nature of the
conflicts that the Security Council must deal with today,
and to underline the consequent relevance of the
humanitarian question.

As we know, the Charter gives the Security Council
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. As originally framed, this implied the
duty to address conflicts between States when these had
international implications. Today the Council's agenda is
increasingly devoted to internal conflicts in which not all
the parties are sovereign States, but can also be groups or
factions within those States. These conflicts are
characterized by civil war, with the major humanitarian
crises it brings; one of the main consequences is massive,
aimless flows of refugees.

This highlights the Security Council's humanitarian
responsibility with regard to the conflicts of which it is
seized. The competence of the Council in this area is
clear, if limited to consideration of measures or actions
that can save innocent lives while political agreements are
sought with a view to the establishment of peace and
security.

Mr. Park took the chair.

There are many humanitarian agencies within the
United Nations system, as well as non-governmental
agencies, that are increasingly involved in humanitarian
situations in conflict areas. Beginning with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), these agencies are working in the field to
alleviate the harsh and cruel conditions faced by the
victims of clashes, war and intolerance. The men and
women of those agencies are carrying out a basic task to
which the international community and the Security
Council have not always attached its proper importance.
Without these humanitarian efforts, conflicts grow
worse, and we all know that when it grows worse, a
conflict naturally tends to affect even more the
international peace and security that are the primary
concern of the Security Council.

To fulfil their missions properly, humanitarian
agencies need the support of the international community.
The most fundamental form of support in the field is
safety. Our central point is that humanitarian workers in
the field helping the victims of conflicts should be the
focus of the Security Council's attention. Of late we have
seen many attacks against United Nations or non-
governmental-agency personnel, resulting in deaths and
injuries. These people have become victims because they
tried to help the victims of conflicts.

The Council should find a way to strengthen legal
provisions and make use of available machinery to protect
humanitarian workers. Threats to the safety of
humanitarian personnel often imperil the sole presence
that the international community can have in a conflict
area. Let it be understood that this presence is our
presence.

On 12 March 1997, the Security Council issued a
broad presidential statement in which, inter alia, it

 

expressed its grave concern at, and condemnation of, the
recent increase in attacks and the use of force against
United Nations and other personnel associated with United
Nations operations, as well as personnel of international
humanitarian organizations. The international community,
and in particular the Security Council, must not neglect
humanitarian issues because of practical considerations or
the realities of authority in a given country. We therefore
agree with the idea recently put forward by Mrs. Ogata, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, that
political solutions to conflicts should address humanitarian
concerns.

On the other hand, we must continuously stress that
the parties to a conflict must recognize the principle of the
neutrality and impartiality of the humanitarian agencies
providing assistance in the area. This leads to a subject that
deserves attention in the future: how to ensure effectively
that the parties to a conflict will respect innocent victims -
refugees, displaced persons and vulnerable groups - and
will grant humanitarian-assistance agencies safe access to
them. In our statements and resolutions we have on more
than one occasion urged the parties to a conflict, including
non-State parties, to respect international humanitarian law.
But unfortunately this appeal goes unheeded.
Respect for the Geneva Conventions and the rules of
humanitarian law must be subject to scrutiny, even when a
conflict is resolved by force; this should include the actions
of all the parties involved. The individual responsibility of
the perpetrators of such acts is a natural corollary of this
approach.

The actions of non-State agents should be subject to
forms of international responsibility; naturally, so should
those of State actors.

There must be a permanent criminal jurisdictional
body with the competence to try those who violate
humanitarian law. We believe that the draft proposal for an
international criminal court prepared by the International
Law Commission provides a good basis for the creation of
the kind of jurisdictional body required. The crimes defined
in that draft could include the violation of the norms of
international humanitarian law.

Chile, as an elected member of the Security Council
for 1996 and 1997, is seeking to help the international
community and, in particular, the Security Council, foster
an awareness of the interrelationship between conflict and
humanitarian tragedy. Very often, those who are closest to
the conflicts dealt with by the Security Council are the
humanitarian organizations - sometimes more so than
Governments, military units or us, the diplomats. Thus, in
addition to the fundamental work that the agencies are
doing in assisting the victims of conflicts, they can also
help Governments better to understand the specific
character of each of those conflicts, because they are
there in the field.

For that reason, the delegation of Chile has focused
on the relationship between the Security Council and the
humanitarian organizations, promoting contact between
them. In this respect, we should bear in mind that the
organs of the United Nations system can inform the
Council about what is happening and what is being done
in one or another conflict situation. Hence, on more than
one occasion Mrs. Sadako Ogata, the High Commissioner
for Refugees, has met with us to enlighten us about the
cruel situation faced by refugees, especially in the Great
Lakes region. We have also periodically received updates
on the humanitarian situation from the United Nations
Department of Humanitarian Affairs. This type of
information exchange is essential, and of the greatest
interest to the Security Council.

However, there are humanitarian organizations that
have not had access to the Security Council. I am
referring to non-governmental humanitarian organizations,
which, like the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the World Food
Programme and others, have personnel in the field, near
the conflicts, and have important things to say to us.

Last February we took a new approach in which
members of the Council, together with the bureaux of
other relevant organs of the system, were able to meet
with representatives of non-governmental humanitarian
organizations that have a substantial presence in the area
of a particular conflict. The Department of Humanitarian
Affairs, on the initiative of a member of the Council,
issued the appropriate invitation and presided over the
meeting. Under that formula, on 12 February last, we
heard the comments of OXFAM, Medecins sans frontieres
and CARE on the situation in the Great Lakes region.
That meeting was very positive and of great interest to
the Security Council. It opened the way for other
meetings of this kind in the future.

This formula for contact with other non-
governmental humanitarian organizations enables us to
expand considerably the scope of consultations with
various humanitarian actors. At the same time, it serves

 

to support the cohesiveness and coordination of the
humanitarian community and to keep it more closely linked
to the decisions taken in the Security Council.

We reiterate the appreciation of the delegation of Chile
for the holding of this open debate, and we wish to propose
that the Secretary-General prepare a set of integrated but
flexible guidelines concerning protection for humanitarian
assistance for refugees and others in conflict situations that
will enable the Security Council carefully to consider this
very important matter in the near future.

