Mr. Jurica (Croatia): Let me thank Mr. Kai Eide
for his briefing. In the same vein, I would like to pay
tribute to Mr. Eide for his determined leadership and to
all the staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their genuine
commitment and hard work undertaken in harsh
circumstances. I also welcome the presence of Afghan
Ambassador Tanin.

Croatia shares the concerns over the deterioration
of the security situation in Afghanistan, where
insurgents, extremists and other radicals are attempting
to destabilize previously calm areas and increasingly
relying on asymmetric attacks and advanced methods
of warfare. The direct targeting of international
organizations and aid workers is yet another obvious
indicator of the sort of enemy the Afghan Government
and the international community are confronting. As
stated in the Secretary-General's report (S/2009/135),
most civilian casualties are the result of the actions of
anti-Government elements, which are increasingly
characterized by a total disregard for civilian lives.

There is a general consensus that this year will be
crucial for Afghanistan in more than one aspect. The
upcoming elections, scheduled for August, will be a
real test of Afghanistan's democratic achievements.
The elections should further stabilize the democratic
process in the country and provide the highest
demonstration of its legitimacy. By providing adequate
technical assistance, financial contributions and
additional security, the international community is
doing its part to ensure free, fair, inclusive and
transparent elections. We welcome the completion of
the voter registration process, including in the most
volatile provinces, without major incident, which we
view as an important preparatory step in the electoral
process.

The stability of Afghanistan is intrinsically linked
to the stability of the region and cannot be achieved
without genuine cooperation from its neighbours,
especially Pakistan. In that context, we are heartened to
see the revival of economic regional cooperation
allowing for the restoration of extremely important
energy and water supply lines. Furthermore, the

resumption of the Peace Jirga process with Pakistan, as
well as the recent meeting of the Tripartite
Commission, testify to the intensifying political
cooperation. We hope that the upcoming regional
economic cooperation conference on Afghanistan will
further strengthen relations between the countries of
the region and yield concrete and practical results. We
look forward to the international conferences on
Afghanistan to be held in the nearest future in Moscow
and The Hague.

Of course, there is no purely military solution to
the problems in Afghanistan; the solution must
therefore be of a political nature. In that regard, a
comprehensive approach unifying military, political,
humanitarian and development activities will be
needed. Croatia highly values the so-called integrated
approach aimed at making more effective use of
civilian and military resources in the country. We find
it extremely important to have the ability to perceive
the specific challenges, problems and needs which are
present in each and every part of that huge country, and
to deploy the resources available in the most efficient
and balanced way. Furthermore, we support stronger
civilian-military coordination based on respect for each
other's distinctive mandates and in accordance with
Afghanistan's specific guidelines on the coordination
of humanitarian and military actors.

Regarding aid coordination and ensuring aid
effectiveness as one of the main roles that UNAMA
should be playing in Afghanistan, we salute the
Mission's follow-up on some of the benchmarks that
the Special Representative presented to the Council at
his last briefing in October 2008, especially on the
development of a single Government database for
information on donor contributions. We would like to
see further action on some other achievable targets,
particularly on the endeavour to set up a mechanism
for joint audits in order to enhance accountability on
each side, and on tangible, commonly agreed criteria to
measure aid effectiveness.

My country welcomes the ongoing improvements
in the Afghan National Army's performance, reflected,
inter alia, in its ability to assume the lead responsibility
for the security of the capital city, as well as in some of
the provinces. Regarding the Afghanistan National
Police, we strongly support the Focused District
Development project. Finally, we see the fight against
corruption as an important and integral part of all
reform endeavours in Afghanistan, and we sincerely
trust that the increased efforts of the new minister in
that regard will soon bear fruit.

Croatia received the Afghanistan Opium Winter
Rapid Assessment report that was jointly released by
the Ministry for Counter-Narcotics and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), and
welcomes projections of a possible further decrease in
opium cultivation in 2009, as well as the continued
increase in the number of poppy-free provinces.
Additionally, we strongly support the regional counter-
narcotics efforts being promoted by UNODC's
"rainbow strategy", and we welcome the significant
seizures of precursor chemicals in Iran, Pakistan and
Kyrgyzstan through the implementation of resolution
1817 (2008).

Keeping the enormous humanitarian challenges in
Afghanistan in mind, Croatia welcomes the
establishment of an office of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in Afghanistan
and the development of the Humanitarian Action Plan.
We welcome the significant refugee returns in 2008, as
well as the completion of the first national profile of
internally displaced persons.

Human rights and the rule of law continue to be a
major challenge in Afghanistan. Allow me to mention
here only two of the many long-standing problems that
continue to weigh heavily on the country. The
entrenched impunity of discriminatory practices,
especially against women and girls - to mention but
two 7 is a good example. We strongly support decisive
actions in the field of the rule of law and human rights,
and we deeply believe that determined action in these
areas will help to promote the aforementioned
conditions and trends.

Croatia welcomes the decision of the General
Assembly to almost double UNAMA's budget in order
to enable it to carry out its challenging mandate. We
strongly support the renewal of the UNAMA mandate
for a further year. We also support the request for the
Secretary-General to provide more frequent reports on
developments in Afghanistan, including adequate
benchmarks for measuring and tracking progress in the
implementation of UNAMA's mandate.

Finally, let me reiterate that, while fully
cognizant of the challenges, Croatia stands ready,
through its military presence and financial support, to
continue to cooperate with the Afghan Government and
international partners towards achieving the final goal
of ensuring a stable, secure and peaceful Afghanistan.

