Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Italy welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2371 (2017). We
recognize the leadership role played the United States
on this issue and we thank the United States mission
for its untiring effort to bring us to reach today's
important result.

Today the Security Council is once again - this
is the second time in 2017 - sending an unequivocal
message to the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea (see resolution 2356 (2017)). The international
community is united in condemning North Korea's
increasing provocations and is determined to confront
this new level of threat to international peace and
security by taking further action. As demonstrated by
the latest intercontinental ballistic-missile launches,
which Italy condemns in the strongest terms, North
Korea is advancing illegally towards an operational
nuclear capability, severely undermining our collective
security and the global non-proliferation regime.
This is an extraordinary situation that calls for
proportional measures.

The resolution that we have adopted today provides
for the broadest, most comprehensive set of sanctions to
have been applied by the Council in many years. It will
remain in force for as long as the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea continues to pursue nuclear weapons
and their means of delivery. We therefore urge the

North Korean regime to take immediate measures to
abandon its nuclear and ballistic-missile programmes
in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner. In
consultation with key partners, Italy also stands ready at
the appropriate time to support additional autonomous
restrictive measures in the European Union context.

We reaffirm that the Security Council's concern
is directed towards the Government of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea and not its people, who
continue to suffer as resources are diverted from
economic development towards military, nuclear
and ballistic-missile programmes. As in the past,
we will remain vigilant in order to ensure that these
new restrictive measures do not have any adverse
consequences from a humanitarian perspective.

While increasing pressure on the North Korean
leadership at this juncture is essential, we call on
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to make
credible progress on its obligation to denuclearize,
thereby enabling negotiations leading to a peaceful
solution as stated in the European Union Foreign
Affairs Council Conclusions of 17 July 2017. In this
regard, Italy reaffirms that sanctions are not an end
in themselves but a means to promote the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's full compliance.

Finally, as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), I would like to restate
Italy's unwavering commitment to the full and effective
implementation of all Security Council resolutions on
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. We will
reach out to the full United Nations membership in
order to ensure that these latest measures are applied
quickly and comprehensively.

