The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg and Paraguay, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kazykhanov
(Kazakhstan), Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein),
Mr. Bichler (Luxembourg) and Mr. Bufi'a
(Paraguay) took the seats reserved for them at
the side ofthe Council Chamber

The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Andrey Denisov,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Denisov to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document 8/2005/22, which contains the
text of a letter dated 13 January 2005 from the
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
transmitting the work programme for 1 January to
31 March 2005.

At this meeting the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Andrey Denisov, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism.

I now call on Mr. Andrey Denisov.


