Mr. Powell (United States of America): Thank
you, Mr. President, for bringing us together today to
reaffirm our commitment to the fight against terrorism.
I thank the Secretary-General for his excellent remarks
earlier.

It is so fitting that this body meet at the
ministerial level to take stock of our campaign against
terrorists and to help chart the way forward. And it is
fitting that we meet here in New York, the site of the
bloodiest of the attacks of 11 September 2001.

Let me begin my remarks by joining all my other
colleagues in thanking Ambassador Greenstock for his
tireless efforts as Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC). Ambassador Greenstock's vision,
his energy and his commitment have transformed the
Committee from an idea into a powerful weapon
against terrorism, and we all owe him a big debt of
gratitude. Thank you, Jeremy.

I would also like to thank our Spanish colleagues
for agreeing to assume the chairmanship of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee in April. They will have
our full support as they build on Ambassador
Greenstock's work to make the Committee an even
more potent weapon in the anti-terrorist arsenal.

We need an effective Counter-Terrorism
Committee for, despite the progress of the past year,
there is still much that we have to do. As the
murderous attacks in Bali and Moscow and Mombasa
and elsewhere have so tragically reminded us, the
terrorist threat continues, and no countries' citizens are
safe. Innocent people from some 90 countries perished
on 11 September 2001. The Bali victims called at least
25 different countries home. No cause justifies the
murder of innocent people. We totally reject terrorists
and terrorism. We must rid the civilized world of this
cancer. We must wage our campaign at every level with
every tool of statecraft for as long as it takes. President
Bush has stressed that "we will win this conflict by the
patient accumulation of successes, by meeting a series
of challenges with determination and will and
purpose".

The declaration that we will adopt today makes
clear that this war has many fronts: from money
laundering and the illicit drug trade to arms trafficking
and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
We must fight terrorism on all of these fronts.

I am very impressed by a number of the
comments that I have heard today from various
colleagues. I thank my colleague from Pakistan for
Pakistan's commitment to continue going after Al
Qaeda. We must get every one of these terrorists and
bring them to justice or destroy them.

I also note that a number of my colleagues have
made reference to the situation with respect to Iraq and
to resolution 1441 (2002). In the very near future, the
Council will meet again to determine what to do about
this situation. Iraq was given a last chance with
resolution 1441 (2002). I am pleased that it was
President Bush who brought this situation to the
attention of the Council in the most forceful way last
September to give Iraq this one last chance. We must
not shrink from our duties and our responsibilities
when the material comes before us next week and as
we consider Iraq's response to resolution 1441 (2002).
We cannot fail to take the action that may be necessary
because we are afraid of what others might do. We
cannot be shocked into impotence because we are
afraid of the difficult choices that are ahead of us.

So we will have much work to do, difficult work,
in the days ahead, but we cannot shrink from the
responsibilities of dealing with a regime that has gone
about the development, the acquiring and the stocking
of weapons of mass destruction, that has committed
terrorist attacks against its neighbours and against its
own people and that has trampled the human rights of
its own people and its neighbours. S0 however difficult
the road ahead may be with respect to Iraq, we must
not shrink from the need to travel down that road.
Hopefully, there will be a peaceful solution, but if Iraq
does not come into full compliance, we must not shrink
from the responsibilities that we set before ourselves
when we adopted resolution 1441 (2002) on a
unanimous basis; and so many other nations expressed
their support for resolution 1441 (2002).

Weapons of mass destruction in the hands of
terrorists or States that support terrorists would
represent a mortal danger to us all. We must make the
United Nations even more effective and we must build
even closer international cooperation to keep these
weapons out of the hands of terrorists. The United
Nations has long worked to marshal the international
community against terrorism. For example, as we have
noted here this morning, there are 12 counter-terrorism
conventions and protocols negotiated under the
auspices of the United Nations and its affiliated
agencies. It is vital that all States become parties to all
of these Conventions and Protocols and fully
implement them as soon as possible.

With the passage of Security Council resolution
1373 (2001) in September 2001, the United Nations
fundamentally changed the way the international
community responds to terrorism. Resolution 1373
(2001) created an obligation for all Member States to
work together to deny terrorists the ability to solicit
and move funds, find safe haven, acquire weapons, or
cross international borders. Resolution 1373 (2001)
said that if you are a member of the community of
civilized nations, you must do your part to eliminate
terrorist networks and terrorist activities.

As we have seen and as we have discussed here
today, resolution 1373 (2001) is starting to have an
impact. Most Member States have submitted reports to
the CTC describing the measures that they have taken
to implement resolution 1373 (2001) and identifying
what more needs to be done. This is a very important
step, and, as Ambassador Greenstock noted earlier,
countries that have not taken this step should comply
as quickly as possible. Those that have should continue
to be responsive to requests from the Counter-
Terrorism Committee.

Some countries are eager to implement resolution
1373 (2001) and to take other measures against
terrorists, but they lack the necessary skills and
resources to do so effectively. We must help them build
up their capabilities. I challenge all nations with
counter-terrorism expertise to help our willing partners.
Many countries have already stepped up to the
challenge. For example, the Commonwealth
Secretariat, France, Australia, Germany, New Zealand
and Norway are all providing assistance in areas such
as drafting anti-terrorist legislation.

For our part, we have more than tripled our
capacity-building assistance. Last year alone, our anti-
terrorism assistance programme trained nearly 4,800
security personnel from 60 countries in everything
from bomb detection to hostage negotiations, crime-
scene investigations and the protection of dignitaries.
We are also devoting $10 million in the coming year to
help strengthen the ability of 18 countries to deny
terrorists the funds that they need to kill innocent
people.

Indeed, the international community has already
made impressive progress in freezing terrorist assets.
The United Nations has played the leading role in this
unprecedented effort. For example, the United Nations
has designated 324 names for asset freezing. In
addition, Security Council resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1390 (2002) laid a strong foundation for halting the
flow of money to terrorists associated with the Taliban,
Al Qaeda and Osama bin Laden.

We are particularly pleased that just last Friday
the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution
1455 (2003). This important new resolution is aimed at
improving Member State implementation of these
sanctions that are targeted at terrorists and are without
time limits. The international community could not
have sent a stronger message of its determination to
stamp out terrorism.

We look forward to working with Ambassador
Valdes of Chile as he assumes the chairmanship of the
Committee established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1267 (1999) to implement the Al Qaeda
sanctions regime. That Committee has become even
more important with the unanimous passage of
resolution 1455 (2003).

But we all need to do more, and we need to
coordinate our efforts better. Many international
organizations at the regional and subregional level are
already working to counter the terrorist threat. These
organizations have an important role to play in helping
their member States fulfil their counter-terrorism
obligations. Now is the time for these groups to talk to
one another, to exchange information and to coordinate
their activities for maximum effect. The Counter-
Terrorism Committee is taking a good first step by
convening a meeting this March to bring many of these
organizations together.
The challenge before us is to weave counter-
terrorism into the very fabric of our national
institutions and our international institutions. We must
rise to the challenge. We must rise to the challenge
with actions that will rid the globe of terrorism and
create a world in which all God's children can live
without fear.

