Mr. Tachie-Manson (Ghana): My delegation
commends the Federal Republic of Germany for
holding this debate on "Maintenance of international
peace and security: the impact of climate change". We
express our gratitude to the Secretary-General and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme for their statements. We align ourselves
with the statements delivered by the representatives of
Argentina on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and
of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Climate change has negatively impacted food
production in many parts of the world. Excessive heat,
wild fires, floods, drought and desertification have
caused crop failures and reduced crop yield. In
addition, as noted by the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, climate change is likely to reduce
access to clean water and ecosystem resources, and to
undermine stable health conditions and the security of
settlements. Evidence abounds that global warming
will cause sea-level rise, major changes in coast lines
and the inundation of low-lying areas.

The impact of climate change has implications
for human security. The livelihoods and survival of
communities are at stake. Climate change has, to some
extent, caused the scarcity of resources, competition
and disagreement among parties, institutional
breakdown and violent conflict in some countries. The
areas in which climate change has led to conflict are
mainly where the capacity of the population to adapt to
changing conditions is weak and it is susceptible to
conflict.

We firmly believe that a security-oriented debate
on climate change in the Council will encourage many
countries to substantially reduce emissions and invest
more in adaptation activities. Investment in adaptation
activities that provide information on vulnerability,
climate risk and early warning signals builds the
adaptive capacities of States through measures such as
co-managing water resources, protecting and
diversifying livelihoods, and ensuring access to and the

 

availability of key natural resources and support to
domestic and regional conflict resolution institutions.
That will enhance security and reduce the potential for
conflicts.

Responses to environmental wars should focus
predominantly not on military solutions to secure
resources or to erect solid barriers to migration, but
more on the cost-effective alternative of adaptation. We
hope that putting climate change in the "high politics"
category of security will not draw attention away from
development challenges, such as extreme poverty,
access to education and HIV/AIDS, which, altogether,
pose an urgent threat to vulnerable societies.

It is our fervent hope that this debate in the
Council will lead to actions that complement and boost
the work of relevant institutions mandated to handle
sustainable development issues. Such actions should be
timely, concerted and sustainable.

