Mr. Kolga (Estonia): Estonia welcomes this open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflicts
and thanks the presidency for organizing it.

Estonia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the observer of the European Union.

We thank the Secretary-General for his timely report
(S/2012/376) and for the recommendations contained
therein. The Secretary-General rightly underlines the
need to focus greater attention on the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts and the need to take more
decisive action in that regard. We welcome the positive
developments, which are based on the results of the
Secretary-General's previous reports. At the same time,
as the current report acknowledges, the situation on the
ground continues to be characterized by the frequent
failure of parties to armed conflict to comply with their
obligations under applicable international humanitarian
law and human rights law.

In many regions and countries in crisis, as well
as in the numerous long-lasting "frozen" conflicts,
civilians, especially the most vulnerable groups - such
as women and children - are still the main victims of
armed conflict, hence the hundreds of thousands of
refugees and persons suffering forced displacement.
With that in mind, Estonia condemns all forms of
violence, including sexual violence, and especially
the violence committed against children. By the same
token, we welcome the Council's ongoing contribution
to the protection of those groups and continue to
support the enhancement and empowerment of the
invaluable work conducted by the Secretary-General's
Special Representatives, Ms. Margareta Wahlstrom and
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy.

Estonia acknowledges that the primary responsibility
to protect their people lies with the States themselves.
At the same time, international humanitarian and
human rights laws must be obeyed not only by national
authorities but by all parties involved. The international
community can do more in enforcing compliance, both
at the national and international levels. We consider the
increased use of accountability mechanisms to be one
of the most important tools to enhance compliance with
international law by all parties to a conflict. Estonia
commends the Secretary-General for dedicating a
substantial part of his report to accountability.

Where national authorities fail to protect their
own people and hold perpetrators accountable, the
international community must take responsibility
in order to save lives and provide justice and redress
to victims. The Security Council bears a special
responsibility under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations and should take a more active stance
in ensuring an appropriate international response,
including referring situations to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) when appropriate. Estonia
supports the Secretary-General's recommendation of
establishing commissions of inquiry into situations
where international law, especially international
humanitarian law, is being violated and, when
appropriate, to refer such situations to the ICC.

Recently, the independent international
commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic,
mandated by the Human Rights Council, stated in its
report (A/HRC/ 19/69) that there are clear indications
that crimes against humanity are taking place in Syria.
Estonia joins the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem Pillay, in calling
on the Security Council to address this issue in a more
systematic and proactive way, and to refer the situation
in Syria to the ICC.

Estonia further appreciates the Secretary-General's
encouragement of the Security Council to develop a
checklist to guide its engagement with the ICC when
it considers the possibility of referrals. But referring a
situation to the ICC is only the first step in ensuring
accountability; the cooperation with the Court, which
should follow, is equally important. Therefore, we call
upon the Council to continue to engage with situations
after their referral to the Court.

Reparations, including restitution and rehabilitation,
for individual victims and affected communities are
also an important aspect of accountability. Estonia
agrees with the Secretary-General that the Council
should consider how to support reparation payments
and national reparation programmes, given its potential
role in authorizing the use of assets frozen under the
sanctions regimes.

Estonia would also like to commend the
Secretary-General for drawing the attention of the
Council and Member States to another important
aspect, namely, humanitarian access in armed
conflicts. More than 1.5 billion people live in fragile or
conflict-affected States. It is the primary responsibility
of States to care for the victims of humanitarian
emergencies within their own borders. Yet, the survival
of millions of people, including internally displaced
persons and refugees forced to leave their homes due
to conflicts around the world today, depends on outside
humanitarian assistance. International humanitarian
law provides for safe, rapid and unimpeded access of
humanitarian personnel and delivery of supplies.

Estonia urges all parties in situations of armed
conflict, State and non- State actors alike, to comply with
international humanitarian law. Yet, access to affected
populations in need and the safety of humanitarian
workers, including locally hired personnel, continue
to be a major concern and a challenge that seriously
affects humanitarian operations. Estonia commends
the efforts of the Emergency Relief Coordinator and the
International Committee of the Red Cross to facilitate
and negotiate access to emergency areas with all
parties to a conflict, most recently in Syria, where up to
1.5 million people need humanitarian assistance.

In conclusion, I would express my sincere hope that
today's debate will contribute to enhanced compliance
with international humanitarian law and human rights
law, including by strengthening of accountability at both
the national and international levels, and by putting an
end to impunity.

