Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to begin
by thanking our briefers. In particular, I would like
to say to Special Representative Patten how profound
and incredibly moving her testimony to the Security
Council was. Her concluding words that inaction must
not be allowed to take place are vital for us all. I think
she has brought to life a truly horrifying picture, and
I commend her for that. I would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman on his update on
the situation one month after the Council adopted an
important presidential statement (S/PRST/20l7/22) that
included calls for an end to the violence, a safe returns
process, humanitarian access and for the root causes of
the crisis to be addressed. I am grateful to him for his
continued engagement on the crisis. It is vital that the
United Nations continues to remain engaged.

The stark reminder - if anyone needed one - that
Special Representative Patten has given us is of the
horrors that Rohingya refugees have suffered. It is a
stark reminder that this is first and foremost a human
tragedy, on which the Council must keep its attention.

Over the past month, we have seen some initial
steps in response to the Council's presidential
statement, which we welcome, in particular the recent
agreement concerning the voluntary repatriation of
refugees signed by the Governments of Myanmar and
Bangladesh on 23 November.

The Government of Myanmar's continued
commitment to the Annan Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State recommendations and to the development
of Rakhine state through the union enterprise
mechanism are also worth highlighting. We welcome
the announcement of the new Rakhine Advisory
Committee. We support initiatives that promise to
build a better future for all communities in Rakhine,
without discrimination and regardless of religion or
ethnicity. The Commission's recommendations remain
a particular important blueprint for the future, given
their wide support.

However, there remains much more to be done,
and it is right that the situation remain on our agenda.
I want to draw particular attention to the agreement
concerning the voluntary repatriation of refugees.
That is a step in the right direction. However, today's
conditions in Rakhine state do not yet allow for the
safe, voluntary and dignified return of refugees to
their homes, as that the Security Council called for
last month. One thousand to 3,000 people are still
fleeing in fear from Rakhine state to Bangladesh every
week. There are continued reports of inter-communal
tensions and arson attacks, as Under-Secretary-Feltman
informed us. As we have said many times before, the
violence and human rights violations must stop.

While we recognize the desire to move forward
quickly, we can support only returns that are safe,
voluntary and dignified. That will require independent
international monitoring to ensure that conditions are
met. The rights of the Rohingya must be respected
by the Burmese Government, including freedom of
movement and access the basic services and livelihoods.
They must be allowed to return home, and not remain in
prolonged stays in internally displaced persons camps,
and they should be given a pathway to citizenship. The
responsibility for making progress lies primarily with
the Government and the security forces of Myanmar.
The actions that they must take are already set out
in the presidential statement agreed unanimously by
the Council.

Let us recall that, in the presidential statement, the
Council called for the Office ofthe United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to be invited to
be a full participant in the returns process. Myanmar
recognizes UNHCR's expertise, but has so far resisted
giving it the necessary role. In that statement, we called
for transparent investigations into allegations of serious
human rights abuses and violations, not just because
those responsible must be held accountabl but also so
that refugees may have confidence in their eventual
return. So far, all we have seen is a whitewash by
the military. In that statement, we called for full and
unhindered access to Rakhine state for United Nations
agencies, humanitarian partners and the media. But
the Government continues to severely limit access
to Rakhine, making it impossible to deliver vital
humanitarian assistance, or verify the situation on
the ground.

Regrettably, the situation means that we must
continue supporting refugees where they are right now.
The Government of Bangladesh, along with United
Nations agencies and other humanitarian partners,
continues to play a vital role in providing life-saving
shelter and assistance. Unfortunately, it is likely that
Bangladesh will need to play that role for longer than
any of us would like. Therefore, it is critical that longer-
term plans be put in place to protect and provide for
refugees in Bangladesh and internally displaced people
in Rakhine state. It is critical, too, that those plans be
properly funded.

In addition to an annual $210 million programme
for Bangladesh, the United Kingdom has contributed
$79 million to the current United Nations humanitarian
response plan in order to provide life-saving assistance
and protection for the refugees and for Bangladeshi host
communities. However, the plan is still only partially
funded - and, in any case, runs out in February 2018.
We encourage the international community to step up
its contributions.

Before concluding, I should like to turn briefly to
the Secretary-General's appointment of a special envoy.
It will be an important and sensitive role. We therefore
support the Secretary-General in deliberating over the
appointment carefully. We call on Myanmar to engage
with the special envoy, when he or she is appointed,
openly and in good faith.

I said at the outset that Special Representative
Patten's briefing was a stark reminder that this is a
human tragedy from which the Council must not turn
away its attention. We cannot change the horrors and
crimes that have already been committed. But that is all
the more reason that the Council must remain engaged,
must remain seized of the situation and must be ready
to take further action if necessary to ensure protection,
justice and progress.

