Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Just a week ago, we
all were here in the Council Chamber, having just
unanimously adopted resolution 2327 (2016). The
unanimous adoption of that resolution demonstrated the
Council's strong support for the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan and our resolve on South Sudan. They
were tedious negotiations, but our collective desire to
find consensus prevailed. Our collective aim was to
support the Transitional Government of National Unity
of South Sudan towards restoring lasting peace and
stability in the country.

The Council is strongest when it speaks in one
voice. After the unanimous adoption of resolution
2327 (2016), we would have hoped for more concerted
efforts by all Council members to support the full
implementation of the resolution.

Malaysia commends the leadership role and
solidarity shown by the regional partners, namely, the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), in mediating dialogue towards
restoring peace and stability in South Sudan. These
regional partners have continued to play an instrumental
role by engaging the parties in the political process
and pledging support to the Regional Protection Force
despite the challenging circumstances.

In this context, IGAD had clearly stated that
dialogue, reconciliation and commitment by all South
Sudanese parties to implement the Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan are required for permanent peace and stability in
South Sudan. It is unfortunate that the perspective and
positions of IGAD, as well as those of the partners and
countries in the region, have not been taken on board.

Furthermore, we are appreciative of the South
Sudanese Government's ongoing efforts and its decision
to fully and unconditionally implement resolution 2304
(2016) and its joint communique with the Security
Council, as well as the recent announcements by
President Kiir to convene an inclusive national dialogue.
These are positive developments. It would have been
better and more productive if the Council had seized
these opportunities and devoted more time and energy
to working with the South Sudanese parties towards
realizing these commitments.

Malaysia believes that united Council resolutions
could be built upon to ensure greater success on South
Sudan. This is, sadly, glaringly lacking today. It is
therefore with much regret that Malaysia was compelled

to abstain today. Having followed the developments in
South Sudan closely, we believe that it is ever more
important for Council members to remain united in
charting a comprehensive and effective strategy to
support the efforts of the South Sudanese authorities
and to implement the peace agreement, protect civilians
and restore peace and stability in the country.

