Mr. Mendez Graterol (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of
Venezuela congratulates you, Mr. President, and your
team on your initiative, efficiency and leadership in
guiding the work of the Security Council during the
month of June. Great contributions have been made
during this past month to the management of the
Council.

Our country welcomes this wrap-up session
because we believe that these sessions make it possible
to identify the progress and challenges before us in
the complex task of strengthening international peace
and security. In the context of the spirit and purpose
of the Charter of the United Nations, we encourage the
Security Council to deepen its working relationship with
the other Members of the Organization in a transparent
and inclusive way with a view to strengthening its
credibility in the eyes of the entire membership of that
forum.

The issue of children in armed conflict has attracted
the Council's attention, and your presidency resolutely
promoted consideration of that topic. Venezuela
believes the adoption of resolution 2225 (2015) was
extremely important. It requested the Secretary-General
to include, in the annexes to his reports on the issue,
parties that resort to kidnapping children in situations
of armed conflict and it calls on them to cease unlawful
or arbitrary detention, as well as torture or other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
imposed on children during their detention.
In the context of that important debate on 18 June
(see S/PV.7466), in particular with regard to the case of
Palestine, a significant number of countries, including
Venezuela, expressed their concern and rejected the
inconsistency and selectivity shown in the treatment
of the occupying Power, which had committed serious
violations against Palestinian children, in the annexes
to the Secretary-General's report (S/2015/409).

In the work that was done this past month, we would
like to highlight the importance of the informational
meeting (see S/PV.7464), held on 17 June, with the
force commanders of the peacekeeping operations
in Darfur, Mali and in separation zone in the Golan
Heights. Those exchanges led to agreement on the need
to ensure that peacekeeping troops are provided with
adequate training, equipment and resources, as well
as to ensure that they are determined and willing to
fulfil their mandates, regardless of the circumstances
in which they operate. Such issues will continue to fuel
our discussions in the next few months.

We would also like to mention the informative
meeting held with the current Chair and the former
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassadors
Olof Skoog and Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, on the
Commission's eighth session (see S/PV.7472). Some of
the most relevant subjects discussed were the importance
of including regional and subregional organizations and
neighbouring countries in the peacebuilding process;
the fundamental role that the Commission plays in
tying together the goals of stability, political legitimacy,
the rule of law and socioeconomic development; and
the need to obtain additional resources for the tasks
involved in peacebuilding. In that regard, we would
like to highlight the challenge of continuing to provide
long-term sustained support to post-conflict countries.
The cost of any effort aimed at strengthening such
countries' institutional, technical, economic and social
capabilities pales in comparison to the human and
economic costs that relapses into conflict can bring.
Those issues have paved the way for the necessary
informed discussion of the reports of bodies studying
peace operations, peacebuilding and the achievements
of resolution 1325 (2005). Those meetings have served
as a prelude to what will surely be an intense debate on
the future of some of the Council's fundamental tools
for promoting and maintaining international peace and
security.

During the Security Council's intensive work over
the past six months, the fight against terrorism has
been high on its agenda, and those efforts have led
to decisions with a global reach aimed at effectively
combating that scourge. Resolution 2199 (2015) and
the presidential statement on foreign terrorist fighters
(S/PRST/2015/ll) reinforce the legal and political
multilateral framework needed to prevent, combat
and eliminate international terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. The implementation of Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions on that topic
requires a strong commitment on the part of States to
ending arms transfers and the financing and training of
non-State actors, in accordance with international law.
We also appreciate the activities aimed at strengthening
international cooperation in our shared effort to combat
violent extremism, which have been scheduled for the
coming months.

Beyond that, and regarding conflict situations that
remain unresolved, with negative consequences for
the peoples involved, such as in Palestine and Western
Sahara, among others, we call on the Security Council,
based on its responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations, to take a more active role in promoting
peaceful negotiated solutions, with the full cooperation
of the parties concerned, in order to achieve firm and
lasting peace.

Venezuela attaches particular importance to
improving the Security Council's methods of work,
which is vital if we are to promote transparency and
inclusiveness. In that regard, we believe that the process
of selecting and nominating the next Secretary-General,
which will start in the next few months, should be
guided by those principles, so as to encourage Member
States to propose candidates. The official presentation
of candidacies for the post of Secretary-General
should be done far in enough in advance to ensure
better interaction between the General Assembly and
the Security Council. We appreciate the initiatives
and statements that have been made on the matter by
various groups of States, including the Non-Aligned
Movement, whose position we fully share.

Strengthening the Security Council's relationship
with troop-contributing countries is a crucial point on
its agenda. We therefore believe it essential that we
fully apply Article 44 of the Charter in order to ensure
that countries that provide contingents can participate
in every aspect and at every stage of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, with the goal of achieving
more effective coordination between the actors involved
in the missions' institutional dynamics.

We would like to encourage the Council to
intensify its cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, in accordance with the provisions of
the Charter, with a view to helping to find solutions to
regional conflicts that have an impact on international
peace and security. Despite the importance of that
objective, we regret that the African Union's Special
Envoy on the question of Western Sahara, former
President Joaquim Chissano, was not permitted to take
part in the discussions on the subject held in April
(see S/PV.7435). The fact that the African Union is a
strategic ally of the United Nations, and particularly
the Security Council, in the promotion of peace and
stability in Africa was not taken into consideration.
That situation affects this body's working methods,
including its transparency, and in the future such
practices should therefore be avoided.

Turning to another issue, Venezuela believes
that the Security Council should confine its focus to
dealing with matters that affect international peace
and security, in strict accordance with the Charter, and
avoid putting issues that are beyond its purview on its
agenda. That is necessary in order to ensure that the
Council's attention is not distracted from the issues that
are central to its work.

Finally, we would like to express our support for and
desire to cooperate with the delegation of New Zealand
when it takes over the presidency of the Council for the
month of July, for which we wish it every success.

