Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing today. His continued
personal engagement in the Middle East gives us hope.
His visit to the occupied Palestinian territory last week
provided him with an opportunity to witness first-hand
the frustrating build-destroy cycle.

We fully support his two-pronged strategy of sparing
no effort to rebuild Gaza and sparing no time to jump-
start the peace talks. We meet here for the Council's
last open debate on this subject for the year - a year
that we ourselves had declared the International Year of
Solidarity with the Palestinian People. We cannot put
a spin on what happened this year. The peace process
collapsed, Gaza was devastated once again, Israel
announced its largest land grab in over three decades,
and tensions around the Al-Aqsa Mosque increased.
The Council failed to fulfil its responsibility as Gaza
was burning and 2,100 of its citizens - of whom
one-third were women and children - were killed. We
appreciate the pledges of $5.4 billion made in Cairo to
rebuild Gaza. But Gaza, as we all know, will remain
vulnerable if the status quo continues.

An overwhelming majority of the international
community continues to support a clear path towards
full Palestinian statehood and sovereignty. The British
House of Commons has recognized the State of
Palestine. Sweden's new Government has also decided
to recognize it. Those weighty pronouncements,
coming from two major European Union countries,
raise the hopes of the beleaguered Palestinian people.
The Council must acknowledge these realities on the
ground. Sustainable peace in the region is not possible
without establishing an independent, viable and
contiguous State of Palestine with pre-1967 borders and
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, living side by side in
peace and security with Israel.

All Arab lands, including the Syrian Golan must
also be vacated. Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, while
addressing the General Assembly last month, said,

"The United Nations should facilitate a just and
lasting solution to the Palestinian issue, based on the
relevant United Nations resolutions" (A/69/PV12, 
p. 38).

We appreciate the United States' persistent efforts
in the quest for peace. We hope that Secretary Kerry's
efforts to reinvigorate the peace process will bear fruit.
The Quartet also needs to be re-energized, but dialogue
should not be pursued only for the sake of dialogue. It
should not forever remain a mirage. It should have clear
goals, timelines and benchmarks.

In Syria and Iraq, the international community
has been challenged to face down the rising tide of
primeval barbarism and criminality. The so-called
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) does not
derive its authority or writ from any religion. We must
all, collectively, oppose and defeat its evil ideology
of hatred, murder and destruction. We must remain
united in our fight against this new face of terrorism
and violent extremism. The political process must be
revived to resolve the continuing conflict in Syria. Now
is not the time to abdicate diplomatic responsibility in
the hope that the warring parties will force the outcome
through guns and blood.

The United Nations and regional players should
use all diplomatic means at their disposal to prevent a
further deterioration of the situation. It is now clear that
ifthe Syrian conflict had been addressed two years ago,
we would not have witnessed the rise of ISIS. We should
hold fast to the lessons that we have learned so painfully
in our contemporary history. As the Secretary-General
said in Gaza, this "endless, needless, mindless cycle
of suffering" must end. Whether in Palestine or Syria,
dialogue and diplomacy need to be pursued with a real
sense of purpose and urgency. That was the rationale
behind creating the United Nations and we must not fail
in fulfilling our duties in that regard.

We know from experience that the failure to resolve
the Palestinian issue has spawned many more conflicts.
The object lesson is that fixing Palestine will fix the
Middle East; fixing the Middle East will cure some
major ailments of our international polity.

