Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
The countries of Central and Eastern Europe associated
with the European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - the associated
countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, and the European
Free Trade Association countries Iceland and
Liechtenstein align themselves with this statement.

May I first congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council and pay
tribute to the outstanding work done by Jamaica in
November. We express our warm thanks to you, Sir, for
opening this briefing to delegations and for thus
allowing us to express our opinions on a subject close
to the European Union's heart.

I also wish to thank Mr. Hedi Annabi for his
briefing this morning.

The Secretary-General's report on progress made
by the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) over the past six months
makes encouraging reading. We are pleased to see that
UNMIBH's mission, in accordance with the mandate
implementation plan, continues to make progress and
that 43 of its 66 projects have been completed so far.
We are particularly satisfied with the results achieved
in relation to the State Border Service, the fight against
trafficking in human beings and drugs, and counter-
terrorism. The fact that the regional police forces and
the two entities are improving their cooperation is very
positive and can only serve to make their work even
more efficient.

It is a shame that the efforts of the police are not
yet being effectively taken up by the judicial system,
which, as noted by the Independent Judicial
Commission, is making only slow progress. Public
confidence, not only in the judicial system, but also in
the police services, is essential if it is to work properly.
We therefore call on UNMIBH to pursue the efforts it
has begun in the difficult task of overhauling the
judiciary.
If it continues in this way, UNMIBH should have
completed its core tasks by the end of its mandate in
December next year. As mentioned by the Secretary-
General in his report, however, monitoring and
assistance activities will follow from there. As we
stated during the debate in the Council in September
this year, the European Union appreciates and supports
the High Representative's comprehensive approach to
restructuring the current civilian presence on the
ground. Indeed, the transition must be planned
intelligently and the avenues open to us for
streamlining the presence of the international
community on the ground must be explored, while
bearing two goals in mind: efficiency and coordination.
The document which High Representative Petritsch is
to submit at the meeting of the Steering Board of the
Peace Implementation Council, being held today and
tomorrow in Brussels, will most certainly enable us to
make progress towards a rapid implementation of such
streamlining, which will further enhance the efficiency
of the international community's action in the country.

UNMIBH's work is directly in line with the
progress made by Bosnia and Herzegovina in
implementing the Dayton Accords. The progress made
is positive and the situation is developing satisfactorily.
The European Union strongly urges the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to continue implementing the
road map to Europe. We should like to stress once
again that responsible political management, combined
with an absolute and immediate determination to
implement institutional, legal and economic reforms in
full, are essential prerequisites for speedy integration
into European Union structures. Regional cooperation
is no less important to the consolidation of this process
and, as we emphasised in September, in this respect
Bosnia and Herzegovina has made significant progress,
which must be taken forward.

