The President: I should like to acknowledge the
presence at the Council table of the new Permanent
Representative of Costa Rica to the United Nations,
Mr. Bernd Niehaus Quesada. On behalf of the Council I
extend a warm welcome to him. We look forward to
cooperating with him in the work of the Council.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East

Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(S/1998/391)

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force, document S/1998/391.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/ 1998/422, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless I hear any
objection, I shall now put the draft resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as

resolution 1169 (1998).

In connection with the resolution just adopted on the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force, I have been authorized to
make the following complementary statement on behalf of
the Security Council:

"As is known, the report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (8/1998/391) states in paragraph 10:

'Despite the present quiet in the Israeli-
Syrian sector, the situation in the Middle East
continues to be potentially dangerous and is
likely to remain so, unless and until a
comprehensive settlement covering all aspects
of the Middle East problem can be reached:

"That statement of the Secretary-General
reflects the View of the Security Council."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1998/ 15.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 11:50 am.

