Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): | welcome China's presidency of the Security Council and assure you, Mr. President, of my country's support. We wish your presidency every success. I cannot proceed without reflecting on our happy memories of Ambassador Pecsteen de Buytswerve and his excellent presidency. Among Belgium's main achievements during its presidency was its level of representation in the form of its King, Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister. I therefore congratulate the Ambassador and his team for their excellent work. I also commend the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq for painting this picture of Iraq, including reasons for hope and causes for concern. I also note the presence of Ambassador Bahr Aluloom and hope his statement and information to the Council will be illuminating. On reasons for hope, the Niger welcomes the recent calm in Iraq and encourages the Iraqi authorities to continue their efforts to foster friendly relations with neighbouring countries, while broadening their partnerships at the regional level. The Niger very muchhopes that the political process, which has experienced some difficulties of late, will lead to the establishment of institutions that guarantee the country's stability with the appointment of a new consensus Prime Minister. The Niger remains convinced that a sustainable process must include Iraqi women. In that regard, we welcome the consultations with the Women's Advisory Group on Reconciliation and Politics, whose demand for representation at all levels of political and economic governance remains legitimate. That political process must seek solutions to the many challenges Iraqis are currently facing. In addition to the terrorist threat, corruption poses an equally dangerous threat because it saps the country of the means to rebuild. My delegation expresses its concern about the way the protests have been managed and reiterates its commitment to respect for public freedoms, including the freedom to protest. The Niger also calls on the Iraqi Government to take measures to overcome the existing administrative and security difficulties so that the violations against children documented in the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2019/984), so aptly pointed out by the Committee Chair, Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve, cease and so that children can obtain civil status documents and have access to education after so many years of violence that have deprived them of schooling. It is most regrettable that the transnational threat of terrorism remains in the country, with Da'esh continuing its rapid rebuilding. The Iraqi authorities, with the support of their partners, must continue the fight against terrorism while ensuring respect for the rights of individuals. As the Special Representative said, Iraq has come a long way. The efforts made, however minimal, must be appreciated, supported and encouraged. Although the responsibility for building a peaceful, stable and prosperous Iraq lies with Iraqis - and they have the means to achieve that - the country must cease to be the scenario for confrontation, the use of force and external interests. To that end, Iraqis need our support now more than ever. In conclusion, the Niger congratulates and encourages the Special Representative of the Secretary- General and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and her team for the convincing results achieved during her mandate.
