Mr. Kolby (Norway): I would like to begin by
expressing our appreciation to your Presidency, Sir, for
the initiative to hold an open debate in the Security
Council on the situation in Burundi.

Norway is deeply concerned by the recent increase
in violence in Burundi, in particular in the south and in
the environs of Bujumbura. We believe that this spiral of
violence must be stopped.

The international community has a special
responsibility to prevent another human tragedy from
happening in this region. Norway therefore believes that
the United Nations should and could play a more active
role in ensuring peace and stability in Burundi.

Norway has for several years actively supported the
peace and reconciliation efforts in Burundi and has also
been one of the major financial contributors to the Arusha
process. So far this year we have channelled $4.5 million
in humanitarian assistance to Burundi. Another $4.7
million has been channelled through the United Nations
system to the Great Lakes region in response to United
Nations regional appeals. Taking into account the present
severe situation and the need for supporting the
humanitarian efforts to restore peace in Burundi, we are
now also considering additional support in the near future.
The demise of Mwalimu Nyerere was met with great
sorrow. His leadership, as the first head of State of the
United Republic of Tanzania and as a peacemaker in the
region, made lasting contributions to a better world. He
will be greatly missed by us all.

My Government is concerned that his passing at this
critical juncture in the peace negotiations on Burundi
could lead to a vacuum in the efforts for peace and
reconciliation, which could further aggravate the security
situation in Burundi and cause a new escalation of
violence. We also fear that the violence in Burundi may
spread to neighbouring States and create increased
instability in the region at large. We therefore strongly
urge all the parties concerned to join in the effort to
appoint, as soon as possible, a new facilitator to replace
the late Mwalimu Nyerere, and also to resume without
any delay the peace talks in Arusha in a constructive

 

manner in order to overcome the present dangerous
standstill in the peace process.

It is important to see the present situation in Burundi
in the context of political events elsewhere in the Great
Lakes region, in particular in the light of the still volatile
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It will
be difficult to ensure peace and reconciliation in Burundi if
the Lusaka Agreement is not effectively implemented in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We are therefore
concerned by the recent reports of an increasing number of
Violations of the ceasefire in that country. We urge all the
parties to the Lusaka Agreement to respect the
commitments they have made in this respect, and we also
urge the Security Council to follow the situation in that
country with close attention.

