Mr. Jokonya (Zimbabwe): We are delighted to
see you, Madam, presiding over these deliberations
today. We are also delighted to see our brother and
friend, Under-Secretary-General Ibrahim Gambari,
whose report has enriched our minds today. Let me also
recognize the presence of the honourable Minister here,
Joao Bernardo de Miranda of Angola.

Today's meeting on the situation in Angola,
coming as it does after the release of the Secretary-
General's report (S/2001/956) on the United Nations
Office in Angola (UNOA), and the supplementary
report (S/2001/966) of the Monitoring Mechanism on
Sanctions against UNITA, could not have been more
timely. Having participated in the debate on the
ground-breaking report of the Panel of Experts on
violations of Security Council sanctions against
UNITA on 18 April 2000, and also having co-
sponsored the resolution on the role of diamonds in
fuelling conflicts, which was adopted by the General
Assembly on 1 December 2000, my delegation has
requested the floor not only to associate itself with this
revealing report by the Secretary-General, which not
only has provided an insight into the economic agenda
and UNITA's role against innocent Angolans, but also
calls for the relentless pursuit of those recalcitrant
elements and/or entities that continue to abet UNITA's
sanctions-busting exploits.

During the debate on the report of the Panel of
Experts on the violations of Security Council sanctions
against UNITA, my delegation submitted to the
Council that the failure to account for the presence of
economic agendas in conflict had at times undermined
international efforts to consolidate fragile peace
agreements. In paragraph 12, the supplementary report
of the Monitoring Mechanism on Sanctions against
UNITA observes that cross-border supplies still reach
UNITA from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
that same paragraph, there are allegations that the
Congo remains a conduit for UNITA diamonds.

However, it should be noted that the report is not
referring to the territory under the control of the
legitimate Government in Kinshasa but to rebel-held
territory in the eastern Congo. According to the report,
the cooperation between UNITA and other rebel
movements in the eastern Congo has made it possible
for that part of the country to remain a major transit
point for UNITA diamonds. We can only conclude that
this cooperation and support to UNITA by the eastern
Congo rebels is not founded on the principle of
[inaudible]. In fact, in those rebel-controlled areas that
straddle the common border of Angola and the Congo,
a new political economy based on anarchy and chaos
has emerged. As a result of diminishing external
patronage, the rebels under the tutelage of UNITA have
been forced to develop their own means of economic
sustainability. Globalization and liberalization have
made it easy for these disparate groups to establish
parallel and transborder economic linkages necessary
for survival, and in terms of reflecting this
transformation, UNITA is instructive.

During the 1980s UNITA was based near the
southern border with Namibia and relied on cold war-
sponsored cross-border support from the apartheid
regime in South Africa. But today it controls diamond
fields in the centre and north of Angola and has,
through a shifting pattern of regional transborder and
international commercial linkages, managed to sustain
its war-making capacity. These linkages have enabled
the conflict in Angola to reach levels of destruction far
in excess of that during the cold war. As one writer has
put it; "Had Savimbi been Chairman of a multinational
company overseeing such transformation, apart from
earning a huge bonus award he would also have won
international acclaim". But that transformation would
not be possible without those State and non-State
actors that disregard the embargo against UNITA.

Madam President, with your indulgence let me
remind the honourable members that the collapse of the
1994 Lusaka Protocol and the return of Savimbi to war
was a consequence of UNITA's failure to comply with
its treaty obligations to demobilize, surrender its
weapons and hand over areas under its control to State
administration. Since that time, the Security Council
has adopted numerous resolutions imposing weapons
and oil embargoes against UNITA, prohibiting diamond
trade, restricting travel of UNITA's leaders around the
world and freezing its bank accounts and those of its
leaders abroad. To the chagrin of all and sundry,
UNITA's war chest continues to grow in spite of these
measures. This is so, because there are willing
individuals and organizations that are determined to
pursue their narrow, selfish motives at the expense of
the Angolan people, who have not known peace since
1975.

The Secretary-General's report is an indictment
of UNITA for crimes against humanity. Indeed, since
May of this year UNITA has renewed its attacks on
innocent civilians, triggering a new wave of internally
displaced Angolans. I need not enumerate all acts of
wanton destruction, as the Secretary-General's report
provides a detailed catalogue of the carnage.

The Government of Angola has never closed its
doors to negotiations with UNITA within the
framework of the Lusaka Protocol. Just two months
ago, on 20 September 2001, Angola's Minister for the
Interior, Mr. Fernando da Piedade Dias dos Santos
"Nando", submitted to the Security Council that

"We, the Angolan Government, remain open to a

peaceful resolution of our conflict on the basis of

the Lusaka Protocol. This Protocol resulted from
long negotiations and has essential elements
needed to bring the Angolan conflict to an end".

(S/PV.43 76)
The Minister also reiterated that sanctions against
UNITA were not an end but a means to restrain to the
maximum extent possible the alternatives available to
Mr. Savimbi and to lead him back to the Lusaka
Protocol, the sole instrument available for the
resolution of the Angolan conflict.

My delegation welcomes the renewal of the
Monitoring Mechanism's mandate for at least another
six months. We also associate ourselves with Angola's
call for the imposition of new restrictive measures
against UNITA in the area of telecommunications
under Article 41 of the United Nations Charter and
operative paragraph 6 of Security Council 1295 (2000).
It is the submission of my delegation that, as long as
the international community, particularly those
countries that have extended their patronage to terrorist
groups which pass for rebel movements in eastern
Congo, do not bring to rein their surrogates, efforts to
strengthen the sanctions regime against UNITA and
plug the loopholes opened as a result of that
organization's cooperation with rebel movements in the
Congo will remain an exercise in futility.

In an article entitled "The Economic Functions of
Violence in Civil Wars", David Keen has remarked:

"Conflict can create war economies. Often
in the regions controlled by the rebels or warlords
and linked to international trading networks,
members of armed groups can benefit from
looting. Under these circumstances, ending civil
wars becomes difficult. Winning may not be
desirable. The point of war may be precisely the
legitimacy which it confers on actions that in
peacetime would be punishable as crimes".

Angola is one of the major oil-producing
countries of Africa and has vast diamond-mining areas.
It also produces gold, and were it not for the
environmental degradation, the legacy of millions of
landmines strewn about its land, Angola has one of the
best agricultural profiles in Africa. Unfortunately,
because of the war, Angola has not been able to
address the needs of its people. It has been said that the
discovery of diamonds in a country should be seen as a
benefit that brings wealth and prestige. However, in the
case of Angola, because of UNITA, diamonds have
become a curse that fuels greed and threatens the very
existence of that country.

In conclusion, let it be known that the
dependence of UNITA on international trade networks
renders its illicit trade vulnerable to concerted
application of appropriate compliance and regulatory
measures. The international community has an
obligation to punish all those trading partners that have
benefited and continue to benefit from UNITA's war
against the Government and the people of Angola.

