Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): The Security Council is
meeting today in reaction to the dramatic developments that
are now taking place in Kosovo. For the past 13 months the
continuing crisis in Kosovo has caused tremendous hardship
and suffering to the civilian population in the province. The
continued repressive actions on the part of the Yugoslav
security forces against the Kosovar Albanian community,
which have again intensified during the past few days, have
led to tragic humanitarian consequences. Many lives have
been lost, while more than half a million Kosovar
Albanians have been forced to flee their burning homes and
villages and seek refuge elsewhere in Kosovo and in the
neighbouring countries.

The violence against the civilian population has been
on the increase in recent weeks and days. The intensified
terror tactics and military assaults by the Yugoslav forces
against the ethnic Albanian community in many parts of the
province represent the continuation of a systematic
repression by the Yugoslav authorities to drive innocent
civilians, especially women and children, out of Kosovo,
reminiscent of the policy of ethnic cleansing that was
carried out during the dark days of the Bosnian crisis.

According to the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the current security environment
in Kosovo is characterized by a disproportionate use of
force, including heavy weaponry, by the Yugoslav
authorities against the poorly armed Kosovar Albanians.
One thing should be clear: combating the so-called acts of
terrorism in Kosovo does not in any way justify gross
human rights violations or the failure to respect
international norms and international humanitarian law.

The Security Council supported the peace process
initiated by the Contact Group back in January this year,
which was designed to settle the crisis in Kosovo through
peaceful means. My delegation cannot fail to express its
appreciation for the strenuous efforts made by the
members of the Contact Group, and in particular those
that were determined to bring about the success of the
peace negotiations in Rambouillet, which resumed in Paris
last week. Unfortunately, the outcome of the negotiations
was not as the international community had expected.
Yugoslavia continues to reject the Rambouillet accords
and has rebuffed all efforts to change its mind, while the
Kosovar Albanian side has put its signature on them,
despite serious reservations on its part. My delegation
welcomes the decision by the Kosovar Albanian
delegation to sign the Rambouillet accords. By that act,
the Kosovar Albanians have chosen the path of peace,
instead of continued conflict. That was, indeed, a
courageous decision which ought to be commended by
the international community and this Council.

My delegation believed that the crisis in Kosovo
could have been resolved through dialogue and
negotiations predicated on good faith and the necessary
political will on the part of the parties concerned. Clearly,
the Kosovar Albanian side has demonstrated this good
faith and political will but, regrettably, the Yugoslav
authorities have not. We had hoped that the intensive
diplomatic efforts, culminating in the Rambouillet talks in
February, which resumed in Paris last week, including all
the efforts made right up to the eleventh hour, to secure
an agreement from Belgrade, would succeed in finding a
peaceful settlement and thereby avert the catastrophic
humanitarian situation now unfolding in Kosovo.
Regrettably, the hopes and expectations of the
international community were dashed by the continued
intransigence of the Yugoslav leadership.

As a matter of principle, my delegation is not in
favour of the use or threat of use of force to resolve any
conflict situation, regardless of where it occurs. If the use
of force is at all necessary, it should be a recourse of last

 

resort, to be sanctioned by the Security Council, which has
been vested with primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. The ongoing conflict in
Kosovo could indeed - and will - have international
repercussions, given the still volatile situation in some of
the neighbouring countries. In any case, the international
community cannot afford to stand idly by, given the
dimension of the violence on the ground and the worsening
humanitarian conditions in Kosovo in the wake of the
repressive military actions carried out by the Serbian and
Yugoslav authorities.

My delegation would have wished that the crisis in
Kosovo could be dealt with directly by the Council. It is
regrettable that, given the divisions in the Council on this
subject, during the past 13 months it has not been able to
address the issue in any meaningful way. It is regrettable
that in the absence of a consensus in the Council - thanks,
or rather, no thanks, to the irreconcilable differences among
permanent members - the Council has been denied the
opportunity to firmly and decisively pronounce on this
issue, as expected of it by the international community. We
regret that in the absence of Council action on this issue it
has been necessary for action to be taken outside of the
Council.

We are seriously concerned about the current situation
on the ground when, with the withdrawal of international
observers and the onset of military actions by the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the Yugoslav
authorities are likely to unleash their preponderant military
might upon the poorly armed Albanians in retaliation. If
this happens, the humanitarian impact on the Kosovar
civilian population will be enormous and tragic indeed. This
aspect of the problem must be immediately addressed by
the international community and this Council. My
delegation joins others in calling for international readiness
to provide humanitarian assistance to the Kosovar
Albanians.

