Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): At the outset I
should like to thank the briefers.

I think Mr. David Lillie was right to challenge
us. Humanitarian workers deserve our praise, thanks,
admiration and, above all, Security Council efforts to
protect them. I am sorry that those efforts have been
found wanting. I will come back to that in a minute.

I support what was said by the representatives
of France and Germany before the debate began. We
believe that it is important for the Council to hear from
all sides of a conflict, so we did not on this occasion
object to the invitation issued under rule 39 to the
Russian Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides
and Refugee Migration Monitoring in the Syrian Arab
Republic and to General Bakin. We are very strong
supporters of freedom of speech, but we prefer it to be
truthful speech. We believe that truth is indeed the first
casualty ofwar. That is a very good saying. I do not like
being told that we cannot trust information from the
United Nations or that we cannot trust the assessment
of the Security Council, but that instead we are to trust
Russian uniformed personnel even though Russia is a
party to the conflict. It is obvious that there is also a
conflict ofinterest. I wanted to explain all that before I
go on to the substance of my remarks.

Our agreement to hear briefers from one side of a
conflict, in particular military briefers in a humanitarian
context, should not be taken for granted in future for
the reasons I have set out. However, today I would like
to focus in particular on the hospitals, on the issues that
Mr. Mark Lowcock raised and on deconfliction. I also
really want to try to get to the bottom of this. I said last
time (see S/PV.8535) that I will keep asking questions
until I get answers. I hope that the General will be
able to help the Council get answers to the questions
it has concerning the attacks on the hospitals, because
these are very serious matters on which we just do not
seem to be able to make any progress. IfI may, I would
therefore like to ask him some questions.

First, I would like to know why 30 hospitals have
been attacked? Also, why was an ambulance a direct
target? Given what we have heard from David Lillie
and the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, and what
we know of international humanitarian law, why, in
the General's View, do the attacks on the terrorists
eclipse the needs of civilians? To us they do not seem
proportionate and they do not appear to be preserving
the principles of international humanitarian law. If
the General believes that the hospitals are legitimate
military targets, we would like to see some of the
information that underpins that belief. In particular,
we would like to know where are the warnings that,
under the Geneva Conventions, need to be given before
a hospital can be treated as a military target. I would
also like to know how the General or how Russia sees
the deconfliction mechanism working for the reasons
the Under-Secretary-General set out.

I have three more questions, ifI may. The first
is about the ceasefire. Why is it so difficult to obtain
a ceasefire when both we and the General support
the Turkish efforts in Idlib? What needs to change
on the ground in order to achieve a ceasefire? What
is happening to investigate and hold accountable the
people responsible for the attacks on hospitals? Finally,
may we have the names and designations of the Russian
and Syrian units involved in the attacks on the hospitals?

I also have points to make on Rukban. In that
respect, I share the concern of my colleagues about
the deteriorating situation and humanitarian access.
We, too, support the need for a third aid convoy
to be allowed in as a matter of urgency. We support
unfettered access for aid across Syria. With respect
to Al-Hol, we continue to support the United Nations
efforts to scale up its response and to provide aid to
humanitarian organizations operating at camps for
internally displaced persons, including Al-Hol.

A number of speakers have raised the political
situation and, as some have noted, Mr. Pedersen
will brief us later this month. What was said by the
representative of France, including his statement on
the use of chemical weapons, represents the United
Kingdom's View. I hope that I will be able to get
some answers.

