Mr. Bamba (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation takes note of the report of the Secretary-
General before the Council (S/2013/377). We thank
Mr. Herve Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his excellent briefing.

Before making a few comments on some points that
appear critical to my delegation, I would like to warmly
congratulate your country, Mr. President, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of July.

Please also allow me to pay tribute to the Secretary-
General for his personal and continued commitment
to the issue of the United Nations Operation in cote
d'Ivoire (UNOCI) - a commitment that is reflected
in the quality of the report before us today. I would
also like to pay tribute to Mr. Bert Koenders, former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Cote D'Ivoire and head of UNOCI, for the excellent
results he achieved in just two years. We hope that he
will achieve the same superior results in our brotherly
country of Mali, where he now serves as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. Finally, my delegation
would like to congratulate Ms. Aichatou Mindaoudou
Souleymane on her appointment as the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
UNOCI. We note with satisfaction that Ms. Souleymane
has, in her new capacity, begun to make contact with
the various authorities and Ivorian entities. I assure her
of the full cooperation of the Ivorian authorities.

Returning to the report of the Secretary-General
and as has been relevantly pointed out, considerable
progress has been made at all levels, particularly at the
level of the general objectives concerning security and
stability, including security sector reform (SSR) and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR);
justice and human rights; and political dialogue and
national reconciliation.

In terms of security and stability, as is strongly
emphasized in the report of the Secretary-General,
President Alassane Ouattara and his Government are
paying particular attention to the stabilization of the
security situation throughout the national territory, with
good results, such as the reclassification of the cities of
Abidjan and Yamoussoukro by the United Nations in
May 2013 as areas authorized for the families of the
international staff of the Organization.

However, as was emphasized by Mr. Ladsous,
concerns remain along the border with Liberia, although
the situation has improved significantly following the
strengthening of the quadripartite cooperation among
the security services of Cote d'lvoire and Liberia,
UNOCI and the United Nations Mission in Liberia.

With regard to the reform of the security sector,
I would like to point out that the coordination of the
implementation of SSR takes place on three levels: the
political and strategic level; the coordination level,
which involves monitoring and evaluation; and the
operational level, which involves implementation.

The National Security Council is at the political
and strategic level. The Council secretariat and the
Advisory Group are at the level of coordination. The
various ministries involved in SSR are implementing
structures, with each ministry having a focal point that
reports monthly on its progress in implementing SSR to
the Council secretariat and the Advisory Group, which
are its partners. Each ministry must develop its own
implementation model and programme it. Accordingly,
the Ministries of Defence, Justice, Interior and National
Security, and Foreign Affairs are the most advanced in
the process of implementing SSR.

With regard to the fight against smuggling, specific
measures have been taken to eradicate the smuggling
of natural resources for the benefit of neighbouring
countries and to put an end to the parallel tax system
set up by members of the former Forces nouvelles
and former combatants. Those measures focus on
the redeployment of State administration throughout
the national territory, in particular customs, police,
gendarmerie, the finance and tax services, on the one
hand, and on raising awareness of military personnel
of the danger that trafficking poses to the national
economy and the sanctions they may incur in the event
of proven liability, including their termination, on the
other hand.

Finally, with regard to the case of Amade' Ouere'mi,
which is briefly mentioned in paragraph 20 of the
Secretary-General's report, my delegation would like
to state that after 10 years of fomenting insecurity in
the Mont Peko national park located in western Cote
d'lvoire, Mr. Oue're'mi was apprehended, prosecuted,
charged and placed in custody on 22 May.

The suspect is subject to the following charges:
crimes against civilians, genocide, violation of
individual freedom, assassination, murder, rape,
assault and battery, threat of death, violence and
assault, tribalism and xenophobia, attacks and other
offences against the authority of the State, the setting-
up of gangs, participation in an insurgency, disturbing
public order, looting, destruction or deterioration of
foodstuffs, goods, merchandise or equipment, group
robbery, extortion, wilful destruction of real or personal
property, coercion, abetting, conspiracy and attempt
to commit all of the aforementioned offences. He is
accused and charged along with nine others.

The proceedings are well under way. In-depth
interrogations, investigations of the individuals
involved and psychiatric assessments have been made.
Accordingly, 50 rape victims and 4,000 victims of
various other offences have already been heard by
the examining magistrate, who has indicted several
suspects, including Amade Oue'remi himself, and is
continuing the investigations in order to find other
accomplices.

On disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
the Authority for Disarmament. Demobilization and
Reintegration, created on 8 August 2012, was set up
in October 2012 and began operations in January 2013.
After six months of operation, 7,680 weapons have
been collected and 8,044 former combatants have been
demobilized and reintegrated or are in the process of
reintegration. In recent months, now that the installation
and implementation of systems and procedures is
complete, we have seen accelerated results. With the
opening of three regional offices and four branches, we
expect to see the Authority's activities take off. We also
expect to open three more regional offices and six other
branches by the end of July.

The Transitional Demobilization and Reintegration
Programme - supported, among others, by the World
Bank and the African Development Bank - has
provided assistance to the Authority for nearly two
months in developing a strategic framework for the
national DDR strategy. This framework was shared
with all partners in April.

The Authority has established a framework
for overall coordination, including national and
international partners, that meets once a month, as well
as four thematic groups. This coordination mechanism
enables the development of sectoral strategies and
action plans. Thus, the thematic groups are finalizing
thematic strategy papers that will be available in late
July. In the same vein, a programmatic document will
be developed with the assistance ofUNOCI, the United
Nations Development Programme and the European
Union, which have volunteered to support the Authority
in this exercise. The document will serve as a basis for
the meeting of partners for resource mobilization in
September.

Regarding the database of ex-combatants, UNOCI
has made a computer expert available to the Authority
for Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration to
examine the database in order to make it more credible.
Thus, the issue of UNOCI access to the database is no
longer relevant. The ongoing joint exercise has already
helped to detect and correct anomalies in the database.
By mutual agreement, UNOCI and the Authority
have agreed not to proceed with a new registry of
ex-combatants. On the other hand, ajoint mechanism to

verify the status of ex-combatants has been developed
and implemented. Furthermore, a system to monitor and
mark weapons in connection with the demobilization
of ex-combatants has been established with the support
of UNOCI, and regular statistics on disarmament,
reintegration and rehabilitation, as well as on weapons,
are provided to UNOCI.
Finally, discussions are under way with UNOCI
and other partners to expedite the reintegration of
ex-combatants. These discussions will be recorded
in the reintegration action plan. In that context, I
welcome the readiness and much appreciated support
of UNOCI in the development and implementation of
the thematic strategies, which will allow the Authority
for Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration to
achieve its objectives.

In terms ofjustice and human rights, at the general
level it should first be noted that the members of the
National Commission on Human Rights have been
appointed. We also note that progress has been made in
the implementation of the national strategy for justice
reform for 2012-2015. The action plan and budget for the
strategy were approved by the Council of Ministers on
6 June. In addition to the national strategy, a strategic
plan is being developed to reform the juvenile justice
system. My delegation notes that numerous efforts and
investments are being made by the State to strengthen
the capacity of the judicial and penal systems.

With respect to the armed forces, the supervisory
authority and the General Staff of the Forces
re'publicaines de Cote d'Ivoire (FRCI) have established
a technical unit for human rights training. This
unit conducts awareness and training for the FRCI
throughout the national territory. Regulations are in
place to punish gross violations of human rights.

Following the report of the National Commission
of Inquiry into the crimes of the post-election period,
the military tribunal has opened investigations and
proceeded to indictments and even to convictions of
military personnel following a procedure in accordance
with the relevant laws. There are three categories of
personnel subject to the judicial proceedings. Thirty-
two members of the army and gendarmerie and eight
members of the National Police have been charged and
heard on the merits. Twenty-three members of the army
and gendarmerie and eight members of the National
Police have been charged on a committal order. Six
soldiers have been charged on a committal order but not
yet heard the merits. In addition, a focal point between
the office of UNOCI and the army has been appointed.

Regarding the investigation of the attack on
the Nahibly camp for internally displaced persons,
the examining magistrate in the court of Man has
been engaged to shed light on the facts of the case
and to charge and detain all persons involved. The
investigation is ongoing and developments therein will
be communicated as soon as available.

Regarding other ongoing judicial procedures,
concerning which we have heard a broad spectrum of
commentary, my delegation would draw attention to
the fact that the separation of powers is a fundamental
parameter of good governance and an expression of
the rule of law throughout the world. There can be no
impartial justice if everyone seeks to tell the judicial
system how to conduct its investigations and who to
prosecute.

Based on the foregoing, I would like to emphasize
that the main concern of the Government of Cote
d'Ivoire in its judicial proceedings is to ensure that all
citizens receive a fair trial within a reasonable time
frame. Despite the difficulties in infrastructure and
superstructure of the Ivorian justice system - which
are related mainly to the destruction that occurred in
the post-election crisis - several procedures have been
completed and submitted to the trial courts. Decisions
have been handed down and trials are about to open.

I would therefore like to emphasize that there are no
political indictees or prisoners in Cote d'Ivoire, since it
is a generally accepted rule that a person's activities
do not affect the juridical nature of the offence with
which that person may be charged. In other words, it
is not because someone holds an important position in
civil and political society that he or she is not subject
to the law.

At this level, the strategy put in place to ensure
equitable justice in Cote d'Ivoire has led the Public
Prosecutor, who is also the head of the Special
Investigations Unit, to give priority attention to the
proceedings of detainees in a sequential approach in
order to ensure them a speedy and fair trial within a
reasonable time frame, in accordance with all the
declarations and principles of human rights enshrined
in the Ivorian Constitution.

However, it is important to note, especially for the
leaders of the former regime, that most of the actions
for which they are being prosecuted are of a criminal
nature, thus requiring the court to make use of a two-
tier investigation process before indictment before
the Court of Appeals. Moreover, an indictment was
recently issued before the Court of Appeals for the
accused, which indicates that the procedures will end
in judgments that are in the course of formulation.

In terms of political dialogue and national
reconciliation, my delegation wishes to reaffirm the
continued commitment of the Ivorian authorities to the
process of political dialogue and national reconciliation.
Everyone knows that Cote d'Ivoire has a long and
deeply-rooted tradition of ongoing dialogue, despite all
that is said and written in the media and other sources
of information. Contacts are patiently and constantly
maintained among all parties, and tangible results will
be seen shortly.

At this point, the President of the Republic continues
to maintain a close dialogue with his people during his
tours to all regions of the country. Thus, having visited
the west in April, on Monday he completed a tour
through the north. While these tours are an opportunity
for communion between the President and the people by
promoting direct interaction, they also reflect the tone
of the equitable redistribution of the country's wealth,
since numerous socioeconomic and even cultural goods
are provided for the benefit of the regions concerned
during the course of these presidential visits. Thus, in
the case of northern Ferkessedougou, it has promoted
reconciliation between political leaders representing
political parties in power or in the opposition.

It is equally reassuring to note that, apart from
these actions at the highest level of the State, local
authorities, through sensitization and early warning
committees, actively contribute to calming tensions
and communal violence. A national programme for
social cohesion was launched on 10 May to coordinate
all Government initiatives in this area. To set it squarely
within the parameters of the national development
plan, the programme is housed within the Ministry
of Planning and Development, which ensures its
institutional foundations.

With regard to the process ofnational reconciliation,
there is reason to celebrate significant progress.
Indeed, after field studies that lasted several months,
the Dialogue, Truth and Reconciliation Commission
organized a restitution workshop in December 2012
to take preliminary stock of the situation. This was
followed by a listening seminar to ascertain the views
of Ivorians on the causes of the crisis, after which
the Commission met on 10, 11 and 12 July, during a
symposium held in Yamoussoukro, to determine the
root causes of the crisis.

The symposium was attended by 120 participants
from all socio-professional strata to share their views
in the context of seven subcommittees on each of the
following themes: land; citizenship, nationality and
democracy; communication and society; justice and
security; gender; education, training and youth; and
poverty. After three days of intense and fruitful work,
the Commission can be credited with having achieved
remarkable results since all the causes of the Ivorian
crisis were exhaustively inventoried by each of the
seven subcommittees, and appropriate solutions were
recommended in each of the aforementioned spheres.
The matrix thus developed will help to formulate
appropriate policies to achieve the objectives of national
reconciliation.

Given these facts and their positive momentum,
we hope fervently that our international partners in
general, and UNOCI in particular, can furnish all the
support the Commission needs to effectively implement
the next phases of its work before submitting its final
report to the President of the Republic in September.

In conclusion, my delegation believes that the
matter of plans to reduce UNOCI's military, police and
civilian components by 2015 should be approached with
great care so as not to create a security vacuum on the
ground while the Security Council's complex mandates
for UNOCI are still being implemented. In that context,
I should reiterate strongly that the Government of Cote
d'Ivoire is aware that it bears primary responsibility
for the country's sustainable recovery and is thus
determined to spare no effort and to make any sacrifice
necessary to achieve its goals for security sector

reform, a well-run DDR process, the achievement of
its national reconciliation objectives, efforts towards
strong, sustainable and inclusive economic growth and
preparation for the conduct of free, fair, transparent and
peaceful elections scheduled for 2015.

I would also like to recall the fact that the Charter
of the United Nations confers on the Security Council
the responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, which is why UNOCI is helping
Cote d'Ivoire to achieve its aforementioned goals.
In that context, my delegation shares the Secretary-
General's opinion that Cote d'Ivoire's sustainable
recovery will undoubtedly contribute to strengthening
peace, stability and development in West Africa. It is
therefore important that the Council's decisions on
UNOCI's military and police units reflect that fact;
hence my delegation's reservations about the proposal
to reduce them by two battalions in 2015.

We believe that the progress being made on every
ongoing project deserves to be strengthened and
protected, at least until the 2015 elections, after which
UNOCI could comfortably consider an orderly transition
to a peacebuilding regime. Similarly, my delegation
emphasizes the critical need for UNOCI to continue to
work closely with the Cote d'Ivoire authorities in order to
come to an agreement on identifying and evaluating the
country's criteria for long-term stability. Incidentally, it
is in consideration of Cote d'Ivoire's requirements for
stability in the long term that the Ivorian authorities
have formally requested that surveillance drones be
deployed along all of our borders, particularly those
with Liberia, and we hope that the Council will give the
request all the attention it deserves.

