Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome you, Sir, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of your country, to the
President's chair at this Security Council meeting, and
thank our German colleagues for taking the initiative to
hold this meeting and for their very professional
chairmanship of the Council's Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. We are grateful to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon; his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Mrs. Radhika Coomaraswamy; and the Executive
Director of UNICEF, Mr. Anthony Lake, for their
attention to the problem of protecting children in
armed conflict and for their useful information on the
state of affairs in this area.

Despite all the steps being undertaken at the
international and national levels and the existence of a
broad international legal basis, we note that children
continue to be one of the most vulnerable groups
suffering in armed conflicts. The Security Council,
within the framework of its mandate to promote
international peace and security, grants significant
attention to this issue. In this regard, we welcome the
adoption of resolution 1998 (2011) today, and hope that
its implementation will contribute to enhancing the
system for protecting children and international
cooperation in this area as a whole.

However, we would like to point out that the task
of protecting children is system-wide in nature, and it
is important that the work done in this area be well
coordinated. That will enhance its effectiveness and
prevent any duplication of efforts, because these
questions are also handled by the General Assembly,
the Human Rights Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission, within their respective mandates. There is
a clear need, therefore, to respect the existing system
of burden-sharing among the various United Nations
bodies, in accordance with the Charter and other
international legal instruments. Significant work is also
being undertaken in this area by several international
organizations within the United Nations system, in
particular UNICEF.

Resolution 1612 (2005) laid the basis for
protecting children during armed conflicts and the
post-conflict reconstruction process, including through
the monitoring and accountability mechanism and the
work of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict. We believe that those instruments should
focus principally on the most severe and large-scale
armed conflicts on the agenda of the Security Council,
including situations where States agree to their case
being considered by the Working Group. In this
context, it is particularly important to establish close
cooperation, dialogue and trust, which should help to
improve the situation of children on the ground.

We have closely studied the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/250), and we note that it
contains a wealth of information. Nevertheless, we
must once again point out the doubtful reliability of
some of the evidence referred to in the report. Clearly,
a balanced assessment based on objective and reliable
information will guarantee further practical
implementation of the recommendations contained in
the report. We express our concern at the loose
interpretation of what is meant by "armed conflict" in
the report. This leads the report to include references to
situations of concern. In this context we would like to
point out that there is no justification for the references
in the report to India, Pakistan, Thailand, the
Philippines and Haiti. The situations in those countries
cannot be called armed conflicts.

The work on the report and on the draft resolution
has shown - as have the discussions - that many
countries have problems as to how the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict is actually implementing some
aspects of her mandate. We believe that the time has
now come for a broad discussion of this issue in order
to answer Governments' concerns.

With regard to the recommendations in the report
of the Secretary-General, we support the idea of the
need to give equal attention to all six categories of
serious violations of children. Crimes against children
must not go unpunished.

It is also necessary to take long-term measures
for the rehabilitation of children who are affected by
conflicts and for their reintegration into society. It is
extremely important in this connection to establish the
right conditions for children to obtain uninterrupted
and complete education, and also to have access to
comprehensive health care.

Finally, it is important to consistently enhance the
mechanisms for bringing to justice those who are
guilty of violating the rights of children. I repeat,
impunity is not acceptable.

We strongly condemn the killing and maiming of
children, both during planned attacks and as a result of
indiscriminate or excessive use of force. Despite the
additional measures being taken to prevent this from
happening, including by international military
presence, they occur with tragic regularity. We believe
it is unacceptable to try to describe the victims among
civilian populations, particularly children, as collateral
damage. That contradicts the provisions of the Geneva
Convention. We advocate careful investigation of such
incidents and punishment for the guilty.

Nor is it acceptable that children should continue
to be detained in military prisons of international
forces without having access to the civil justice system.
We call on the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Children and Armed Conflict to give
particular attention to this issue.
In conclusion, I would like to express again the
view that effective cooperation, including in the area of
protection of children, is impossible without
cooperation with the Governments of countries
involved in conflicts or in the post-conflict
reconstruction stage. In that context we stress the
importance of cooperation between United Nations
missions and United Nations country teams with
non-State armed groups must take place only with the
agreement of the Governments involved in those
conflicts.

