Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, at the outset, I would like to thank you
for having convened this important meeting. Allow me
also to welcome the participation of Mr. Rene Preval,
President-elect of Haiti.

The electoral process in Haiti is undoubtedly a
first step towards the strengthening of democratic
institutions and the promotion of the rule of law and
good governance, which must be followed by other
equally important steps on the road to achieving
national reconciliation and building national unity,
which cannot be attained without the participation of
all Haitians.

My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
congratulate Mr. Preval on his election as President-
elect of Haiti, and also to congratulate the people of
Haiti for the success of the electoral process that took
place on 7 February 2006. We eagerly look forward to
the completion of the second round of elections on
time, in order to form a national Government that is
able to build peace in keeping with the hopes and
aspirations of the Haitian people.

Providing the necessary support for
peacebuilding activities will play a crucial role in
guaranteeing long-term stability and ensuring the
welfare of the Haitian people. In the next phase, a
number of issues must to be addressed. Those include
the disarmament of former combatants and their
demobilization and reintegration into society; the
restoration and rehabilitation of the security sector, and
rebuilding the national police force to effectively
enforce the rule of law; ensuring that justice is upheld,
through promotion of the judiciary and respect for
human rights; the creation of jobs; and rebuilding an
active national civil administration able to provide
basic public services such as water, energy, health care,
education and infrastructure.

In order to succeed in all those areas, we must
consider the past and benefit from the lessons learned
in building a State with institutions that focus first on
national interests. We believe it is reasonable for the
elected Government to benefit from the support of the
United Nations, since the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), as ably led by
Mr. Valde's, as well as other United Nations agencies,
have played a crucial role in the progress achieved so
far in the areas of stability and the provision of basic
services. MINUSTAH is generally considered an
indispensable help to the new Government, and its
presence has had a great effect on security and the
monitoring of the electoral process. In the next stage, it
will ensure further assessment of the situation when the
new administration takes office in Haiti.

The Haitian people now look to their new
Government with a great deal of confidence, as
reflected in the results of the election. We hope that the
new Administration will be able to discharge the
responsibilities it has been given and the difficult tasks
that await it, and that stability will return to that
country, which has suffered too long from internal
turmoil.

Finally, we support the adoption of the draft
presidential statement on the situation in Haiti that is
before the Council.

