Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Under-
Secretary-General Nakamitsu for her briefing.

The Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF)
Treaty, signed by the United States and the Soviet Union
in 1987, eliminated an entire category ofmissiles, those
capable of travelling 500 to 5,500 kilometres. It was
one of the key achievements of the post-Cold War arms
control in Europe and delivered greater security and
stability, not just for Europe but for the entire world.

Over a long period, Russia violated the INF Treaty
by secretly developing and deploying non-compliant
missiles, specifically a mobile-launch missile system,
the 9M729. Those missiles are hard to find, rapidly
deployable and can target European cities with
conventional or nuclear warheads. Russia refused to
acknowledge their existence until the United States
identified the missile using its Russian designation.
Russia's only subsequent attempt at openness was
a stage-managed offer to demonstrate the missile's
alleged compliance. That would have taken place under
contrived conditions, and it would have been impossible
to assess the range of the missile.

On 1 February, the United States announced its
intention to suspend its obligations under the INF
Treaty, thereby triggering a six-month withdrawal
process, which concluded on 2 August with the lapse of
the Treaty. Russia bears the sole responsibility for the
Treaty's demise. The United Kingdom and NATO allies
fully supported the United States decision to withdraw.

In the last five years, many diplomatic efforts have
been made to persuade Russia to return to compliance.
The United States raised this issue with Russia over
30 times, and NATO allies reached out unsuccessfully
via the NATO-Russia Council. Russia, however, has
remained defiant, focusing its narrative on denial of
the facts and counter-accusations, the likes of which we
have heard once again today.

On 2 August, when the INF Treaty lapsed, NATO
Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg stated that

"[w]e will not mirror what Russia does, we
do not want a new arms race, and we have no
intention to deploy new land-based nuclear missiles
in Europe".

He explained that NATO will respond to Russia's
aggressive actions, but

"everything we do will be balanced, coordinated
and defensive".

We support the United States explanation of the
timeline for the development of its recently tested
ground-launched cruise missile and do not believe
that the United States was non-compliant with the INF
Treaty at any time.

As a permanent member of the Security Council,
Russia has the responsibility to play a vital role in
promoting international stability. However, this
behaviour once again undermines Russia's claim that
it is a responsible international partner upholding
international peace and security. Russia's present actions
are in line with a pattern of aggression that represents a
clear threat to international peace and security.
