Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to express my appreciation to you, Sir, for organizing
this meeting on the situation in Afghanistan. I would
also like to welcome Mr. Nicholas Haysom as the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and wish him
success in his new assignment. I also thank him for his
briefing.

The Islamic Republic of Iran, with its deep cultural
and historical ties to Afghanistan, is indeed very eager
to see a peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan as its
neighbour. Our policy has been and will continue to
be one of supporting peace, stability, security and
socioeconomic development in Afghanistan, as we see
security in Afghanistan as tantamount to security along
our borders and in our region. It is our firm intention to
maintain and expand our relationship with Afghanistan,
which is rooted in friendship, good-neighbourliness
and mutual interest and understanding.

Iran has already welcomed the formation of the
National Unity Government, led by His Excellency
Mr. Ashraf Ghani as its President and His Excellency
Mr. Abdullah as its Chief Executive Officer, and
has pledged its support for and cooperation with
that Government. We earnestly hope that the new
Government will succeed in its efforts to strengthen
peace, security, stability and development in
Afghanistan, and can carry its difficultjob to fruition.

My Government is deeply concerned over
the continuation and exacerbation of violence in
Afghanistan, and strongly condemns all violent attacks
committed by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other violent
and extremist groups against innocent people and
Afghan infrastructure. Unfortunately, over the past
several years the presence of foreign troops and the
activities of terrorists and violent extremist groups
have developed into a vicious circle, with terrible
consequences for the Afghan people. Those groups
have used the presence of foreign troops as an excuse
to justify and expand their operations and to attract
human and financial resources. We hope that, as the
number of foreign troops in Afghanistan dwindles, the
situation in that country can and will rapidly return to
normal. In the meantime, we condemn any cooperation
with and encouragement provided to these groups, as it
emboldens them in their odious behaviour, extends the
plight of the Afghan people and is counterproductive
to establishing peace in Afghanistan and in the region.

On the important question of security arrangements
beyond 2014, we believe that any activity aiming
at security sector capacity-building or supporting
the Afghan National Security Forces, including the
Resolute Support Mission, should be undertaken with
the full consent of and in constant consultation with the
Afghan Government. This is an important prerequisite
to demonstrate the strong commitment of the
international community to respecting the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of
Afghanistan. At the same time, we wish to underline
that regional cooperation constitutes an effective means
to promote security and development in Afghanistan.

Sustainable progress on security and development
is mutually reinforcing. The establishment of peace
and security remains essential to reconstruction,
humanitarian relief efforts and sustainable
development. It is in that light that Iran has played an
important role in the reconstruction of Afghanistan and
is ready to pursue that role in future and in cooperation
with the new Government. We are ready to expand our
bilateral cooperation, particularly on security matters,
counter-narcotics efforts, developing projects and
economic cooperation in the fields of infrastructure
and agriculture, as well as durable solution for Afghan
refugees.

There is great potential for improving relations
especially in the fields of trade and transit As an
example, completing the railroad project between Herat
and Khaf City in Iran would be an important step. We
have also offered to make available our facilities in the
port of Chah Bahar, which could be very useful for
Afghanistan as a landlocked country. We are waiting
for the tripartite agreement between India, Afghanistan
and Iran to be finalized in this regard. We support
any regional initiatives aimed at exploring regional
potential for the welfare, stability and development of
Afghanistan and the rest of the region.

With respect to counter-narcotics efforts, we are
particularly concerned about reports indicating that
opium poppy cultivation in Afghanistan has almost
doubled since 2012. That poses a real threat to the
region and beyond, and should be addressed by the
international conununity and the Afghan Government.
In this regard, the international community should, inter
alia, support the Triangular Initiative on cooperation
on countering narcotics among Afghanistan, Iran and
Pakistan, which is essential not only to strengthening
the security and stability of Afghanistan, but also to
alleviating the serious concerns of neighboring States
and transit and destination countries.

We support UNAMA and the United Nations
agencies in their efforts to provide development
assistance and reconstruction support to Afghanistan
through a robust regional engagement on issues such
as border security, immigration, the return of refugees
and drug-control measures. The role of UNAMA
should be further strengthened in the light of the new
developments in Afghanistan. The future role of the
United Nations in Afghanistan is going to grow due to
the multifaceted and more complicated challenges.

In conclusion, the Government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran once again reiterates its sustained
support for the promotion of security, stability and
comprehensive and sustainable development in
Afghanistan, and extends our warmest support to the
new Government in Afghanistan.

