Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): In our
work on the Security Council, we have attached high
importance to the humanitarian situation in Syria
because we firmly believe that we must alleviate the
humanitarian suffering there. The region must also
avoid the serious fall-out from the crisis.

We worked very closely with our partners in the
Security Council, as well as with Luxembourg and
Australia, in order to submit resolutions 2139 (2014)
and 2165 (2014), both of which are based on the
reports of the Secretary-General focused on making
humanitarian assistance - including the food and
medicines critical to millions of Syrians - accessible
to Syria across its borders with Turkey and Lebanon.
Throughout this year, we have worked very closely
with the aforementioned partners, as well as with Spain
and New Zealand in recent weeks, and consulted with
all Council members, concerned countries and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to
enable the United Nations and its partners to deliver
humanitarian assistance to Syria, which we hope to do
in the early weeks of next year.

Today's adoption of resolution 2258 (2015),
authored by Jordan, New Zealand and Spain, will allow
the United Nations Verification and Inspection Mission
to operate for at least another year so as to ensure that
humanitarian assistance, including medical aid, reaches
those who most need it in remote and besieged areas.
Regrettably, in the past terrorist groups have hindered
the delivery of such assistance.

The co-authors of today's resolution - Jordan, New
Zealand and Spain - thank all members of the Council
for their cooperation, consensus and partnership, which
have enabled us to adopt the resolution unanimously.
We are very grateful to all for their cooperation, in
particular over the past two years in which we have
been members of the Council, and underscore once
again the importance for the Council to work tirelessly
to ensure that humanitarian assistance continues to
reach Syria, particularly given the millions who are in
dire need of it.

In conclusion, against the backdrop of resolution
2254 (2015), the first and second Geneva communiques
and the Vienna statements, we stress the importance of
reaching a political settlement to the problem in Syria.

