Mr. Bermudez Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Uruguay attaches great importance to
the various situations in the Middle East on the
Council's agenda.

We thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his
informative briefing and, as we have highlighted so
many times, for his ongoing dedicated work. He can
count on Uruguay's support.

Despite the many multilateral, regional and
unilateral initiatives to try to end to the Palestinian-
Israeli conflict, we are still far from reaching a
peaceful and mutually acceptable solution. The two-
State solution remains the only viable option. There
is no plan B to replace it. We must return as soon as
possible to direct negotiations that can elucidate the
outstanding issues. We recognize that this may take
time, but it would be worse to remain bogged down in
the current paralysis and stagnation. To achieve that
goal, the current trends on the ground must be reversed.
Otherwise, it will be extremely difficult for Palestine to
consolidate its State territory.

Uruguay has strong ties of friendship with both
the State of Israel and the State of Palestine. We once
again reaffirm the right of Israel and Palestine to live in
peace within secure and recognized borders in a spirit
of renewed cooperation and free from any threat or
action that undermines peace. We could dwell on the
most recent events - the firing of rockets from the
Gaza Strip towards Israel and the repression to which
it leads or the imminent demolition of the village of
Khan Al-Ahmar. We prefer instead to focus today on
asking both parties to adopt measures and gestures that
would help to de-escalate and alleviate tensions, albeit
gradually. In Uruguay's view, such measures include
the following.

First, the launching of industrial or homemade
rockets from the Gaza Strip must cease, along with
any action that can be deemed terrorism against Israeli
targets. Second, restraint must be exercised so as to
prevent disproportionate repression of demonstrations
or protests taking place in the Gaza Strip. Third, the
settlement policy in the occupied Palestinian territories
must be suspended because settlements are illegal
under international law. Fourth, demolition orders
for Palestinian homes in the West Bank and in east
Jerusalem must be suspended. Fifth, the State of Israel
must be fully recognized and the blockade of Gaza
must end. Sixth, military and civilian prisoners or
their remains must be returned to their relatives as a
minimum show of humanity in the conflict. Seventh,
reconciliation agreements between Fatah and Hamas
must be consolidated for the sake of Palestinian unity.
Eight and no less important, beyond activism, both sides
must be sensitive to the general and urgent needs of
the civilian population. Palestinian and Israeli civilians
are the majority and they want peace. Unfortunately,
political leaders tend to lose sight of that fact. Ninth,
the historical, cultural and religious heritage must be
preserved in an atmosphere of coexistence. If tolerance
reigns, there is room for everyone. Finally, we must
work to develop the economic potential of the region
and solid avenues of cooperation once the conflict
is over.

In conclusion, it is time to begin to move beyond
hatred and its incitement, disillusionment, despondency
and frustration. Seventy years ago, the General Assembly
adopted resolution 181 (II). It can be said that, thanks to
the impetus provided by that international legal action
emanating from this Organization, Israel and Palestine
have consolidated their identity, rights and obligations
as States and as recognized legal entities.

Today as 70 years ago, the international community,
which was sensitive and backed that solution, is still
eagerly waiting. It is harmful and unhealthy for the
leaders to refuse to accept the path that the international
community has selected and backed in good faith. Any
territorial gain or exercise of misunderstood sovereignty
is moot if it is at the expense of peace and prolongs the
misery of the peoples who inhabit that region.

Before concluding, I would like to add a brief
comment on Syria. Uruguay continues to support the
work of the Special Envoy, Mr. Steffan de Mistura, a
tireless negotiator who has acted on behalf of all of us.
After so many years of a conflict of rare intensity that
has brought nothing but death, physical destruction
and damage to the social fabric of Syria, the least we
can aspire to is the formation of a balanced, inclusive
and credible constitutional committee that will lay the
foundation for a new constitution for Syria, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015).

