Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon) (spoke in French):
As everyone can see, we, the four member States of the
Lake Chad basin, are here. My colleagues have asked
me to speak on their behalf on this memorable day on
which the Security Council, several years after issuing a
presidential statement, has now adopted a firm Council
resolution - resolution 2349 (2017). I therefore have
the honour to speak on behalf of the countries of the
Lake Chad region, that is, Chad, the Niger, Nigeria and,
my own country, Cameroon.

At the outset, I would like to thank the Security
Council for its visit from 2 to 7 March to the countries
of the Lake Chad basin, an unprecedented visit by the
Council to that part of the world. It allowed Council
members to understand the real nature of Boko Haram,
which is a nebulous terrorist group, and its actions; the
material and human damage it has done; its extremely
barbaric methods using young people, women and
girls, including the very young, as suicide bombers or
common bandits to burn down schools and villages,
attack markets, steal livestock and ambush soldiers and
civilian populations. The visit was also an opportunity
for members to hear at first-hand from the most
senior officials of the countries concerned and to see
for themselves on the ground the efforts made by our
countries and their peoples at the military, security,
humanitarian, diplomatic and development levels to
counter the Boko Haram.

The resolution adopted today, following the
Council's visit, is an important step forward in
mobilizing the international community in support of
the countries of the subregion in their onerous task of
combating that terrorist sect. As representatives have
already said, we are fighting against terrorism. We
must recall that the shadowy Boko Haram terrorists
were linked with the Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant/Da'esh by the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015), concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities.

Given the humanitarian, economic, political,
social and military costs of this crisis, the countries
of the subregion quickly realized that the military
response, while essential for the security of people and
property, should be part of a holistic approach. In that
connection, the Council saw for itself during its visit
that each State concerned had adopted and implemented
initiatives aimed not only at tackling the root causes,
but also at the disastrous consequences of the current
situation. I am pleased that the resolution refers to the
many development plans designed by the countries of
the region.

In the same vein, Cameroon, the Niger, Nigeria
and Chad have stepped up their cooperation in
several areas to curb and put an end to this situation.
This cooperation can also be seen in the framework
of regional organizations, such as the Economic
Community of Central African States, the Economic
Community of West African States and the Lake Chad
Basin Commission. One of the key outcomes of this
regional cooperation was the establishment of the
Multinational Joint Task Force, which enabled us to
significantly reduce Boko Haram's military capabilities.
We appreciate the multifaceted support provided by our
bilateral and multilateral partners, but as the Council
knows, Boko Haram never sleeps. Although roundly
defeated on the military front, its capacity to do harm
can still be seen in its suicide bombings, abductions and
ambushes. We hope that the adoption of this resolution
will mark the beginning of more decisive support not
only for the Multinational Joint Task Force and regional
initiatives, but also for each of the Lake Chad Region
countries, which, in order to deal with the multifaceted
crises arising from Boko Haram's terrorist actions, are
now forced to reduce their budgetary allocations to
other national sectors, such as education and health.

Eradicating Boko Haram is a pressing need, both
for the countries of the region and for the international
community as a whole. We fully appreciate the substance
of paragraphs 33 and 34 of resolution 2349 (2017),
which invite the Secretary-General to conduct a joint
high-level visit to the region with the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, the President of the World
Bank, the President of the African Development Bank
and the High Representative of the European Union
in order to strengthen the international community's
commitment to implementing the various development
programmes being carried out in the region with a view
to eradicating poverty and destitution, which are the
real deep-seated causes and breeding grounds for Boko
Haram. Once the Council has begun to prepare for that
visit, we stand ready to welcome Council members with
the hospitality that the countries in the Lake Chad basin
are known for.

Cameroon, the Niger, Nigeria and Chad hope that
the report to be submitted by the Secretary-General will
be bold and will make it possible to focus on finding the
most appropriate solutions not only in terms of security
and humanitarian needs, the urgency of which is
beyond question, but also in terms of the deficiencies in
education and training, in resilience to climate change
and in sustainable development, while at the same time
keeping in mind the objective of eradicating poverty.
Then and only then can we be sure that we can, all
together, ensure a decisive victory over the shadowy
Boko Haram terrorists.

We count on the Security Council, just as the
Security Council can fully count on us.

