The Deputy Secretary-General: It gives me
great pleasure to be here today as a witness to the
significant achievements of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone. After listening to both the President and the
Prosecutor speak about the work and goals of the
Special Court, I feel humbled but, at the same time,
encouraged. It was only five years ago that an 11-year
conflict, characterized by indescribable brutality and
the systematic use of mutilation, abduction, sexual
violence and the murder of civilians, came to an end in
Sierra Leone.
The first of its kind, the Special Court was
established on the basis of an agreement between the
United Nations and a Member State - Sierra Leone -
at the request of the Security Council and the
Government of Sierra Leone. This new hybrid model
of international justice sits on the territory where the
crimes were committed and therefore has the unique
advantage of benefiting from both international and
Sierra Leonean personnel.

The Special Court has faced numerous difficulties
and challenges since it was established. However, it is
clear that tremendous efforts have been made by both
dedicated staff members and the people of Sierra
Leone to prosecute those who bear the greatest
responsibility for serious violations of international
humanitarian law committed in Sierra Leone since
30 November 1996.

Like the other ad hoc Tribunals currently in
existence, the Special Court prosecutes war crimes and
crimes against humanity. Uniquely, however, this Court
has also prosecuted all its indictees for the enlisting of
children under the age of 15 to participate in hostilities.
Notably, building on the jurisprudence of the ad hoc
tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, the
Special Court has confronted the tradition of impunity
for gender-based crimes, prosecuting offences such as
forced marriage and recognizing the unique nature of
the sexual crimes perpetrated primarily against women
and girl children during this conflict. For the first time,
sexual slavery as a crime against humanity is being
expressly prosecuted under international law.

Today the Special Court has demonstrated how it
has discharged the heavy responsibility it assumed in
2002 to ensure that perpetrators of crimes are brought
to justice. In so doing, the Court has contributed to the
restoration and maintenance of peace and security in
Sierra Leone. It is often said that one of the Special
Court's greatest accomplishments is its Outreach
Section. It is truly remarkable how the Section has
enlisted the support of the general public in Sierra
Leone and the neighbouring region. The Section
effectively disseminates information about the trials
before the Special Court at the grass-roots level,
providing accessible information on the application of
the basic values of the rule of law in the restoration of
peace.

The Special Court has joined other international
tribunals in offering hope to future generations - a
hope that the rule of law may prevail in the affairs of
men and women of all nations and that those whose
deeds offend the conscience of mankind shall not go
unpunished.

On the day of the opening of the Charles Taylor
trial, the Secretary-General encouraged all Member
States to continue their support and contributions to the
Special Court. Today, the Special Court has
specifically sought the assistance of the international
community through financial support. However, the
Court also requires the cooperation of Member States
in the enforcement of sentences, the relocation of
witnesses and the subsequent residual and legacy
issues that will naturally arise from its activities. I
strongly reiterate those requests.

It is imperative that the international community
continue to generously support the Special Court,
ensuring that it has both the human and financial
resources necessary to conclude its mandate. The Court
constitutes an important milestone in the fight against
impunity. It marks the considerable achievement of
those who have worked selflessly to ensure a lasting
legacy of justice and of the rule of law, of which the
Sierra Leonean people, Africa and the international
community at large can be proud.

