Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): As a small, peaceful, democratic and
demilitarized country, Costa Rica has maintained and
continues unswervingly to maintain an international policy
based on the principle of the rejection of the use of force
in relations among States. This long-standing policy is
grounded in our own national experience and in the firm
conviction that international law is the sole proper and
legitimate instrument for addressing and resolving disputes
among States.

Over the past two years, Costa Rica, as an elected
member of the Security Council, has applied that policy of
principle by actively supporting the use in all cases, as a
matter of first priority, of the means for the pacific
settlement of disputes provided for in Article 33 of the
Charter. Moreover, Costa Rica in that same capacity has
reaffirmed that recourse to the use of force envisaged as an
exceptional measure in Chapter VII, Article 42, of the
Charter falls within the sole and exclusive purview of the
Security Council, and that only this principal organ of the
United Nations can authorize collective action of that kind.

In that context, Costa Rica learned with great and
profound disquiet of the air strikes carried out today by the
United States of America and the United Kingdom against
military installations in Baghdad, Iraq. Given those events,
Costa Rica reaffirms its long-standing position rejecting the
unilateral use of force and insisting on adherence to
international legal instruments.

Nonetheless, Costa Rica wishes to say that over these
two years it has witnessed with frustration the Iraqi
Government policy of defying and ignoring international
obligations. That dangerous conduct by the Iraqi authorities
has undermined full implementation of Security Council
resolutions on the elimination of all weapons of mass
destruction in the possession of Iraq, has sapped
international trust in Iraq's good word, has profoundly
harmed the living conditions of the country's civilian
population, and has driven Iraq's relations with the
international community into a dead end.

Hence, Costa Rica forcefully and vigorously appeals
to Iraq to put an end, once and for all and
unconditionally, to its provocative actions, to fulfil its
obligations without delay in conformity with the terms set
by the Security Council, and to bring its conduct into line
with what it has undertaken to do and with its promises
to the international community.

Costa Rica today appeals to all parties concerned to
do everything in their power to make possible, through
intensive recourse to the law and to diplomacy, a peaceful
solution to the present crisis.

