Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): I would like to join
you, Mr. President, and our colleagues in warmly
welcoming the Foreign Minister. Given the lateness of
the hour I will be brief, but I hope that our brevity will
not be misunderstood as any lack of sympathy or lack
of support for the concerns that are being expressed by
the Foreign Minister.

It is clear that the Council is seized of the
difficult situation that you have described. This week
the Council has met the Secretary-General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization under the Arria formula.
He met with the Prime Minister of Yugoslavia, and
now we are meeting with you. I think we have had
three high-level meetings in one week to discuss the
Kosovo situation. It is, I believe, unprecedented and
indicates how seized we are of the situation.

As you have also heard, Mr. Minister, there seems
to be a high degree of consensus in this room. All of us
condemn the Albanian extremists, and this will be
clearly stated in the presidential statement that we will
be adopting immediately after this meeting.

On our part, we would like to quickly agree with
two points that the Foreign Minister made in his
speech. The first point relates to his statement that the
problem his country is facing requires political,
diplomatic and security measures. The only point we
would add is that it might also require economic
measures as a long-term solution. We were pleased to
note that the Foreign Minister said that the leaders of
the countries of the region have committed themselves
to a new era of development, cooperation and stability
in their relations. We believe that this is the best long-
term formula.

The second point the Foreign Minister made was
that it should not be forgotten that, this time, the
international community is also being seriously tested.
I believe that that is a very clear hint that the Council
faces a serious test on this issue. Certainly, we will
ultimately be judged not by the press statements we
make, nor by the presidential statements we issue, nor
by the resolutions we adopt, but by results on the
ground. We hope that, as a result of the Council's
actions, there will be results on the ground. If there are
not, we hope that the Foreign Minister will keep us
posted.

