Mr. Mladenov: I would like to begin by thanking
the Council for its support, expressed during the
previous briefing, for the work of the Office of the
United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process on the ground under challenging
circumstances, particularly as the situation in Israel
and Palestine, unfortunately, continues to deteriorate.

International focus on the question of Palestine
may have been overtaken by the tragedy in Syria and
events elsewhere in the Middle East, but it cannot be
allowed to be relegated to a secondary problem. Sadly,
settlement announcements, outbreaks of violence and
terror, and the absence of visionary leadership continue
to define the conflict. The inability to see beyond the
horizon and grasp the benefits of resolving the Arab-
Israeli conflict, ending the occupation and establishing
a two-State solution that meets the national aspirations
ofIsraelis and Palestinians alike is a historic loss to the
region as a whole.

The absence of progress has led to growing anger
and frustration among Palestinians and profound
disillusionment among Israelis. It has strengthened
radicals and weakened moderates on both sides. On
9 October, a Palestinian opened fire, killing two
Israelis and injuring six others in a terror attack in
occupied East Jerusalem. Our thoughts and prayers go
out to the families of the victims. Deplorably, Hamas
and many others chose to justify and glorify the attack
and its perpetrator. This tragic incident once again
underscores an undeniable truth - if Palestinians
genuinely hope to reach the long-overdue goal of
Palestinian statehood and an end to the occupation,
that will not be achieved through violence but must be
reached through negotiations.

In separate incidents during the recent clashes in
East Jerusalem, a 20-year-old Palestinian civilian died
after being shot by Israeli security forces. In a separate
incident, an unarmed 12-year-old girl was shot in the
legs by security guards while approaching a checkpoint.

During the reporting period, Israel has continued
with settlement planning, including the recent
promotion of an initial 98 out of 300 housing units
in Shilo, located deep in the occupied West Bank. If
implemented, that plan will drive a wedge between
north and south in the West Bank and jeopardize the
contiguity ofa future Palestinian State. Israeli officials
have defined that move as an attempt to relocate settlers
from the illegal Amona outpost, which has been slated
for demolition by the Israeli Supreme Court. I once
again reiterate the position of the Secretary-General
that settlements are illegal under international law and
undermine the two-State solution.

Adding to that troubling overall picture,
Palestinians have again been unable to exercise their
democratic rights after local council elections in the
West Bank and Gaza were postponed. The political
bickering, mutual accusations, legal challenges and
counter-challenges that followed have left the people
of Gaza and the West Bank feeling more apart. I am
concerned by recent calls by Hamas legislators in Gaza
for the Hamas-led Government to resume its work
in Gaza. Such a step would seriously undermine the
Palestinian Government of National Consensus, and
would also make the reconciliation almost impossible.

In August I raised United Nations and international
concerns about the steady continuation of Israel's
policy of expanding its presence in the occupied West
Bank (see S/PV.7762). Today I wish to discuss another
impediment to a negotiated solution - the security,
humanitarian and political situation in Gaza.

Three deadly conflicts in the past eight years have
eroded both Palestinian beliefthat Israel wants anything
more than Gaza's destruction and Israeli conviction
that their Palestinian neighbours desire peace. Fuelling
Israeli fears is that Gaza is controlled by a de facto
authority whose overtly anti-Semitic charter equates
resistance with violence, rejects peaceful solutions and
aspires to the obliteration of Israel.

Israel accuses Gaza militants of continuously
seeking to obtain money and military materiel, including
by smuggling in civilian boats, concealing components
for the production of rockets inside commercial
shipments and diverting construction materials from
needy beneficiaries. The United Nations has been
informed by Israel of at least 41 serious smuggling
attempts that have been intercepted since the beginning
of 2016. Although the United Nations lacks the capacity
to independently confirm the smuggling accusations,
if accurate, they show the intention to continue attacks
against Israel.

Last week I travelled to Gaza, where I witnessed
warehouses empty of construction materials, as the
reconstruction process is significantly slowing down
due to limitations of imports. No new residential
reconstruction projects have been approved since
March. In the recent days the approval of some 80
projects, some of which had already been started, has
been revoked by Israel. I saw residential buildings
half built. I met with families whose projects had been
cleared for reconstruction, yet had not received any
cement for months. I heard from those who had tried
to navigate the web of rules governing the import of
materials considered dual-use, with no luck or response.
I stand with the people in Gaza who have suffered
through conflicts and closures and who continue to
face unimaginable suffering.

At current rates, it will take more than one year
to catch up with the backlog of approved projects, and
years to address the full housing and reconstruction
shortage in Gaza. Those trends are worrying, and I call
on the parties to the Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism to
recommit once again to ensuring its smooth operation.
Failing to do that will put in question the viability of
the mechanism and undermine the precarious calm
in Gaza.

According to some estimates, in the past decade
militants in Gaza have fired nearly 16,000 rockets and
mortars at Israel. Approximately 200 projectiles have
been fired since the end ofthe last conflict. While since
2014 there has been little damage or injury, there is an
ever-present risk of a potentially catastrophic escalation
that neither wants nor needs.

During the 2014 conflict, Israel discovered and
destroyed 14 tunnels crossing into its territory, and
in May of this year detected and destroyed two more.
Allow me to reiterate the joint position of Russia, the
United States, the European Union and the Secretary-
General as stated in the Quartet report (S/2016/595, annex). The illicit arms build-up and militant activity
in Gaza must be terminated. Such actions increase the
risk ofa new escalation of hostilities, keep thousands of
people on both sides of the border under constant threat
of attack, and undermine the reconstruction process.

The militant threat, however, should not serve as an
excuse for Israel to indiscriminately harm civilians in
Gaza. In addition to the continuing severely restrictive
closures, I am concerned by persistent incursions and
the almost daily firing and shelling by Israeli forces
into Gaza along the fence and at sea.

The vicious cycles of conflict in Gaza must end.
To do so control of Gaza must return to a Palestinian
Government of National Unity, committed to the
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) principles.
The closures on Gaza must also be lifted in line with
resolution 1860 (2009). Palestinians and Israelis both
deserve the right to lead normal lives in freedom and
security, with their human rights respected.

Since the takeover of Gaza by Hamas in 2007,
40 per cent of Palestinians living in the occupied
territory are beyond the control of the legitimate
Palestinian Government. Israel's closure policy and
severe restrictions have brought social, cultural and
economic interaction between Palestinians in Gaza and
the West Bank to a virtual standstill. The widening
chasm that has emerged between both parts of the
occupied Palestinian territory undermines the national
State-building enterprise and threatens the very
viability of establishing a united Palestinian State as
part of a two-State solution. Unity is therefore critical.
I encourage Hamas to pursue reconciliation with Fatah
in line with PLO principles and to consider redefining
its political stance.

Turning briefly to the Golan, I remain concerned
by the volatile situation which undermines the 1974
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and jeopardizes
the ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic. It remains critical that the parties to the
Disengagement Agreement maintain liaison with the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force, in the
first instance, and exercise maximum restraint and
refrain from any action that could escalate the situation
across the ceasefire line and the already volatile
regional environment.

Turning back to the question of Palestine, let me
conclude my briefing by issuing two warnings. First,
to those who believe that the people of Gaza can be
punished by closures or by imposing restrictions on
the entry of construction materials that are vital for
the economy, they should know that the temperature in
Gaza is rising. Allow me to also be abundantly clear to
those who build tunnels, fire rockets, smuggle military
materiel, profit from the black market or seek to
create confrontation. Their actions are dangerous and
irresponsible. They are stealing from their own people
and risk the lives of Palestinians and Israelis alike.

We must all avoid the risk of sleep-walking into
another violent conflict, at a time when the region as a
whole needs moderate forces to unite and stand up to
the radicalization that we see in the Middle East.

Gaza's future is inextricably linked to the future
of the Palestinian people and their goal of establishing
an independent State. But the longer its population
continues to suffer under the intolerable weight of
Gaza's current dynamics, the further Palestinians are
from realizing that objective, and the closer we are,
unfortunately, to the next major escalation.

