Mr. Josselin (France) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I wish first of all to thank you for the
opportunity that you are giving the Security Council to
raise the delicate issue of the accumulation and spread of
small arms and light weapons in the world. I also want to
commend the Secretary-General for the very interesting
statement he has just made.

For some time, the Security Council, in the exercise
of its responsibilities for international peace and security,
has studied this phenomenon that is closely related to
changes in the nature of the conflicts afflicting many
countries. More than inter-State conflicts, in which regular
armies fight each other, and which still exist today but
now constitute only a small proportion of current
conflicts, we are now witnessing the proliferation of
internal conflicts in which more or less well-structured
and well-commanded armed groups confront each other,
in which the distinction between combatants and civilians
is blurred and in which the actions of guerrillas replace
frontal combat. This type of conflict lends itself best to
small arms and light weapons, which are adaptable to the
terrain and to the kind of action undertaken, and are easy
to transport, distribute and conceal. We must note that,
paradoxically, for several decades small arms, especially
landmines, have taken many more victims, both civilian
and military, than so-called arms of mass destruction.

This new challenge requires an approach that is both
multifaceted and integrated. There is no single
comprehensive solution. We must act in many fields -
disarmament, peacekeeping, peace-building, the struggle
against large criminal organizations, holding producer and
user States responsible - and all this must be done at all
levels: global, regional and national.

I would identify several types of action, ranging
from the stage of prevention to that of post-conflict
peace-building. The first concerns the search for better
control of legal transfers of small arms and light weapons,
which is linked to the development of international
cooperation in the struggle against illicit traffic. First we
must ensure strict respect for arms embargoes established
by the Security Council, not only to bring pressure to
bear on the warring parties, but also to try to stem the
flow of weapons that fuels these conflicts.

 

Secondly, the strengthening of national legislative and
regulatory frameworks regarding transfers of small arms
and light weapons must be given our full attention. If States
assume their responsibilities and their duties in this field, it
will be possible to achieve better control of all legal
transfers and stricter enforcement of arms embargoes.

Then there is adoption of regional codes of conduct or
voluntary moratoriums on these transfers - I have in mind
the one recently decided upon by the members of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) - which could induce States to display greater
restraint in this field and make this activity somewhat more
moral. For its part, in December 1998 the European Union
adopted a joint action regarding its contribution to the fight
against the destabilizing accumulation and spread of small
arms and light weapons. Furthermore, the European Union
has adopted a code of conduct on arms exports, which can
make the issuance of export authorizations dependent on
standards of respect for human rights.

Lastly, the conclusion of the protocol on the
manufacture of and illicit traffic in firearms, ammunition
and other related material, in addition to the future United
Nations convention on combating transnational organized
crime, should provide us with an appropriate instrument
with which to struggle against a particularly disquieting
form of criminality.

But we must do more. The holding by 2001, under the
auspices of the United Nations, of an international
conference on the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects, which Switzerland has proposed
to organize in Geneva, will give us that opportunity. France
hopes to make an important contribution to that work. We
are even now considering the drafting of an international
convention with legally binding effect relating to one
specific aspect of this question: the marking of small arms
and light weapons. This type of provision would make us
better able to monitor the production and circulation of
small arms, to ensure better security conditions in the
management of stockpiles and to trace the channels used in
trafficking.

Secondly, the management of post-conflict situations
is another side of the struggle against the effects of the
destabilizing accumulation and spread of small arms. This,
specifically, means a number of things. First, it means
collecting weapons that are often kept by combatants and
that are spread among a civilian population, neutralizing
them and preferably destroying them to prevent them from
falling back into the hands of warring factions, as,
unfortunately, we have seen recently. Such programmes
must be systematically reflected in peace agreements that
put an end to internal conflict and be included in
peacekeeping operations mandates.

It means that arms collection activity must be
accompanied by the demobilization of ex-combatants and
their reintegration into civilian life.

I might add that it is the responsibility of all
concerned to ensure that these operations are given
adequate human, technical and financial resources. In this
respect, voluntary contributions, while they do make it
possible to start up an operation quickly, cannot be the
sole source of financing. They are, by definition, too
uncertain. Furthermore, in many cases, disarmament and
demobilization programmes are prepared but cannot be
completely carried out because of lack of resources.

In the same connection, we must give particular
attention to the plight of child soldiers, who are often the
last to lay down their arms and the first to take them up
again. We must restore meaning to their lives.

Last year the Security Council adopted resolution
1209 (1998) on illicit arms flows in Africa. Africa, while
very vulnerable, is not the only continent concerned. In
the Balkans, in South Asia and in South-East Asia we
have again recently seen the ravages caused by the spread
of small arms in zones of tension and conflict. It is
therefore necessary and timely for the Security Council to
deal with all aspects of the problem. That is the object of
the presidential statement to be made today. My country
hopes that this will be a new element to mobilize the
international community to action to stem the effects of
the accumulation of, and destabilizing traffic in, small
arms.

