Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, I would like to congratulate you,
Madam President, on the assumption of the important
role of President of the Security Council. I would also
like to thank the delegation of the United Kingdom for
their effective work in presiding over the Council last
month.

We welcome the participation in today's debate of
the United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti, President
Bill Clinton. We expect the results of the active work
by Mr. Clinton as Special Envoy to be a significant
breakthrough in mobilizing international assistance and
investment for social and economic recovery in Haiti.

We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Annabi, for his substantive
briefing on the recent developments in Haiti, and for
introducing the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/439) on the activities of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). We agree
with the main observations and recommendations of
the report. We are grateful to the Prime Minister of
Haiti, Mme Michele Duvivier Pierre-Louis, for her
informative statement, and we wish her success in
addressing the problems that face Haiti.

Positive results have been achieved in the
stabilization process in Haiti. The political process has
been revitalized, the State authority has been
established and senatorial elections have been held.
Thanks to the joint efforts of the Haitian police and
United Nations peacekeepers, it has been possible to
stabilize the security situation.

However, the situation in the country remains
fragile. A constant threat to stability comes from the
grave social and economic situation. MINUSTAH is
playing an important role in maintaining law and order
in the country. United Nations peacekeepers helped to
restore State control during the civil unrest, provided
the necessary support to the Haitian people in dealing
with the aftermath of the hurricanes and ensured the
safe holding of senatorial elections.

The United Nations is making great efforts to
revitalize the political process in Haiti and to establish
a national dialogue and reconciliation. We should note
the good cooperation established between the Mission
and Haiti's law enforcement agencies. United Nations
peacekeepers and the Haitian police are working
together effectively on securing sea and land borders
and on fighting crime.

Providing assistance to Haiti in re-establishing
and reforming the bodies responsible for security is a
principal area of the activities of the United Nations
Mission. Russian citizens have been deployed in the
Mission. We expect that that progressive plan to
increase the personnel of the Haitian National Police
will make it possible to begin the process of gradually
transferring responsibility to the Haitian police.

We note the significant contribution by regional
organizations of Latin America and the Caribbean in
providing comprehensive assistance to the Haitian
people. We support the 2009-2011 consolidation plan
for Haiti drawn up by the Secretary-General. We are
convinced that the consistent implementation of the
provisions of that plan will contribute to incremental
advances in the priority areas for Haiti.

The main responsibility for establishing peace
and security in Haiti lies with the Government and
people of the country. However, it is clear to us that, at
this time, they still need international assistance.
Therefore, we support the extension of MINUSTAH's
mandate for one year until October 2010, as
recommended by the Secretary-General. The Russian
Federation will continue to support the people and
Government of Haiti in building a stable and
democratic State.

