Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would first like to thank
Special Envoy Ould Cheikh Ahmed for his briefing
this morning and for his efforts to politically end the
conflict in Yemen, which is in a situation going from
a very bad - even desperate - situation to an even
worse one. I would also like to thank Mr. O'Brien,
Mr. Graziano da Silva and Mr. Ghebreyesus for their
valuable contributions today. I would like to say to
them that we pay tribute to the United Nations and
all humanitarian actors present on the ground, who
continue to deliver live-saving support to all those in
need in what are very challenging circumstances.

This morning's briefings warrant action on several
fronts. First, we all know that a political solution is the
only way to end the conflict in Yemen. We therefore
reiterate our continued support for the Special Envoy
and his efforts for a resumed United Nations-led
political process and a durable cessation of hostilities.
As the Security Council stated in presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/7 one month ago, it is time for the parties
to resume peace talks and engage constructively and in
good faith. As we all know, women's participation in
such talks is crucial.

Secondly, as our briefers clearly reminded us
today, the humanitarian situation in Yemen has further
deteriorated since we last met (see S/PV.7974), and that
was only six weeks ago. It is a man-made tragedy, and,
as often happens in cases of armed conflict today, the
civilian population and children in particular are the
main victims. We are horrified by the rapid spread
of cholera to all of Yemen's governorates. It has been
described as the worst cholera outbreak in the world.
When Mr. O'Brien spoke to the Council on 30 May
(see S/PV.7954), only a little more than a month ago, he
reported 55,000 suspected cases, and it has now surged
to over 300,000. That increase is as much as 15,000 to
20,000 per day with more than 1,700 associated deaths
in just 75 days.

We also know that Yemen is on the brink of famine.
Yemen is the largest food-insecurity emergency in the
world, and more than 17 million people - approximately
two-thirds of the population - are food insecure, while
6.8 million Yemenis are living just one step away from
famine. We therefore need to immediately deliver funds.
We call on donors to deliver on their commitments
made at the pledging conference for Yemen held in
Geneva on 25 April, which we, the Swedish and Swiss
Foreign Ministers, hosted together with the Secretary-
General, but even the commitments we and others made
in Geneva will not be sufficient to meet the enormous
humanitarian needs. We therefore call for additional
funding to the United Nations humanitarian response
plan for Yemen.

Finally, in addition to more funding, there is an
urgent need for greater humanitarian access and full
respect for international humanitarian law. We repeat
the Council's call on all parties, issued last month in
presidential statement S/PRST/2017/7, for safe, rapid,
unhindered and sustained humanitarian access and for
facilitated access to essential food, fuel and medical
supplies throughout the country, in accordance with
international humanitarian law. It is important to keep
all of Yemen's ports functioning, including Hudaydah
port, as a critical lifeline for the humanitarian response.

The parties now need to comply urgently with
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
We remain concerned about the high number of deaths
of civilians and the damage to civilian infrastructure,
particularly medical facilities and personnel. Medical
facilities are needed not only to give medical care,
but also to fight cholera. As the United Nations
Humanitarian Coordinator in Yemen stated recently,
"we must give hope to millions of Yemenis by showing
that the world is not indifferent to their suffering".

