The Secretary-General: Allow me to start by
thanking the Council's wise President, Mr. Danforth,
for bringing us here to Nairobi. It was his initiative that
brought us here.

It is fitting that the Council should have taken the
rare and highly symbolic step of meeting here in
Africa. The Council has come to Nairobi primarily to
discuss the situation in Africa's largest country, the
Sudan, which, unhappily, is also one of the countries
most affected by conflict. The Sudan is a country with
very deep-rooted and complex divisions. In large parts
of the Sudan, particularly in the south, the people have
lived for decades in fear, hunger and misery, both
natural and man-made.

Now, at last, the Naivasha peace process, so
skilfully and patiently led by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), offers real hope:
real hope of an escape from that long nightmare and a
chance to transform the Sudan's political landscape and
system of governance. The Sudan's people have waited
far too long for such a transformation. It is high time to
conclude the negotiations between the Government of
the Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement and Army (SPLM/A) and start
implementing what has been agreed.

The effects of delay are felt not only in the south,
but elsewhere too, as conflict spreads to more parts of
the country. The devastating conflict in Darfur is
glaring evidence of this. That is why the time for
decision is now. There is no time to waste. The speedy
conclusion of the north-south talks would not only help
curb the further spread of conflict to other parts of the
country; it would also serve as a basis and a catalyst
for the resolution of existing conflicts.

Indeed, as I have indicated to the Council on
earlier occasions, the Government of the Sudan and the
SPLM/A have already agreed to use the relevant
principles of the Machakos Protocol as a basis for
resolving conflicts in other regions, including Darfur.
Those principles were the basis for settling the
conflicts in the Nuba Mountains, Southern Blue Nile
and Abyei.

Another reason to conclude the Naivasha process
speedily is that this would lead to the formation of a
new coalition Government in Khartoum with a new
army, one that would include the SPLM. I cannot help
feeling that the formation of a north-south Government
in the Sudan would add weight and impetus to the
search for a settlement in Darfur and elsewhere and
that it would have an important confidence-building
effect.

That is why, today, I re-emphasize to the
members of the Council the importance of an early
conclusion of the Naivasha process. I am confident that
the Council will, in its collective and private
discussions with Vice-President Ali Othman Taha and
Mr. John Garang, as well as in the draft resolution that
it will be adopting on the Sudan, encourage the parties
to sign a comprehensive peace agreement before the
end of the year. I particularly welcome the Council's
promise of full support for the implementation of such
an agreement and its offer of incentives to encourage
the parties to do what is right for their people and the
country.

Both the Government and the SPLM. should be
urged to work together to resolve other conflicts
besetting the Sudan immediately after signing their
agreement, as indeed they should, as members of the
new Sudan Government. This kind of approach is
needed because there is a general issue of governance
in the Sudan. It is not just a problem of north and
south, Darfur or Beja. Such conflicts cannot be dealt
with in a piecemeal way. A comprehensive approach is
required. Naivasha offers a good basis on which to
build. The Sudanese from around the country and
across the spectrum, including political parties, civil
society and exiles, are going to have to come together
to discuss the future of the Sudan and how the country
should be governed.

While it is proper that the Council should place
its primary focus, in these particular meetings, on the
conclusion of the north-south talks, the conflict in
Darfur also demands its attention. The terrible situation
in Darfur has been brought about mainly by deliberate
acts of violence against civilians, including widespread
killing and rape. Because of the magnitude and
intensity of the human suffering in that region, the
conflict remains a burning concern. The Council's draft
resolution rightly reflects that concern.

It is encouraging that, in Abuja, the parties to the
Darfur conflict have signed protocols on the
humanitarian situation and on security. They must be
urged to abide strictly by those agreements. The parties
should also be pressed to maintain the momentum
towards reaching agreement on political and other
outstanding issues. The Council should send an urgent
message to that effect to both the Government and the
rebel parties, and to all States that have particular
influence on them.

Meanwhile, I regret to report that the security
situation in Darfur continues to deteriorate, despite the
ceasefire agreements signed earlier in N'Djamena and
now reinforced in Abuja. Both the Government and its
militias, as well as the rebel groups, have breached
these agreements. This has made humanitarian work by
the United Nations and our partners precarious and
difficult, if not impossible. Many innocent civilians
continue to suffer as a result. This cannot be allowed to
continue. The strongest warning to all the parties that
are causing this suffering is essential. We cannot allow
impunity.

When crimes on such a scale are being
committed, and when a sovereign State appears unable
or unwilling to protect its own citizens, a grave
responsibility falls on the international community, and
specifically on the Security Council. So far, the
Council has chosen to exercise that responsibility by
demanding compliance with its mandatory resolutions,
while giving its full support to the efforts of the
African Union (AU) mediation and monitoring
mission.

The African Union mission has begun to deploy
and has already achieved some successes. It now needs
to move rapidly into the areas of Darfur where people
are most in danger; and for that, it urgently requires
means of transport, as well as financial and logistical
support. All Member States with the capacity to do so
must give the maximum possible support, so that the
AU force, including the essential police contingent, can
deploy swiftly and mount an effective operation on the
ground.

I have spoken of the need for a comprehensive
approach. Only a comprehensive political solution for
the Sudan as a whole offers any longer-term hope of
stability in the country. It is therefore time to convince
the Government and its future partner, the SPLM, to
conclude the Naivasha process and quickly involve all
Sudanese stakeholders - the Government and armed
and non-armed opposition groups - in a national
conference to discuss the future governance of the
country. We - the United Nations, the African Union
and the whole international community - should join
our efforts to help plan and support that process. The
United Nations, through my Special Representative and
other technical staff, in partnership with members of
the IGAD Partners Forum and the Troika, will continue
to do everything we can to assist the IGAD mediation
and the parties to bring about a quick and successful
completion of the Naivasha negotiations.

For far too long, war has inflicted misery and
untold human suffering on the Sudan, distorting the
allocation of scarce resources, discouraging foreign aid
and scaring away both Sudanese and foreign investors.

Peace can turn this situation around. Already, we
in the United Nations are preparing a major,
multidimensional operation to help build a lasting
peace, and many donor countries have indicated their
readiness to help the Sudanese realize a tangible peace
dividend. But first, agreements must be finalized and
signed. The engagement of the Council must impart a
new sense of urgency to all the Sudanese parties.

By meeting here in the region, the Council has
made an important gesture of solidarity and support for
the peoples and institutions of the new Africa. It is
good that the Council has chosen to work through
African institutions, provided that members do not
forget that the Council itself retains primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, as laid down in the Charter. What is
happening in the Sudan - and in other African
countries on the Council's agenda, such as Cote
d'Ivoire - is a grave challenge not only to Africa but
to all humanity. The United Nations must be fully
engaged in helping to meet it.

