Mr. Thein (Myanmar): It is my honour to speak
at this important debate on countering the narratives
and ideologies of terrorism. My delegation would like
to associate itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Thailand on behalf of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).

We congratulate Egypt on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of May and for
convening this debate. My delegation welcomes the
adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2016/6 today.

Myanmar is equally concerned with the violence
and instability across much of the Middle East and
North Africa, as well as the possibility of encountering
such incidents in other parts of the world, including our
own region. Myanmar resolutely opposes any act of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. We share
the sympathy for the victims of the terrorist acts that
took place today in Iraq and for all of the victims of the
narratives of terrorism in our time.

Today, we are facing an extraordinary form
of terrorism that surpasses all traditional and
non-traditional threats across the globe, as it intends to
shake up the very fabric of civilized society and inject
its violent and extreme ideologies into the hearts and
minds of younger generations. On the extremist front,
terrorism preys on vulnerable groups, such as women
and children, and even soft targets such as medical
facilities and health-care personnel. Terrorism ignores
geographical and ethical boundaries.

The Internet and social media have also made it
possible to spread the ideologies of terrorism and hatred
in ways that are difficult to follow. Therefore, States
must take every possible measure to track and deter
such cyberelements on the Internet, using appropriate
technological means. We must also holistically
address the root causes, in addition to security and
law enforcement retaliation, including by way of the
political, social and economic means necessary to
prevent such threats.

The role of women is important in participating in
the decision-making process on all political, economic
and social platforms. Children and young people must be
cared for and provided with educational opportunities
throughout their lives, with a view to knowing right
from wrong, as a form of preventive immunization
from the threats of terrorism and crime.

Myanmar enacted its domestic law on combating
terrorism on 4 June 2014. We criminalized various
forms ofterrorism, as well as the financing and abetting
of terrorism. We have also enacted domestic legislation
to suppress the financing of terrorism and money-
laundering, as well as legislation to provide mutual legal
assistance in criminal matters. On the structural side,
the necessary central control bodies and the Financial
Intelligence Unit have also been established.

Myanmar reaffirmed its dedication to peace and
security and to countering terrorism by signing the
Additional Protocol to the International Atomic Energy
Agency Safeguards Agreement in 2013 and by ratifying
the Biological Weapons Convention in 2014 and the
Chemical Weapons Convention in 2015. National
implementation measures, in cooperation with the
relevant treaty bodies and technical support agencies,
such as the Chemical, Biological, Radiological and
Nuclear Risk Mitigation Centres of Excellence, are
being carried out pursuant to the provisions of the
relevant Conventions.

Myanmar respects and adheres to all resolutions
of the Security Council, in particular those relating to
the fight against terrorism, and cooperates fully with
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and other concerned
United Nations agencies. We welcome the vision of
establishing a comprehensive international framework
by 2017 to address the terrorism issue. To date, Myanmar
is a State party to 11 international instruments relating
to countering terrorism.

We are an active member of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Convention on
Counter Terrorism, which represents the collective
regional efforts being made by ASEAN countries since
2011. We continue to work on the new ASEAN Work
Plan 2016-2020 and seek to strengthen access to quality
educational systems. The Special ASEAN Ministerial
Meeting on the Rise of Radicalization and Violent
Extremism in October last year strengthened regional
cooperation on that issue.

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1) and the 2015 Paris
Agreement on Climate Change have created guiding
frameworks for Member States to implement and build
strategic partnerships, which could help us create
societies that do not tolerate any act of terrorism while
leaving no one behind in achieving those goals. The
role of the United Nations is relevant to the preventive
measures that can be taken to sustain peace and prevent
violent extremism. The United Nation system can help
Member States by providing technical assistance in
national capacity-building so that they can address
those issues in the areas and according to the priorities
indicated by Member States.

In conclusion, Myanmar would like to reaffirm
its commitment to engaging with the various agencies
of United Nations, the United Nations system itself
and Member States in order to address the threats of
terrorism through available frameworks, including the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the
Secretary-General's Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism (A/70/674) and other relevant frameworks.

Myanmar will continue to work actively with
regional and international partners to prevent and
counter terrorism. Terrorism transcends religious,
ethnic, cultural and territorial boundaries, as it threatens
peace, stability and the development of all humankind.

