Mr. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express our deepest condolences
to the Government and people of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia for the passing of His Royal Highness Crown
Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud, and we ask God,
in his everlasting mercy and forgiveness, to welcome
him. We also express our condolences to the people
and Government of Turkey for the earthquake that
struck there recently.

I am honoured to address the Security Council on
behalf of the Group of Arab States. I would like to
congratulate you, Madame President, on your
successful presidency of the Security Council. I would
also like to thank you for convening this open debate
and Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his briefing.

Over the past decades, the Council has convened
many meetings like today's, at which a large number of
statements were made to confirm the importance of
reaching a peaceful, just, comprehensive and
sustainable solution to the Palestinian question and to
achieve peace and stability in a region of great
importance to international peace and security.
However, the Palestinian question is still awaiting that
solution, although we all know that it was proposed a
long time ago and that it consists of the establishment
of two independent States, living in peace side by side
on the basis of the 1967 borders, in accordance with
the Arab Peace Initiative, relevant United Nations
resolutions and the Road Map. It is time we did what
we all know must be done.

More than 60 years ago in 1947, the General
Assembly adopted its resolution 181 (II) on the
establishment of two States in Palestine. Since then,
however, Israel has only occupied more Palestinian and
other Arab territories and continued to pursue
repressive policies against the Palestinians, violate
their inalienable rights and use excessive force against
them. Despite all the efforts to hold peace talks and the
support that the peace process has received, the
outcome of that process remains hostage to the
intransigence of the Israeli side, which has continued
policies that do not express a sincere desire for peace,
contradicting its claims to the contrary.

That is demonstrated by the insistence of the
current Israeli Government on expanding illegal
settlements in the West Bank, including building new
housing units in East Jerusalem, knowing that those
actions undermine the basic conditions for resuming
genuine peace negotiations and that they constitute a
challenge to the will of the international community,
including resolutions of the Security Council.

At the same time, the Arab countries have shown
a sincere desire for peace with Israel, as evidenced by
the Arab Peace Initiative. The Initiative, however, has
been met only with continued intransigence by
successive Israeli Governments opposed to creating
real conditions for a successful peace process. That
pattern has led to several wasted opportunities, the
most recent of which was the opportunity that arose
last year after the resumption of direct peace talks
between the two sides, strongly encouraged by the
Government of the United States.

Today, we have a real opportunity to take a major
step towards a practical solution for the Palestinian
cause. It would require serious political will and the
Security Council to assume its Charter responsibility
for the situation in the Middle East, including the
question of Palestine. The Arab Group hopes that the
Palestinian demand for full membership in the United
Nations, which was referred to the Council a month
ago, finds support among all members of the Council
and that Palestine will enjoy the Council's
recommendation for full membership.
The Palestinian State has so far been formally
recognized by more than 130 countries -the vast
majority of States Members of this international
Organization - and States continue to join the list
every day. Member States are becoming aware that
there is no choice but to realize the right of
Palestinians to determine their own destiny and to live
in dignity and security within the borders of their
independent State, also given the fact that the
institutions of the Palestinian Authority are ready to
manage a viable State, as confirmed by relevant
international organizations.

The Palestinian side has stressed that its
application for membership does not necessarily mean
closing the door to negotiations with the Israeli side.
Indeed, we are anticipating the resumption of
negotiations soon, in accordance with the call by the
Quartet in its statement of 23 September (SG/2178).
We underline again that the success of negotiations will
hinge on putting a stop to the construction of
settlements and to all repressive Israeli policies and
practices towards the Palestinians, and on Israel lifting
the unjust, inhumane and illegal siege imposed on the
whole population of Gaza.

We stress our firm rejection of the illegal
measures taken by Israel in occupied East Jerusalem
and its attempts to change the Arab identity,
demographic composition, legal status and religious
character of the city. We stress that all such attempts
are null and void and without legal effect. On the other
hand, it is incumbent upon the Israeli authorities -
who often speak of the need to address security and
terrorism - to act to put an end to the crimes and
terrorism perpetrated by some Israeli settlers, which
have become intolerable.

Last week saw an agreement to exchange
prisoners between the Israeli and Palestinian sides. We
call for the release of all remaining detainees
languishing in Israeli jails, especially minors, women,
the elderly and the ill.

One obstacle to sustainable peace in the Middle
East that threatens stability in our region is Israel's
nuclear policy and its refusal to accede to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT),
cooperate with the International Atomic Energy
Agency, and subject its nuclear facilities to
international monitoring. The Arab Group emphasizes
the importance of holding a conference to establish a
zone free of nuclear and other weapons of mass
destruction in the Middle East in 2012, pursuant to the
action plan adopted at the 2010 NPT Review
Conference (see NPT/CONF.201050 (Vol. I)). Parallel
progress must be maintained in terms of content and
timing, leading to the full and total elimination of all
weapons of mass destruction in the region - nuclear,
chemical and biological - in accordance with the
action plan. The Conference should yield concrete
results on the road to achieving that goal.

The Israeli occupation of Lebanese territory and
the Syrian Golan continues. Here we would like to
highlight the relevant General Assembly resolutions
and Security Council resolution 497 (1981), which
emphasizes that the Israeli decision to annex the Syrian
Golan is null and void and without legal effect. The
Arab Group calls for Israel to withdraw from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967
and to stop its aggressive practices, which violate
international humanitarian law, in particular the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949.

The Arab Group demands that the international
community compel Israel to implement its obligations
under resolution 1701 (2006) so as to prevent
violations of Lebanese sovereignty by land, sea and air;
to withdraw from the northern part of Ghajar village,
Shaba'a farms and Kfar Shuba hills; and to accelerate
the demarcation of the Blue Line.

