Mr. Blok (Netherlands): I thank the presidency for
organizing today's meeting on the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, a subject that is at the top of our
agenda. It is an issue of vital importance to peace and
security in the region and to the world at large. We
have come a long way in the past year. As Henry Ford
once said, "coming together is the beginning, keeping
together is progress, working together is success".

The Security Council has worked hard to achieve
success by optimizing its strengths, striking the right
balance between two main ingredients - pressure and
dialogue. I think it is safe to say that we have succeeded,
thanks to our unity, which is a vital component that
should never be underestimated. Our show of unity was
of course brought about by the gravity of last year's
events: the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
multiple ballistic-missile tests and nuclear tests and its
development of a nuclear and missile programme that
posed a threat to regional and global security and to the
global non-proliferation regime. These events gave us
a shared sense of purpose and highlighted the urgent
need to bring the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea back to the negotiating table.

In response, the Security Council has worked
together tirelessly and with clear results. It adopted
three far-reaching resolutions - resolutions 2371
(2017), 2375 (2017) and 2397 (2017) - within the space
of five months, resulting in the most comprehensive
sanctions regime ever. This forced Pyongyang to come
back to the negotiating table and created a window
of diplomatic opportunity that still exists today. The
Republic of Korea and the United States seized this
opportunity in 2018 by organizing high-level talks.
President Moon, President Trump and you, Secretary of
State Pompeo, rose to the occasion, and we are grateful
for that.

The international community should maintain the
pressure until the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
meets its international obligations. We should never
underestimate the power a united Council can wield.
A united Security Council will keep up the pressure on
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. A united
Council will ensure full and effective implementation of
sanctions and pave the way for complete, verifiable and
irreversible denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
And a united Council will support diplomatic talks and
reassure the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
that we are willing to engage with it once it has taken
concrete steps towards denuclearization.

To achieve that, a well-functioning Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) is
essential. It can play a key role in taking action against
sanctions Violations and in minimizing the humanitarian
impact. As Chair of the Committee, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands will continue to do its utmost to this end.
We need a Panel of Experts that can do its job in an
effective, independent and secure manner.

Last but not least, we need to be persistent. It will
not be easy, but no effort should be spared in seeking
a peaceful solution. There is simply too much at stake.
The Democratic People's Republic of Korea continues
to evade sanctions in order to advance its nuclear-
weapon programme, often with the possibly unwitting
assistance of other countries. The Democratic People's
Republic of Korea might still be moving towards a
deployable nuclear intercontinental ballistic missile.
There is still a risk of the further spread of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction
and delivery-system technology. This would further
undermine the global non-proliferation regime.

In conclusion, let me say this 4 failure is not an
option. Failure benefits no one. If we act in unison and
fully implement the Security Council's resolutions,
historic breakthroughs are possible. The world is
watching, and the Council must act in unity, because
unity is strength.

