Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to warmly welcome
Ambassador Jones Parry, the new Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom to the United
Nations. We wish him every success in his new post,
and we assure him that we wish to continue the sincere
and productive cooperation enjoyed by our two
delegations.

We would also like to thank Ambassador Munoz,
the Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999), for his second oral briefing
made in accordance with the provisions of resolution
1455 (2003). We also wish to thank him for the
detailed and valuable information he has presented
regarding the efforts made and the work undertaken by
States to implement the provisions of resolutions 1267
(1999), 1333 (2000), 1390 (2002) and 1455 (2003). We
congratulate him on the Committee's excellent work
and thank him for his personal efforts, and those of his
Mission, aimed at ensuring the success of the
Committee's work.

The important work done by the Committee
represents an important preliminary step in the
international efforts to combat terrorism. Those
activities are of particular importance to the work of
the Security Council, as demonstrated by the series of
resolutions adopted by the Council to confront this
major challenge facing the international community.

The points mentioned by Ambassador Munoz
regarding the progress made by the Committee clearly
demonstrate the enormous amount of work done by the
Council, its members and the Secretariat to implement
the provisions of the Council's resolutions. I would like
to take this opportunity to dwell on some of the points
he touched upon.

I should first like to take up the issue of
substantive reports. As we have heard, a number of
Member States have indeed submitted reports. The
guidelines adopted by the Committee have facilitated
the preparation by States of their reports, as well as the
Committee's study of those reports. We therefore
encourage Member States that have not yet done so to
submit their reports to the Committee as soon as
possible. In that regard, I would like to point out that
the Syrian Arab Republic has submitted all the reports
requested of it.

Secondly, I would like to mention the
Committee's consolidated list. Thanks to the efforts
that have been made, that list has become more
valuable, more detailed and easier to read.

Thirdly, I wish to refer to the Monitoring Group.
The Group's reports have become more valuable,
focused and extensive. They are also more credible and
transparent, while also more clearly reflecting the
information transmitted to the Monitoring Group from
every source, including from the Group's own field
missions. Given the importance of the Group's work
and the need to provide it with assistance to carry out
its mission, the Committee has, in cooperation with the
Secretariat, strengthened the Monitoring Group by
making several recommendations to assist it in
reviewing and analysing the reports submitted by
States pursuant to resolution 1455 (2003).

Fourthly, I wish to mention the subject of
cooperation between the Committee and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee.

The Committee is faithful to the provisions of
paragraph 3 of resolution 1455 (2003), which stresses
the need to improve the exchange of information
between the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC), established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001). That has been reflected in the
meetings and contacts of the experts of both
Committees. Accordingly, we must take note of the
joint communique adopted by both Committees to clear
up any ambiguity or misunderstanding with regard to
the work that they have done concerning Member
States.

Countering international terrorism is a major task
that requires planning and genuine cooperation among
States. For the United Nations to ensure that that
campaign is taking place, it is not enough to say that
we are combating terrorism; in fact, a number of
measures have been adopted and actions undertaken to
fight terrorism. However, the international community
must energetically condemn terrorist acts. Here, I do
not wish to go into detail. As I just said, what has been
done is indeed important, but much remains to be done.
Obtaining information and making it available to
Member States is a long, difficult task that requires
cooperation among the Secretariat, the Security
Council and both Committees so that the
Organization's responsibilities are clear with regard to
the maintenance of international peace and security.

