Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous and Deputy Foreign
Minister Ludin for their statements this morning. I
would also like to convey the deep gratitude of my
Government for the dedication and leadership that the
outgoing Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Staffan de Mistura, has given to the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
over the past two years. I would also like to welcome
the incoming Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Jan Kubis.

The year 2011 has been a difficult one for
Afghanistan. The deliberate insurgent strategy of
targeted - and high profile - attacks, concerns about
Afghanistan's financial and economic capacities, and
doubts in the minds of some Afghans about the
international community's continued presence have all
dented public confidence among the Afghan people. It
is therefore important that this year is ending with a
number of significant and more positive indicators of
progress, in particular renewed activity by the National

Assembly, agreement on the International Monetary
Fund programme for Afghanistan, the Loya Jirga in
November and the Bonn Conference on 5 December.

The Bonn Conference has further consolidated
the foundation for the international community's long-
term commitment to Afghanistan, which must extend
beyond 2014. It has successfully laid the groundwork
for the concrete discussion of two key issues in coming
months, namely, the sustainment of the Afghan
National Security Forces and coordinated development
assistance, particularly at the Tokyo conference in July
2012. It is only concrete discussion, not just
discussion, that can be decisive. We were pleased that
Bonn explicitly acknowledges the crucial and
increasing role to be played by the United Nations in
Afghanistan as we move beyond security transition to
the more fundamental task of economic transformation.

We welcome the Secretary-General's most recent
report (S/2011/772*) on UNAMA and agree with its
key findings. We support the establishment of a broad-
based peace dialogue and endorse the Secretary-
General calls for concerted efforts to forge a national
consensus, including with civil society, to achieve that.
The renewed focus on engagement at the provincial
and district levels that has emerged from the Loya Jirga
is particularly welcome. Renewed efforts at the
reintegration of insurgents who are prepared to lay
down their weapons remain especially urgent.

It will also be important to sustain the momentum
of the regional process agreed in Istanbul in November,
including through confidence-building measures. We
applaud Turkey's determination to help in that regard.
Effective cooperation among Afghanistan's neighbours
is an indispensable part of the international
community's efforts to strengthen Afghan institutions,
and thereby to promote regional stability.

It will also be essential to ensure a transparent
and suitably prioritized economic and development
agenda and, most critically, for the international
community to develop long-term partnerships with
Afghanistan beyond 2014 that underwrite that effort.
UNAMA's efforts will be vital, including through its
honest-broker political role between the Government of
Afghanistan and the international community and its
support for the strengthening of electoral processes and
the rule of law in Afghanistan. Ensuring the success of
the 2014 and 2015 elections will be vital to solidifying
democracy.

It is obvious that cooperative action will be

essential to meet Afghanistan's economic challenges,

particularly through prioritization and reform by the

Afghan Government and by the international

community actually delivering its commitments on-
budget as part of the Kabul process.

My own country, Australia, is itself in the top 10
of Afghanistan's development partners, and we will
remain so. Afghanistan is currently the fourth largest
recipient of Australian aid, and we will be increasing
that over coming years. As the ninth largest troop
contributor, our commitment remains serious. We will
see through our primary mission of training the Afghan
National Army 4th Brigade in Uruzgan province,
consistent with the security transition, and we will
keep under consideration a continued Australian
Special Forces presence in Afghanistan beyond 2014, if
that is the wish of the Afghan Government. We
announced in November that we will begin
negotiations on a long-term framework agreement with
Afghanistan, for cooperation well beyond 2014. That
will include development assistance as well as security,
political, economic and cultural cooperation.

In conclusion, following the Bonn and Istanbul
Conferences, we hope that the message from the
international community, including from my own
country, to the Government and people of Afghanistan
is clear: we are not only with you as the transition
process unfolds, but we will also be with you long after
2014, as you put Afghanistan on the path from
transition to transformation.

