Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Allow me, first of all, to thank Mr. Kenzo
Oshima for the detailed briefing he has given us today
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

The problem of protecting civilians in armed
conflict remains one of the most burning issues of our
day. In our view, it is only normal that the Security
Council, which bears the primary responsibility under
the Charter for the maintenance of international peace
and security, should give its constant attention to this
issue. Security Council resolutions 1265 (1999) and
1296 (2000) have established a solid basis for the
Council's work in this area. We are grateful to the
Secretary-General for his reports on the protection of
civilians, which outline for the Council areas in which
to make further efforts to protect civilians. We are also
grateful for the Secretariat's contribution in preparing
the aide-memoire.

Russia's position on this question is based on the
need for an effective and adequate international
response to any crises, including humanitarian ones.
The international community has developed an
excellent legal basis for the attainment of the noble
goal of protecting the lives and health of persons not
directly engaged in armed conflict. We have in mind
primarily the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and the
Additional Protocols thereto. Unfortunately, we must
point out that there is a large gap between written law
and the practical implementation of these vital norms.

Russia knows from bitter experience what war is
and the suffering it causes to people. Many of the
victims of armed conflict are women, children and
elderly persons. Representatives of political and
humanitarian missions of the United Nations and of
non-governmental organizations perish in the flames of
these conflicts. We support strengthening coordination
and cooperation between the Security Council and the
International Committee of the Red Cross and other
bodies that, under the division of labour that has
emerged, are reacting to a variety of challenges in the
humanitarian sphere.

Of course, in all circumstances the primary
responsibility for ensuring that civilians are spared the
brunt of conflict lies with the parties to an armed
conflict. In our view, the draft aide-memoire drawn up
by our experts is a practical step in protecting civilians.
We hope that it will provide valuable assistance to the
Security Council in complying with its peacekeeping
mandate.

In conclusion, allow me to thank you and your
delegation, Mr. President, for having taking the
initiative to hold this meeting, and for the great
contribution you have made in the preparation of the
aide-memoire.

