Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are glad to welcome you, Mr. Minister, as
you preside over this meeting, at which, at your
initiative, we are considering a very important and
multi-faceted topic.

We are also grateful to the Secretary-General for
his statement and to our distinguished guests, Mr. Nabil
Elaraby, Mr. Jamsheed Marker and Sir Brian Urquhart,
for their contributions to our work. I hope that their
experience, their wisdom and the arguments that they
have made for the pacific settlement of disputes and
conflicts will help us to find the right solutions in these
difficult times.

The Security Council has an important role in the
pacific settlement of disputes and armed conflicts. It is
an organ with a unique international legal legitimacy. It
has a wealth of experience in peacekeeping and in the
mobilization and coordination of international and
national resources, and it has a broad range of
resources in this area. I would like to say that this
machinery can also be fully applied to the prevention
of conflicts and disputes. In that context, it is important
to observe the generally accepted norms and principles
of international law, including the decisions of the
Security Council, which lay the foundation for a
comprehensive strategy to prevent disputes and armed
conflicts. Foremost among those decisions is resolution
1366 (2001).

We also note what is taking place now in the
General Assembly. The final touches are being
scrupulously applied to a draft resolution on the same
question. The approval of the draft presidential
statement prepared for today's meeting at the initiative
of Pakistan is intended as a substantial contribution to
our joint efforts in carrying out one of the major
Charter tasks of the Organization as a whole and in
particular of the Security Council: the peaceful
settlement of disputes and armed conflicts and the
prevention and elimination of threats to peace and
other violations of the peace.

Recent events have once again reaffirmed the
importance of all States showing political will and
consistently being guided by the tenets of the Charter.
These include the observance of the principle of the
non-use of force in international relations, except as
provided for in the Charter. The international
community has a heightened understanding of the
nature of current threats and challenges and of the
imperative need for multilateral efforts to overcome
them, and of the unprecedented scope of the tasks
facing the United Nations and its Security Council in
this sphere. As never before, the Council's ability to
produce a quick and adequate response to emerging
threats to global peace is of enormous significance. An
important role is played by the Secretary-General and
his representatives in various regions and by special
missions of the Security Council, as well as by regional
organizations.

A vital and capable United Nations is a key
instrument for collectively working on joint measures
to confront the threats on the basis of strengthening and
developing a collective security system as set forth in
the Charter. In this connection, the main responsibility
for the settlement of disputes lies with the parties
themselves, and no one can replace them in that regard.

The Russian Federation, fully realizing its
responsibility as a permanent member of the Security
Council, is prepared to continue to promote the search
for ways to enhance the effectiveness of the Council's
efforts to prevent, and find peaceful settlements to,
disputes and armed conflicts. The evolution of peace
processes will dictate the need to develop norms of
international law and adapt them to new realities.
However, such work must be carried out collectively,
on the solid base of the United Nations Charter, which
will enable us to come up with agreed-upon decisions
whose legitimacy would not be in doubt. We are firmly
convinced that the future lies in collective efforts to
solve problems of general concern to today's world.

