Ms. Lajous (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): The
recent Security Council mission to Ethiopia and Eritrea
continued the Council's practice of assessing on the
ground the situations that form part of its programme
of work. We are gratified that all members of the
Council participated in the mission, because this
demonstrated their shared determination to send a
message of support for the peace process between those
two countries.

The high points of the mission were undoubtedly
its meetings with the Prime Minister of Ethiopia, Mr.
Meles Zenawi, and with the President of Eritrea, Mr.
Isaias Afwerki. The constructive exchanges with both
leaders strengthened the relationship between their
countries and the United Nations. In particular, the
meetings emphasized the positive contribution of the
United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
(UNMEE) in building confidence between the two
parties.

The Security Council mission was successful
because it met its goal: to assure the leaders of the two
countries that the United Nations will continue to
support them during the phase of implementing the
forthcoming decision of the Boundary Commission.

It is our hope that the Ethiopian and Eritrean
authorities will keep open channels of communication
with UNMEE and with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in order to set up a system for
cooperation, which will be indispensable in the
implementation of that decision. We reiterate our
conviction that the adoption of unilateral measures
could affect the sense of trust that both parties must
evince. We appeal to the guarantors, witnesses and
facilitators of the Algiers Agreements for their support
in this crucial phase ofthe peace process.

One of the clearest conclusions of the Security
Council mission was that the international community
needs to support both countries' demining efforts,
especially during the physical demarcation of the
borders. We hope that donors will contribute to the
special United Nations trust fund to remove the
antipersonnel mines that pose a serious threat to the
peoples of Ethiopia and of Eritrea.

We want to convey our appreciation to the
personnel of UNMEE for their effective efforts to
coordinate with the agencies of the United Nations
system and the non-governmental organizations that
carry out projects to meet the humanitarian needs of
the refugees and internally displaced persons in the
Temporary Security Zone. Talks between members of
the Security Council mission and representatives of
such organizations enabled us to grasp the dimensions
of their work and of the challenges that they daily face.

One pending task for the Security Council is to
define an exit strategy for UNMEE once the physical
demarcation of the borders is complete, taking special
care to preserve the progress made in the gradual
process of normalizing relations between Ethiopia and
Eritrea. Here, in addition to the United Nations, the
Organization of African Unity and subregional
organizations have a major role to play.

Let me conclude by thanking the Government of
Norway and Ambassador Ole Peter Kolby for the
support and leadership that made it possible for the
Security Council mission to Ethiopia and Eritrea to be
a success.
