Mr. Uhomoibhi (Nigeria): My delegation would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his latest report on the
situation in Liberia (S/l995/279), which constitutes the
basis of the draft resolution now before the Council. To a
large extent, the report gives an accurate account of the
current state of play in Liberia, which, unfortunately, is not

 
encouraging. It underscores the political, military and
humanitarian tragedy that continues to plague Liberia.

My delegation has expressed at every opportunity its
disappointment over the fact that the Liberian factions and
political leaders have not been able to agree on the
composition and chairmanship of the new Council of
State, as provided for in the Agreement they themselves
signed in Accra, Ghana, on 21 December 1994, despite
the considerable efforts of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) to broker an agreement
between the Liberian parties.

In Nigeria's continuing efforts to help resolve the
deadlock in the Liberian peace process, my Government
has agreed to host a summit of West African leaders in
Abuja in May. It is hoped that this summit will result in
a more effective harmonization of the policies of the
States in the subregion and produce a concertation of
efforts to assist the Liberian parties in achieving peace
and national reconciliation in their country.

However, our efforts can only complement those of
the parties themselves. If we are able to create a climate
conducive for negotiations, it is for the parties to seize the
moment and make the necessary compromises for peace.
My delegation is in full agreement with the
Secretary-General when he observes in his report that:

"The continuing rivalry and intransigence of the
faction and political leaders have taken a heavy toll
on the Liberian people". (5/1995/279, para. 28)

It is only proper that those responsible for the
continuing impasse in the Liberian peace process reflect
seriously on the personal responsibility they bear for the
deaths of hundreds of thousands of their people, the
destruction of their country's economy and infrastructure
and the destabilizing effects on their neighbours, the most
pertinent case being Sierra Leone.

The present draft resolution is right in extending the
mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia (UNOMIL) until 30 June 1995, as recommended
by the Secretary-General. It is also appropriate to call on
all Liberian parties once again to implement the
Akosombo and Accra Agreements by re-establishing an
effective cease-fire and installing the Council of State.

Violations of the arms embargo imposed under
resolution 788 (1992) have in the past not helped the
collective efforts to promote peace in Liberia. Therefore,

 
my delegation supports any well-thought-out measures
aimed at tightening the current regime limiting the flow of
arms into the country. In this connection, we endorse
paragraph 3bis of the draft resolution, which does exactly
that, and establishes a Committee of the Security Council
to monitor compliance with the arms embargo regime, and
we hope this will have a salutary effect on the situation.

For these reasons, my delegation will vote in favour
of the draft resolution.

