Mr. Kamilov (Uzbekistan) (spoke in Russian): I
should like to thank you, Madam President, for giving
me this opportunity to speak here today. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
and Ambassador Brahimi for detailed briefings on the
situation in Afghanistan. I also thank them for their
prodigious efforts with respect to the whole matter of
Afghanistan.

Uzbekistan is a close neighbour of Afghanistan
and naturally a stable and enduring peace in that
country is in the vital interest of our country. We want
to develop very friendly relations with our neighbour
Afghanistan. In a short statement, I would like to
comment on just a few aspects of the situation.

First, there is humanitarian assistance.
Uzbekistan, together with the United Nations, has
already delivered humanitarian assistance to
Afghanistan, making available our infrastructure in a
city near our common border. We are deeply convinced
that it is extremely important to think not just about
humanitarian aid; today we also must consider the
economic reconstruction of the country, about which
much has already been said here. We believe that the
Afghan people's aspirations are fully justified. During
the Afghan conflict, a whole generation has grown up
knowing nothing in life but war. Humanitarian
assistance is necessary, but we also must think about
education, about the minds and spirits of the people of
Afghanistan.

Naturally, we support the broad programme for
the restoration of peace in Afghanistan as proposed by
Ambassador Brahimi. We also support one of the most
important principles in this whole process, a central
unifying role for the United Nations.

In our View, the events now occurring in
Afghanistan bear witness to the correctness of the
strategy adopted by the international community for the
destruction of the terrorist infrastructure in Afghanistan
and the establishment of a firm and lasting peace there.

I would like to confirm once again that
Uzbekistan has cooperated and will continue to
cooperate fully in the "six plus two" group and with the
world community. We will continue to do everything
we possibly can to ensure that peace returns to
Afghanistan, ensuring in turn the integrity and security
of the country. Today, we have a unique chance to
bring peace and stability to the region. In our View, that
is one of the most important factors in the entire
system of international security today.

