Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of August, and by thanking Ambassador Joy
ngu and the Nigerian delegation for their work over
the past month. I thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
for his briefing and Mr. Jeremic', Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, for his statement. We also thank
Mr. Skender Hyseni for his statement and his presence
here today.

Mexico has closely followed the process of
adapting the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to the
situation on the ground, and we welcome the fact that
coordination with the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) has been strengthened, in
keeping with resolution 1244 (1999). That resolution
provides the international legal framework for
achieving a settlement of the situation in Kosovo and
contributing to stability in the Balkans.

The Mexican delegation reiterates that the
presence of UNMIK is of crucial importance in
supporting essential efforts to improve the situation in
terms of security, the promotion of stability, respect for
human rights, dialogue and reconciliation, and support
for humanitarian and development assistance.

In this regard, we commend the work of UNMIK
and emphasize the importance of its continued support
to minority communities in Kosovo and contribution to
reconciliation, dialogue and regional cooperation. We
welcome efforts to develop a strategic integrated
framework for the United Nations system for Kosovo
in order to identify priorities and contribute to
maximizing the impact of the work of the Organization
in the region, in particular in terms of development and
economic recovery.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/401)
notes that the general security situation remains calm,
but that incidents of an inter-ethnic nature that have
occurred in northern Kosovo, although isolated in
nature, do not generate an atmosphere of stability. On
the contrary, they encourage violence and inter-
community hatred. As mentioned during the debate of
6 July (see S/PV.6353), such incidents of violence are
to be condemned, and it is important therefore to
appeal once again to the parties to combat impunity
and take measures to bring the perpetrators of such acts
to justice.

My delegation believes it essential that, in
designing and implementing programmes for the
integration of minorities, the parties give priority to
protecting human rights and maintain open and
cooperative dialogue with UNMIK.

On the subject of displaced persons, we remain
concerned by the low number of voluntary returns -
523 - which is lower than the number of forced
returns - 756.

Measures to promote reconciliation, tolerance and
respect for human rights are also crucial to efforts to
reverse the trends towards discrimination against and
harassment of displaced persons and refugees upon
their return. In this regard, we encourage UNMIK to
strengthen its coordination with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, local
institutions and other humanitarian organizations
working on the ground.

In this context, we would like to reiterate that,
pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999), particularly in
terms of international humanitarian law, international
human rights law and the rights of refugees, all parties
must establish an environment conducive to the safe,
voluntary and non-discriminatory return of all those
who wish to do so. It is also crucial to redouble efforts
to provide the basic health, housing, educational,
protection and employment services that will
contribute to development, security and the integration
of populations upon their return to their places of
origin.

The issue of missing persons is one of the major
challenges to the process of reconciliation between the
communities of Kosovo. The numbers are alarming.
For instance, the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) estimates that around 1,800 individuals
are still missing. We therefore appeal to the parties to
seek to clarify the whereabouts of the missing, with the
support of UNMIK, EULEX and the ICRC.

Regarding the rule of law and human rights, we
commend the cooperation between UNMIK and
EULEX aimed at strengthening the justice institutions
of Kosovo in order to ensure that the civilian
population, including the minority communities, have
full access to justice and that the victims receive
appropriate attention. We also recognize the
importance of promoting the rule of law to combat
impunity, ensure accountability, encourage the
reconciliation process between the communities, and
make amends for the human rights violations
committed in the past.

My delegation recognizes the essential role
played by UNMIK, alongside EULEX and the local
authorities, in protecting the cultural and religious
heritage of Kosovo. We also commend UNMIK's
efforts to promote the reconstruction of Serb cultural
and religious heritage sites, including the
supplementary memorandum signed by UNESCO.
These measures are positive steps towards restoring
confidence between the communities.

In conclusion, I refer to the recent advisory
opinion issued by the International Court of Justice
regarding the accordance with international law of the
unilateral declaration of independence in respect of
Kosovo. Like other delegations, we have learned with
interest of the results of the Court's work. Mexico is
now analysing the implications of the advisory opinion
with the attention that such an important issue
deserves. Nevertheless, we believe it important to point
out that the advisory opinion limits itself strictly to the
formal aspects of the declaration of independence as an
act of promulgation, without taking up underlying
issues.

As we have noted today and reiterated on
previous occasions, resolution 1244 (1999) is the
international legal framework for resolving the
situation in Kosovo. We believe it critically important
for the parties involved to opt for peaceful means and
dialogue to reach a political settlement on Kosovo's
definitive status and achieve a mutually acceptable
solution that promotes respect for the rights of all
communities and the maintenance of peace and
security in the Balkans.

