Mr. Sabyeroop (Thailand): At the outset, I should
like to express my delegation's sincere appreciation
to you, Mr. President, for convening this important
debate on the topic of United Nations peacekeeping. I
also thank you for the concept paper provided to assist
our discussions today (S/2013/4, annex). I thank the
Secretary-General for his remarks earlier this morning
and would like to align my statement with the statement
delivered earlier by the Permanent Representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Since the first United Nations peacekeeping mission
deployed more than 60 years ago, we have seen time
and time again how critical and pivotal peacekeeping
has been to the maintenance of international peace and
security. And as peacekeeping has evolved to keep up
with the changing landscape of conflict and diplomacy,
we have increasingly realized that modern-day
peacekeeping can and should also play a meaningful
role in the process of conflict prevention, peacebuilding
and sustainable development. Peacekeeping
missions can and must assist in creating an enabling
environment to help countries establish the foundations
of peace, reduce the risk of backsliding into conflict,
and establish conditions for recovery and long-term,
sustainable development.

The international community must continue to
strive in this direction to enable peacekeeping missions
to continue to play and enhance their meaningful role.
We have already seen what has worked in this respect
and where we believe we should focus more of our
efforts.

First and foremost, peacekeeping missions must
be conducted in accordance with the principles and
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations and
relevant Security Council resolutions. They must also
adhere to the three basic principles of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, namely, consent of the
parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except in
self-defence and defence of the mandate. Peacekeeping
operations must also respect the principles of
sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-intervention in
matters within the domestic jurisdiction of States. My
delegation wishes to stress the importance of providing
clearly defined mandates, a unified line of command,
and an efficient use of existing resources.

Secondly, we see the need to explore further the
concept of peacekeepers as early peacebuilders. As the
resolution adopted today rightly points out,

"while primary responsibility for successful
peacebuilding lies with governments and relevant
national actors, multidimensional peacekeeping
missions bring comparative advantages in early
peacebuilding" (resolution 2086 (2013), para. 9).

My delegation fully supports this point. We must
strive for the early formulation of integrated and
coherent approaches to post-conflict development,
based on host-country priorities, through dialogue
and close cooperation. In this regard, troop- and
police-contributing countries must also be included in
the dialogue at every stage of peacekeeping operations,
particularly at the early stages of mandate drafting,
where we feel that they can contribute experiences and
lessons learned in the field.

My delegation firmly believes that the promotion
and protection of the interconnected issues of peace
and security, development and human rights provide for
long-term solutions, not only for conflict resolution but
also for preventing conflicts from arising altogether.
Guided by these principles, Thailand's peacekeepers in
Timor-Leste, Haiti, Darfur and the Gulf of Aden have
made it a point to also assist in local and community
development, sharing experiences and best practices
in agriculture, health and water resource management
with local villagers.

Thailand is continually adapting and strengthening

its peacekeeping roles and capacities to best suit current
developments in peacekeeping and field requirements,
in line with the mandate of each United Nations
mission. Presently, we are considering the participation
of small numbers of specialized troops - such as army
engineers, medical units and female officer units 4 in
peacekeeping missions. They are trained to understand
the unique situation of post-conflict populations, to
fully respect different cultures and beliefs and to serve
as consultants, engineers and friends.

(spoke in French)

My delegation also welcomes the reiteration in the
resolution of the importance of the gender dimension in
peacekeeping, in particular with regard to promoting the
participation of women in conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding. We highly appreciate the
Secretary-General's call for stronger action to meet the
challenges to integrating women at all levels and within
the United Nations structure itself.

For its part, in September 2012 Thailand established
a subcommittee on women and the promotion of peace
and security under the National Committee on the Policy
and Strategy for the Advancement of Women. Thailand
has always attached great importance to supporting
the role and impact of women peacekeepers in the
field. However, through the creation of this national
mechanism and the recently established National
Women's Development Fund, we have focused greater
attention on formal commitments to empowering Thai
women and on further developing our capacities and
contributions in this regard.

Coherence and coordination at all levels are
critical. Troop- and police-contributing countries
need to understand how to continue to train our own
peacekeepers in the most appropriate manner. It is
therefore critical to enable our peacekeepers in this
way to continue to play increasingly meaningful roles
towards the ultimate goal of helping to create the pillars
and foundations of sustainable development in conflict-
affected States.

We wish to see the further strengthening of
cooperation and consultations among troop- contributing
and police-contributing countries, the Council, the
Secretariat and all relevant United Nations agencies
in more open and frequent consultation processes. I
also assure the Council of my delegation's readiness
to continue to engage in any future deliberations on
peacekeeping missions and activities.

