Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): First and foremost,
allow me to commend you, Mr. President, on the
holding of this important open debate on peacebuilding
in Africa. I also thank you for your presence here at
the helm of the presidency of the Security Council. We
express our gratitude for the briefings by Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon; Kenya's Cabinet Secretary for
Foreign Affairs, Ms. Amina Chawahir Mohamed, in her
capacity as Chair ofthe Peacebuilding Commission; and
Mr. Smail Chergui, Commissioner for Peace Security
of the African Union.

We Venezuelans share a close bond with Africa,
and as such we cannot but reflect on what is happening
on the continent. Following the end of colonialism,
Africa has benefited from unprecedented economic
growth and has made substantial progress in meeting
the Millennium Development Goals, especially
those concerning education, women's empowerment
and combating HIV/AIDS and other diseases. The
continent has also made progress in strengthening its
governance institutions at the national, subregional and
regional levels. Nevertheless, Africa still faces major
challenges, such as reducing poverty, inequality and
exclusion, as well as in promoting sustainable economic
growth through its own model. Like Latin America
and the Caribbean, Africa suffers from the scourge of
organized crime, drug trafficking and trafficking in
small arms and light weapons and human beings. That
is in addition to the armed conflicts that still affect
some countries in the region.

Against the backdrop of that situation, it is fair to
ask ourselves the extent to which Africa's colonial past
weighs on its future. The truth is that for most Africans
European colonialism was exploitative, violent and
illegal, and the subsequent development of Africa is
tied to that legacy. By the logic of domination, colonial
Powers came to enslave, plunder resources and exploit
existing differences between various leaders and
communities for their own benefit. Groups that had
historically been united were separated, and vice versa.
One of the biggest mistakes was not to understand
that tribal identities were only one of many by which
Africans identified themselves, such as ancestry, clan
and occupation. The result was the drawing of artificial
boundaries lacking a proper sense of nationhood.

The legacy of exploitation still weighs on African
peoples, while a colony - Western Sahara - still
suffers the indignities of oppression. Africa today
continues to be the victim of armed intervention by
Western Powers, such as took place in Libya in 2011,
which resulted in great destabilization and uncertainty
in the entire region, including the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons among terrorists and
Violent non-State actors. We should also mention the
negative impact of unilateral sanctions against African
countries, as is the case of the sanctions imposed by
the European Union, as well as the fact that more than
60 per cent of United Nations sanctions committees
focus on the region.

Instead, what we should do is to promote
cooperation, dialogue and respect for the principles
of sovereignty and the self-determination of peoples.
The great task facing African leaders is to continue,
as they have been doing for many years, to change the
system they inherited from the former colonial Powers
on which they were dependent, and pave a truly African
path forward in the full exercise of their sovereignty
and self-determination of their people.

To confront those challenges, the African countries
have gradually developed a peace and security
architecture of their own. The African Union therefore
represents the legitimate forum for dealing with African
affairs. Through its institutions, such as the Peace
and Security Council, the Continental Early Warning
System, the Panel of the Wise, the African Standby
Force, the Peace Fund and its policy frameworks, such
as the African solidarity initiative and that of post-
conflict reconstruction and development, the African
Union has laying the groundwork for peacebuilding
in the continent. It is our responsibility to support the
African Union as the legitimate organization of the
region, as well as relevant subregiongal forums.

Since 2005, the Peacebuilding Commission has
been assisting African countries emerging from conflict
to overcome the destructive legacy of war. Currently,
six African countries are on the Commission's agenda.
Furthermore, 18 of the 33 countries that benefit from
the Peacebuilding Fund are on the African continent.
Support for these entities is geared towards, inter alia,
modernizing the State, building administrative and
management capacity, building democratic institutions,
restoring the rule of law, providing public services,
creating jobs, reducing poverty and reintegrating
vulnerable groups.

As noted by presidential statement S/PRST/2016/12,
adopted today, the purpose of peacebuilding must be to
build institutional and human capacities enabling States
to overcome the root causes that have led or could lead
to further conflict. The support of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund has helped
some States to leave behind the legacy of war and
embark on the path towards peace and development. In
other cases, their efforts have been insufficient and old
conflicts have broken out again. With the adoption of
resolution 22 82 (2016) and General Assembly resolution
70/262, the United Nations has taken a meaningful
step forward to a more comprehensive understanding
of peacebuilding that emphasizes conflict prevention
and the primacy of politics in the peaceful settlement
of disputes. Through the implementation of these
resolutions, we hope to leave military intervention
forever behind to make way for approaches aimed at
achieving political solutions and developing nations.

One critical area that has lagged in the work of
United Nations peacebuilding is the mobilization of
international resources and the creation of national
resources for sustaining peace. The mobilization of
resources is vital to deliver the dividends of peace,
including job creation, providing public services,
building strong political institutions and providing
justice. Without the ability to mobilize and generate
resources sustainably and to provide them equitably,
a State emerging from conflict will encounter serious
difficulties in legitimizing its mandate, achieving
reconciliation and establishing ties of trust with its
people.

Many African countries, including those emerging
from conflict, have immense natural resources that
could generate significant national revenue, but they
cannot always take full advantage of them. Among the
main causes for that are the predatory attitudes of many
international companies that, in their quest for oil,
gold, diamonds and other precious materials, interfere
politically and militarily in the region for their own
benefit, take advantage of the fragility of countries
in or emerging from conflict, and illegally exploit
their natural resources. African countries have the
right to manage their national resources to the benefit
of their own people, and their sovereign use of those
resources is key to ensuring that Africa can achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/ 1).

If we are to curb the illegal exploitation of natural
resources and regularly and effectively manage those
resources, States emerging from conflicts must create
the capacity and expertise to negotiate fair contracts
and understand the accounting practices of national and
international concerns with which they interact, on the
understanding that those natural resources belong to the
State and are for the enjoyment of the whole population
and not just a few.

Moreover, many countries in such circumstances
have trouble monitoring and controlling illicit financial
flows and tax evasion by these international mining
concerns. This challenge extends beyond one, two
or three States; it is a problem that requires a legal
international framework to counter those trends
and reform banking secrecy laws and international
corporate tax regimes. Efforts to build peace in Africa
and the rest of the world - particularly those to help
States emerging from conflict to generate their own
national resources - cannot overlook those injustices
or fail to address them.

In conclusion, we believe that the main functions of
the Peacebuilding Commission and Peacebuilding Fund
must include building national capacities to combat
the exploitative practices of international extractive
corporations, while promoting an international
financial system that is more fair and transparent. Only
through social justice will we have sustainable peace
in Africa.

