Mr. Pemagbi (Sierra Leone): The delegation of
Sierra Leone wishes to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of May 2005. We extend to you and to the
other members of the Council our deep appreciation for
selecting for public debate a subject that is closer to our
heart than we can express. The choice of post-conflict
peacebuilding as the subject of this debate is an indication
of the significance that your delegation and the Council
attach to that critical aspect of the peace process. We view
this debate as a prelude to an opportunity for more
exhaustive discussion of the Secretary-General's
proposed Peacebuilding Commission.

As all are aware, Sierra Leone is a post-conflict
country. Naturally, we are delighted to participate in
this debate, and we are doing so from the perspective
of our practical experience and our expectations.

The post-conflict phase of a peace process is
supposed to address the issues that generated the conflict
and to lay the foundation for lasting peace and
development. It is a period for reconciliation, confidence-
building and the rebuilding of institutions, especially
those for the administration of justice, democracy, human
rights and accountable governance. It is a period for a
country in war-to-peace transition to reflect on the past
and to cultivate attitudes that will facilitate the avoidance
of the mistakes that culminated in the conflict.

But it is also a phase that is characterized by
expectations for a better standard of living, justice,
human rights, freedom, rapid development, social
services and, of course, participatory governance. After
all, it is the lack of access to these that generates most
conflicts in the world today. The fear and anxiety of
post-conflict countries stem from a failure to deliver on
those expectations, and, often, many post-conflict
countries have neither the resources nor the capacity to
deliver on them.
Unfortunately, moreover, post-conflict peace
management or consolidation has never been a priority
of the international community. Making sure that the
guns are silent, but not making sure that they are silent
forever, has been erroneously interpreted as peace.
Hence the bitter experience of frequent reverses in
peace efforts.

The problem of abandoning post-conflict
countries to struggle with their own fate has been aptly
described by the Secretary-General as "a gaping hole in
the United Nations institutional machinery"
(A/59/2005, para. 114). That is why Sierra Leone
welcomes - and with great expectations - the
Secretary-General's recommendation to create a
Peacebuilding Commission charged with the
responsibility of promoting assistance for post-conflict
countries to transit from war to lasting peace.
Naturally, we look forward to the establishment and
operationalization of the Commission, particularly in
the light of the withdrawal from my country of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL).

It is common knowledge that the United Nations
has scored major successes in Sierra Leone and that
UNAMSIL is on the verge of completing its
withdrawal. We appreciate the role of the United
Nations organs and agencies in our post-conflict
recovery, but we wish that no "gaping hole" existed
and that the United Nations were more involved in this
phase. In spite of that, and in spite of many difficulties,
Sierra Leone is proud of its rapid progress in many
areas, including rebuilding the justice system and
strengthening the rule of law; raising new, better,
trained, disciplined and efficient security forces;
restoring social services; rehabilitating the road
infrastructure; capacity-building; governance reforms;
reviving the economy; reintegrating ex-combatants;
and resettling the displaced population. We owe those
developments to the generosity of the international
community and our bilateral friends. We thank them
all. But we need more - much more - to sustain the
momentum for achieving lasting peace and stability.
That is the most reliable guarantee against sliding back
into conflict.

In conclusion, it is fair to say that the United
Nations is at a crossroads, poised for fundamental
reform in response to identified weaknesses and
strengths and to challenges imposed by its ever
expanding functions. One of those challenges is armed
conflict in all its aspects and manifestations. Now we
have the unprecedented opportunity to take decisions
on reforms and on the creation of new institutions for
the elimination of armed conflict and, more urgently,
for helping countries emerging from conflict to achieve
lasting peace and stability. It is much better and much
cheaper to invest in post-conflict peacebuilding, which
is also preventive in nature, than to expend scarce
resources on relapses that can be prevented.

