We would like to thank Special Envoy of the Secretary-General Huang Xia for this insightful briefing. We also want to take this opportunity to table a few comments. First of all, the regional dynamics have shown certain positive developments, but there is a risk of losing momentum. As coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is not sparing the region, widespread contagion, coupled with weak health infrastructure, will certainly adversely affect the region's development as well as the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. There are other challenges, too. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the presidential coalition has seen increased tension, with a potential impact on needed reforms. In Burundi, the modalities and outcome of upcoming elections also remain crucial for the region's stability. At the same time, the humanitarian situation and the human rights context remain dire. Secondly, in the light of the foregoing, we reiterate our strong support for the Secretary-General's request in 2019 for a new peace and security strategy for the Great Lakes region. We are keen to support and participate in the open and transparent development of such a strategy, which should be sped up. The recent creation of a new contact coordination group is proof of continued momentum. As the COVID crisis has already led to the postponement of a session of the Regional Oversight Mechanism in Kinshasa and the Great Lakes Trade and Investment Conference in Kigali, we should be cautious not to lose momentum. Let us work proactively on a new regional strategy, looking at the full spectrum of the framework agreement. Such a strategy should look not only at economic development, which is undoubtedly of crucial importance, but also - and foremost - at the root causes of conflict, including human rights violations and the illegal exploitation of natural resources. Thirdly, the COVID-19 crisis will make working in and reporting on the Great Lakes region more challenging. The current report contains an impressive overview of activities undertaken by the Special Envoy in implementation of the road map. We hope that the Office of the Special Envoy will be able to sustain its efforts, despite COVID-19 restrictions, by focusing, as we have been doing in the Council, on further videoconference meetings to pursue business.
