Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): We welcome the
inauguration on ll April of the Angolan Government of
Unity and National Reconciliation. This was a major step
forward for the people of Angola. We would like to
congratulate them on their determination to complete this
essential stage of the peace process.

We would like also to pay tribute to the work of
Special Representative Maitre Beye and to the Secretary-
General, whose Visit in March did much to help convince
the parties of the Security Council's resolve on this issue.
We agree with the Secretary-General's assessment that
Angola is closer than ever before to a final settlement. The
key now is to ensure that this forward momentum is
maintained. Delays have characterized the Angolan peace
process for far too long. Let us hope that they are now
consigned to the history books.

The new Government deserves our full support. These
initial weeks and months are likely to be testing. Former
adversaries have to learn to work together. A new team
must get to grips with the responsibilities of government.
UNITA has made the right decision in joining the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation. We trust
they will now play a full and constructive part at all levels
of the new Government and in the wider process of
national reconciliation. We continue to believe that a
meeting between President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi
would be a welcome and visible signal of both leaders'
commitment to making the new Government work for the
benefit of all Angolans.

In the immediate future, there are important political
and military tasks which must be completed. They are
spelled out in the Secretary-General's report (S/ 1997/304).
We agree that programmes to incorporate UN ITA personnel
into the Angolan army and the national police or to
demobilize them should be accelerated. Getting State
administration in place throughout the country is also a
priority, and it is also important that the people of Angola
can move around their country freely and that the exchange
of goods is not impeded. We hope that rapid progress will
be made on all of these outstanding issues and that they
are not allowed to become new obstacles to the peace
process.

One obstacle to further progress on the free
movement of people and goods in Angola is the
enormous number of mines which have been laid during
the conflict. We hope that the reported delays in the
mine-clearance programme will be resolved soon. In the
meantime, we agree with the Secretary-General's
recommendation that, as an interim measure, the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III)
should continue to provide operational support to the
mine-clearance programme, on a cost-reimbursable basis
from the Department of Humanitarian Affairs, until the
end of June.

The Secretary-General refers to reports of Angolan
involvement in the conflict in Zaire. We share his serious
concern at these reports. The people of Angola know all
too well the price of armed conflict. They must refrain
from any action which would exacerbate conflict in Zaire.

We agree with the Secretary-General that the
international community must remain engaged in Angola
until the goal of full implementation of the peace
agreements is reached. We support his recommendation
to extend the mandate of UNAVEM. III to 30 June 1997,
and to deploy a United Nations observer mission in
Angola thereafter. It is essential that the mandate of the
observer mission is strong enough to enable it to be
effective. We attach particular importance to the human
rights element of it and to the mission having powers to
investigate alleged abuses, as well as to the civilian police
and public information programmes.

Finally, to those who would question the value of
the United Nations and the resources devoted to it, the
work of UNAVEM. III, the largest current United Nations
peacekeeping operation, is a reminder of the critical role
which the United Nations can and does play in bringing
conflicts to a peaceful resolution. But to be able to
continue to do this effectively we need both the resources
and the ability to take timely decisions which will be
followed by prompt action when required.

