Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to express my gratitude to the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy, Mr. Jan Eliasson,
for his valuable efforts during the peace discussions in
Sirte, Libya. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his report to the Council (S/2007/653) and
my gratitude to Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie
Guehenno for his briefing on the deployment of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).

Despite our acknowledgment that the
implementation of resolution 1769 (2007), regarding
the deployment of the Hybrid Operation, has
encountered some difficulties, the efforts to deal with
those difficulties are themselves proof that work is
under way to implement the resolution. The report of
the Secretary-General acknowledges that there is real
progress in carrying out the resolution, including the
efforts of the Sudanese national unity Government to
allocate land for camps for the Operation in place of
other land that could not be allocated due to unforeseen
circumstances or because it was already occupied or
privately owned. Work is also under way to carry out
the aviation agreement. All of this indicates the
seriousness of the Government, which was welcomed
by the Secretary-General in his report.

The Government has created an interagency
ministerial committee in preparation for the
deployment of the Hybrid Operation. Therefore, the
United Nations must, in turn, do its part to complete
the circle of collective responsibility for the
implementation of the resolution. The composition of
the contributed troops must be completed while
maintaining its African character, as acknowledged in
the same Security Council resolution. We should speed
up approval of African offers submitted to the
Secretariat and overcome the bureaucracy that delays
their approval. We must take into consideration the
reservations of the Government of the Sudan because it

is the party that is primarily concerned. We must
promote dialogue, understanding and constructive
coordination with that Government. Also, the General
Assembly Committee concerned continues to face
difficulties in estimating the appropriations necessary
for the Hybrid Operation. All of these factors combined
affect the deployment of the Operation.

I wonder who should be held responsible for the
delay in appropriating the necessary finances to deploy
the mission. In order to carry out this operation, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations must quickly
and promptly complete the light and heavy support
packages for the mission. They should not have
ignored this question once resolution 1769 (2007) was
adopted.

We must put an end to the questioning and the
unconstructive criticism of others. We must continue
confidence-building efforts with the host country for
the Hybrid Operation. Some people believe in the
principle of complementarity between the principal
tracks identified by the Secretary-General to deal with
the Darfur question, namely, the political,
peacekeeping and humanitarian tracks. We must also
take care not to negatively affect the achievements
already realized. We must maintain confidence-
building efforts and we must not mix the tracks in a
way that negatively affects the integrated effort. We
must not continue to blame one party alone and
overlook the negative role played by the insurgents and
the threats they pose to the safety and security of
peacekeeping personnel and to humanitarian aid
shipments.

The Haskanita terrorist incident against the
African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) must lead
us to seriously consider investigating this heinous
crime and punishing the criminals. I would like to ask
the Secretariat about the most recent developments
regarding that terrorist act.

The boycott of the Sirte discussions in Libya by
the Sudan Liberation Movement and the leader of the
Justice and Equality Movement placed an obstacle in
the path of peace and the Darfur peace process.
Unfortunately, those renegades are not subject to
sufficient pressure by the Security Council, especially
by certain members of the Council, despite the fact that
the boycott has greatly and noticeably hindered the
discussions, which are part of the road map.
07-61468
These people not only failed to attend the peace
talks, but also had a negative influence on those who
participated in the Sirte discussions and ruined the
positive atmosphere of the meetings. The Council must
take necessary action against those who hindered the
progress of the peace process, including by considering
targeted sanctions against them. We would like to
know Mr. Eliasson's opinion on imposing sanctions
against those individuals.

Finally, we firmly believe that uniting our efforts
to find a comprehensive peace agreement for Darfur
will help us to avoid many significant complications,
including in the ongoing debate about the composition
and deployment of the Hybrid Operation. Therefore,
we must exert all possible efforts to carry forward the
peace process, to give our full support to the United
Nations and the African Union Envoys and to continue
promoting confidence-building measures with the
national unity Government while taking all necessary
measures against those who hinder the Darfur peace
process.

