Mr. Prendergast: On the Secretary-General's
instructions, I visited Cyprus, Greece and Turkey
between 30 May and 7 June for consultations on the
future of his mission of good offices in Cyprus.

The Secretary-General's aim in asking me to
travel to the region was to "take the pulse" - to find
out where the parties stand, to seek their views on
what, if anything, the United Nations should be doing
in current circumstances, and to come back and report
those views to him, along with options and advice
regarding the priority, intensity and resources that he
might wish to assign to the good offices.

My mission was preceded by a week of preliminary,
informal, non-binding discussions in New York with a
Greek Cypriot envoy, during which he elaborated
Greek Cypriot views on both procedure and substance,
and also sought the feedback of the United Nations.

In Cyprus, I met Mr. Tassos Papadopoulos, the
Greek Cypriot leader, three times. I met Mr. Mehmet
Ali Talat, the Turkish Cypriot leader, twice. I also saw
political leaders on both sides. In Greece and Turkey, I
met the foreign minister of each country and senior
foreign ministry officials, as well as other prominent
Greek and Turkish personalities.
I would like today to convey to the Council a
summary of the views expressed and the discussions
held.

On the Greek Cypriot side, Mr. Papadopoulos
said that he was eager for negotiations to resume under
the auspices of the Secretary-General. He said that his
people were suffering from occupation and uncertainty
and that they wanted a solution, and he confirmed both
the procedural and substantive points that his envoy
had made to me in New York.

On procedure, Mr. Papadopoulos said that new
negotiations should be carefully prepared. His position
was that, in any resumed negotiations, there should be
no deadlines, no arbitration of substantive issues by the
United Nations or third parties, and only a settlement
plan agreed by the parties should be submitted to
referendum. At the same time, he accepted that
negotiations should not be open-ended.

On substance, Mr. Papadopoulos said that he
believed the plan finalized by the Secretary-General
last year gave the Turkish Cypriot side and Turkey, in
his words, nearly everything they wanted, more than
they needed, and more than was fair. In his view, that is
why a large majority of Greek Cypriots had rejected
the plan while a large majority of Turkish Cypriots had
accepted it. He believes that future negotiations can be
successful only if the Turkish Cypriot side and Turkey
understand that and if they are prepared to meet
outstanding Greek Cypriot concerns during the course
of negotiations.

The substantive points the Greek Cypriot side
would like to pursue in resumed negotiations touch on
most of the main issues dealt with in the plan,
including governance, security, citizenship, residency,
property, territory, economic and financial issues,
transition periods and guarantees of implementation.
Asked by the Greek Cypriot side to give initial
reactions to their ideas, I indicated that the United
Nations understood that the Greek Cypriots have
concerns and that those would need to be addressed in
a mutually acceptable manner between the parties. But
at the same time, I said that I thought the other side
would find daunting the breadth and depth of what the
Greek Cypriot side had elaborated, and I encouraged
them to produce a list of focused, finite, manageable
and prioritized proposals.

I also asked Mr. Papadopoulos if the concerns
outlined by his envoy were an exhaustive or only an
illustrative list of the areas in which he sought changes.
Mr. Papadopoulos replied that he had no intention of
raising further concerns, but he reserved the right to do
so during negotiations, depending on the demands
made by the other side. Despite my encouragement,
Mr. Papadopoulos declined to indicate any hierarchy in
his demands or any priority within them, saying that he
believed those could emerge only during negotiations.

On the Turkish Cypriot side, Mr. Talat said that
he wanted to see a settlement as soon as possible based
on the United Nations plan and that he would like to
see intensive negotiations under the auspices of the
Secretary-General to achieve such a settlement within a
reasonably short period of time. He stressed the desire
of his people for an urgent settlement.

On procedure, Mr. Talat favoured a process with
United Nations arbitration and clear time limits for
negotiations, since he was concerned that negotiations
might otherwise drag on indefinitely. He stressed, in
this context, that Turkish Cypriots were disappointed at
the failure of the Security Council to react to the
Secretary-General's good offices report of 28 May
2004. He mentioned, in particular, insufficient
acknowledgement by the international community of
the fact that a majority of those who had voted on the
Turkish Cypriot side in the referendum had accepted a
compromise United Nations plan, and, secondly, the
lack of action by the Security Council to help ease
unnecessary restrictions that, he insisted, had the effect
of unjustifiably isolating and punishing the Turkish
Cypriots.

Mr. Talat said that this lack of response should be
remedied. He added that, were negotiations to resume,
he believed that there should be some sort of
mechanism in place so that each side would know what
its fate would be should the negotiations end in failure
as a result of the actions of the other side.

On substance, Mr. Talat said that his people had
been prepared to accept the United Nations plan not
because it was ideal, but as a compromise. He stressed
that certain key features - political equality, partnership,
bi-zonality, bi-communality, the treaties of guarantee
and alliance - were the essence of the plan and should
not be eroded. He added that there were also real points
of Turkish Cypriot concern about the plan that he
would like to discuss in any future negotiations. They
included territory, property, resettlement of dislocated
Turkish Cypriots, financing, and guarantees against
usurpation of the settlement arrangements by either side.

I said that the Secretary-General had been
surprised at the lack of any response by the Security
Council to his report. However, I reminded Mr. Talat
that 76 per cent of Greek Cypriots who voted last year
had rejected the finalized United Nations plan, and that
this was a problem not just for the Greek Cypriots but
for both sides. Mr. Talat said that, to address Greek
Cypriot concerns, he would be prepared to entertain
minor changes within the parameters of the plan, but
he believed that it was very important to have a clear
and final list of demands from the Greek Cypriot side. I
conveyed orally the areas of concern that the Greek
Cypriot side had elaborated to me. Mr. Talat said that
he regarded these as lying well outside the parameters
of the United Nations plan and as unacceptable to the
Turkish Cypriot public.

I should add that I discussed with both leaders the
obvious lack of confidence that exists between the two
sides and measures that might be taken, either by
agreement or, perhaps better still, unilaterally, to build
confidence. Both leaders said that, while efforts to
build confidence were important, they should not be a
substitute for the search for a settlement. There are
certain points on which follow-up from one or other of
the parties is anticipated. The Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Chief of Mission of the
United Nations Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP),
Mr. Wlosowicz, remains at the disposal of the parties
to pursue these matters.

In Athens, the Greek Government said that it
wished to see a resumption of the Secretary-General's
mission of good offices. In that context, Greek
representatives said that the United Nations plan was
the first comprehensive solution framework ever put
forward and that it had come very close to delivering a
settlement. However, Greece believed that, on certain
aspects, the plan reflected the fears of the past more
than it did the challenges of the future with Cyprus as a
member of the European Union. The Greek
Government would want to see the two sides in
cooperative negotiations based on the United Nations
plan so that outstanding concerns could be addressed
and a settlement achieved.

In Ankara, the Turkish Government said that they
wished to see a settlement based on the United Nations
plan and that Turkey would welcome an intensive
process under the Secretary-General's auspices. For
that to happen, the Turkish Government believed that it
was important for the Greek Cypriot side to furnish a
clear and exhaustive list of changes it would like to see
to the plan. The Turkish Government stressed the sense
of frustration in Turkey at the Security Council's lack
of response to the Secretary-General's report of
28 May 2004, saying that this made it difficult to
persuade people that Turkish and Turkish Cypriot
efforts for a solution were adequately acknowledged.
Those views were also conveyed to the Secretary-
General by Prime Minister Erdogan at a working lunch
in New York on 9 June, shortly after my return from
the region. The Secretary-General conveyed to Prime
Minister Erdogan, as I had to Mr. Talat and in Ankara,
our surprise and disappointment at the fact that the
Council had not reacted to the report or to last year's
developments. Also, both the Turkish Cypriots and
Turks expressed disillusion as well as disappointment
at what they perceive as inadequate steps by the
European Union to ease Turkish Cypriot isolation, an
outcome which they feel they had been led to expect.

This concludes my summary of United Nations
consultations with the parties. I should like now, if I
may, to move to an assessment of the situation.

First of all, there are some important positives to
acknowledge. All of the parties want to see some sort
of resumption of active United Nations good offices.
All the parties accept that the United Nations plan should
serve as the document on which the negotiations would
resume. Political figures on both sides in Cyprus are
maintaining cordial contacts with one another in an effort
to promote mutual understanding. There are useful
contacts at other levels, too, whether among experts on
particular subjects or among ordinary people now that
they are able to cross to the other side. I was interested
to learn that an independent bi-communal survey that
polled attitudes to potential changes to the United
Nations plan found the encouraging result among
grass-roots opinion on both sides that it might be
possible to make certain changes that would secure
majority support for the plan in both communities.

But there are negatives, too. The gap between the
stated positions of the parties on substance appears to
be wide, while confidence between them does not seem
high; rather the contrary. These two factors, especially
in combination, make efforts to establish common
ground extremely difficult.

As the Secretary-General considers what course
of action to take, there are a number of additional
factors that he will bear in mind. He believes that the
starting point for the United Nations must and should
be full respect for the decision of the voters on each
side in the referendum of 24 April 2004 and an
approach that is guided by that full respect.

Last year, the Secretary-General and his team
exerted extraordinary efforts to work with the parties
and finalize a plan that we hoped would be acceptable
to the people on each side - a plan that had been
developed over a four-and-a-half-year process of
negotiation and consultation unprecedented in the
history of the Cyprus problem. In the end, the
Secretary-General was left with extremely difficult
judgements to make on many contentious matters,
since there were continuing and persistent deadlocks
between the parties on nearly all substantive issues on
the table, and he had been tasked by the parties to use
his discretion to resolve them, so that a plan could be
submitted to referendum. The plan, as finalized by the
Secretary-General, is fully in accordance with the
vision of a settlement contained in Security Council
resolutions.

Yet, as I mentioned earlier in this briefing, on the
Greek Cypriot side, more than three quarters of those
who voted rejected the finalized United Nations plan.
That is a fact that cannot be wished away. While the
United Nations could not countenance a solution other
than the kind envisaged in the resolutions of the
Council, the highest-priority concerns which led Greek
Cypriots to vote the way they did would most certainly
have to be addressed in any future process based on the
United Nations plan, and the Greek Cypriot electorate
must have confidence that this would be borne in mind
in a renewed process.

In that context, a prioritized and exhaustive list of
concrete proposals for negotiation would be an
important advance, because it is very hard to address a
long list of concerns in an ordered way if they are
expressed without modulation or indication of their
relative importance.

At the same time, it would not help the search for
a solution if Greek Cypriot concerns were met in a way
that caused the loss of majority support for the United
Nations plan on the Turkish Cypriot side, and the
Turkish Cypriot electorate in turn must have
confidence that that, too, would be borne in mind in
any renewed process. Meanwhile, confidence on the
Turkish Cypriot side and in Turkey - whose role will
be critical - is diminished by the fact that, although a
clear majority among those who voted on the Turkish
Cypriot side supported a compromise United Nations
plan finalized by an agreed procedure, Turkish
Cypriots see little acknowledgement of their efforts to
achieve a solution and little or no improvement in their
situation in the period since the referendum.

It is natural for each party to seek to protect its
own interests with regard to both procedure and
substance. But it is important to encourage both sides
to focus on their overriding common interest, namely,
the need to agree on revisions so that the United
Nations plan can command majority support not only
in their own communities, but in each other's too.

In that regard, the Secretary-General wishes to
stress the obligations of the parties themselves.
Outsiders can help, but it is the parties who must
summon the vision, courage and political will needed
to make a settlement, with all that that implies by way
of compromise. Leaders have to lead, not just follow,
their supporters. A settlement will become possible
only if the parties act towards each other in a way that
conveys respect, understanding for the other's concerns
and a desire for an early settlement.

Responsibilities also fall on the Governments of
Greece and Turkey. They must keep in mind that the
Cyprus problem should be settled on its own merits, in
the interests, first and foremost, of the Greek Cypriots
and the Turkish Cypriots. The strong support of Greece
and Turkey for the mission of good offices, for which
the Secretary-General is grateful, will need to be
matched by a readiness to think afresh on certain
aspects of the problem so that a solution can be
achieved on the basis of a revised United Nations plan.

So, where to from here? The Secretary-General is
mindful of his own responsibilities, and he remains
committed to assisting the parties to achieve a
settlement. As a general proposition, the Secretary-
General's good offices ought to be available to parties
who request them. Moreover, the persistence of the
status quo on the island is unacceptable, as the Council
has made clear on many occasions.

At the same time, launching an intensive new
process prematurely would be inadvisable. I hope the
Council would agree that nothing positive would be
served by a new effort that ended - as the previous
two efforts did - in high-profile failure or else in a
frustrating stalemate.

As things stand, the Secretary-General believes
that it would be prudent to proceed very carefully. He
intends to reflect on the future of his mission of good
offices in the period ahead. As he does so, he will want
to take full account of the reaction of the Council to
this report. He will also be closely observing
developments on the ground and, in particular, any
evolution in the position of the parties in the light of
the assessment and the observations I have just made.

Depending on the evolution of events and
attitudes on the island, it may become appropriate to
consider appointing a special adviser, on a when
actually employed basis, who would engage the parties
and explore whether the necessary common ground
existed or could be built to enable full-scale
negotiations to resume. For, ultimately, it is only
through negotiations between them on the basis of the
plan that a settlement will be achieved.

