Ms. Loj (Denmark): I would like to begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Jan Egeland for his
comprehensive briefing. I commend the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and Mr. Egeland
for the active role that they have played.

Given their gravity and magnitude, the
humanitarian crises of Africa merit more of our
attention and our political and financial resources.
Some of the humanitarian crises highlighted by Mr.
Egeland have been with us for much too long, while
others have only recently become a major concern.
Violent conflicts, food shortages and governance crises
are among the most widespread causes. If we have the
collective will, all those causes can be influenced and
corrected through concerted action by all parties
involved.

Let me take this opportunity to comment on the
situations of Zimbabwe and northern Uganda. But let
me underline that the humanitarian situation in Darfur
also requires the close attention of the international
community, and I thank Mr. Egeland for his update on
the situation in Darfur.

With respect to Zimbabwe, I am afraid that
President Mugabe's statements concerning Mr.
Egeland's person and the United Nations family in
general speak their own tragic language. We once again
urge the Government of Zimbabwe to allow the
international community to alleviate the suffering of
the Zimbabwean people. We request a minimum of
respect for Mr. Egeland's commendable efforts to assist
the people of Zimbabwe.

The situation in Zimbabwe is getting worse every
day. There is a real risk that, unless the international
community starts making operational plans
immediately, thousands of people in Zimbabwe will die
of hunger within the next couple of months. Zimbabwe
is not the only country facing that dire prospect. The
food situation is indeed precarious in neighbouring
countries as well. But the food shortage in Zimbabwe,
which is amplified by ill-conceived economic policies,
could have disastrous consequences if nothing is done.
The food shortage is particularly disturbing since only
a few years ago Zimbabwe was a net exporter of food
supplies. The disastrous situation will only intensify
the current stream of people fleeing from Zimbabwe,
adding new burdens to the neighbouring countries.

In that regard, we urge the Governments and the
international institutions of the region to address this
issue urgently and to make an extra effort to develop a
common approach to Zimbabwe. Such an approach
should be guided by the overarching goal of alleviating
the plight of the people of Zimbabwe and restoring the
rule of law.

Similarly, the United Nations should play a key
role in trying to re-establish a mutually respectful
dialogue with the Government of Zimbabwe. To the
extent that the present climate of mistrust spurred by
the outrageous recriminations of the Government of
Zimbabwe can be replaced by a respectful dialogue, we
would like to suggest the consideration of a visit to
Zimbabwe by the Secretary-General as soon as
possible. I would appreciate it if Mr. Egeland could
comment on that, including his views on how a
possible visit by the Secretary-General could help
lubricate relations with the Government of Zimbabwe.

Let me now turn briefly to the situation in
northern Uganda. As the Council has just heard from
Mr. Egeland, this is one of the most tragic conflicts in
Africa. Approximately 1.5 million people are suffering,
and there is an urgent need to strengthen our efforts to
identify ways and means to end the conflict.

It seems to be an annual pattern on the part of the
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) to express willingness
to negotiate for peace as the festive season approaches
and as the rainy season complicates operations on the
ground. This time, the LRA must combine its
expressed wish for peace with concrete proof by
declaring a ceasefire and by putting a definite end to
the despicable, cruel acts continually being carried out
in northern Uganda and southern Sudan. There is no
reason for the LRA fighters not to disarm. A well-
designed disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme is in place and provides an
important incentive, at least for lower- and middle-
ranked LRA members.

The Government of Uganda, for its part, is
encouraged to vigorously pursue a peaceful approach
to the conclusion of the conflict. We would welcome
any attempt on the part of the Ugandan Government to
enter into dialogue with the LRA, while taking the
necessary steps to ensure the protection of the
vulnerable civilians living in northern Uganda. People
are killed not only by bullets. The majority of deaths
occur in the camps of the internally displaced persons
as a result of the extremely poor living conditions. That
is intolerable and simply has to stop.

Finally, let me take this opportunity also to assure
the Council of the Danish Government's continued
willingness to provide funds in response to the
numerous humanitarian crises in Africa. With respect
to northern Uganda, the Danish humanitarian
contribution amounted to $2.6 million in 2005. And
with respect to Southern Africa, our humanitarian
assistance is expected to exceed $12 million before the
end of the year.

