Mr. Somdah (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to thank the Special
Representative, Mr. Victor Da Silva Angelo, for his
8
briefing on developments in the situation in eastern
Chad and north-eastern Central African Republic.

The security and humanitarian situation in eastern
Chad and north-eastern Central African Republic
remains worrying due to the ongoing clashes between
Government forces and armed groups. My delegation
once again condemns the attack of 4 May 2009 by
armed groups under the banner of the Union des forces
de la resistance. We reiterate our appeal to all parties,
especially armed movements, to renounce any military
solution to the crisis and to respect their commitments,
in particular the Sirte agreement of October 2007.

The lack of security continues to be a major
source of concern and compromises humanitarian
activities. We are pleased that the Chadian
Government, supported by the United Nations Mission
in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT), has been able to effectively deploy the
Detachement inte'gre de securite (DIS) and thereby
reinforce security in camps for refugees and internally
displaced persons. We encourage the partners to
continue to provide significant logistical support to
DIS so that it can fulfil its mission.

One encouraging event was the signing on 25 July
in Tripoli of a peace agreement between the Chadian
Government and the Mouvement national, which
provided for an end to hostilities and the reintegration
of combatants from the Mouvement into the Chadian
army and of its leaders into Government administration.

At the political level, we are encouraged by the
progress achieved, in particular the consensus reached
on draft laws concerning, respectively, the status of the
opposition, the political parties' charter and the approval
of decrees to implement laws on the electoral code and
the National Independent Electoral Commission. We
welcome the holding of the general census of the
population, which is a further decisive step towards the
organization and holding of general elections. The
parties must maintain an ongoing dialogue and
coordination to resolve any disagreements.

With respect to the Central African Republic, we
are concerned about the deterioration of the security
situation in the north-eastern part of the country due to
the resurgence of acts of banditry, intertribal violence
and attacks by armed groups, which has increased the
number of refugees and limits the delivery of
humanitarian aid. It is essential that all parties respect
the decisions they reached following the inclusive
09-42729
political dialogue of December 2008. We encourage
them to continue to make progress towards genuine
national reconciliation in order to enable the political
process to move forward, with a view to holding
legislative and presidential elections in 2010.

This Council should continue to give particular
attention to the security and humanitarian situations in
the Central African Republic, especially in the
northern, north-western and north-central parts of the
country.

With respect to the situation in the subregion, we
remain convinced that resolving the crisis and putting
an end to instability in Chad will require close and
effective cooperation among States of the region. We
continue to encourage Chad and the Sudan to improve
their bilateral relations and to cooperate fully in order
to put an end to the activities of illegal armed groups,
in accordance with the commitments undertaken in the
Dakar agreement and the Doha agreement of 3 May
2009. We urge them in particular to avoid any act that
could fuel tensions between the two States.

With respect to the deployment of the military
component of MINURCAT, we urge the international
community to do its utmost to ensure the effective
deployment of the military component of MINURCAT
and to make it operational by giving it the logistical
means necessary to carry out its mandate. My
delegation takes due note of the strategic workplan of
MINURCAT. We share the point of View expressed by
the Secretary-General on the preliminary conditions for
the withdrawal of the Mission, which will require the
ongoing commitment of Governments in the region, a
resolution of the potential factors of insecurity and
instability along the border between Chad and the
Sudan, and the support of the international community.

In conclusion, we invite the international
community and the Council in particular, in the light of
the ongoing high level of insecurity in Chad and the
Central African Republic, to remain mobilized in order
to provide significant assistance to the respective
efforts by the Governments of these two countries.

