Mr. Nobilo (Croatia): At the outset, I should like to
congratulate the Russian Federation on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month and
to assure you, Sir, of my delegation's full cooperation on
the two other important regional issues that will come
before the Council next week.

Likewise, I should like to commend the delegation
of Oman for the able way in which it led the work of the
Council last month.

My delegation welcomes the Security Council's
prompt consideration of and action upon the present draft
resolution. This timely effort is another demonstration of
the international community's firm and resolute
commitment to finally rescue Bosnia and Herzegovina
and its people from four years of aggression, genocide
and suffering.

History often tells us that this century began in 1914,
with the tragic events in Sarajevo. The action by the
Security Council today, to establish a multinational
implementation force to police a final peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, will show that the Council, in effect,
has turned the closing page on the twentieth century. The
ending of what we hope is the last European war has
yielded not a just peace, but a fair peace based on a
balance of power and the reality of scarce resources. A
just peace remains attainable, however. It can come about
only with the full implementation of all aspects of the
Peace Agreement.

It was four years ago, on 1 October, that the first
Bosnian-Herzegovinian village, Ravno, was "ethnically
cleansed" by units of the Yugoslav People's Army (JNA)
and irregulars that entered Bosnia and Herzegovina from
Montenegro. A few months later, at Kupres, the citizens
of Bosnia and Herzegovina took up arms for the first time
to defend themselves in an organized way from another
long column of advancing JNA tanks. The defenders of
Kupres, like the innocent victims of Ravno, paid a heavy
price. What followed thereafter in Sarajevo and elsewhere
in Bosnia, as we all know, was much worse.

 

However, what made it all somewhat less devastating,
if that seems possible, was the people themselves - such
as the people of Kupres, who founded the Croatian Defence
Council (HVO), which was the first institution to defend
Bosnia and Herzegovina and was the first reason why
Bosnia and Herzegovina was able to survive; such as the
people of Sarajevo, who stood up bravely and relentlessly
to defend the principles and ideals that today's civilization
holds dear and irreplaceable. They gave Bosnia the vitality
and spirit to fight the ills imbedded in ideologies of the
past, ideologies that were intent on destroying it and two of
its peoples.

To this we can add the people who came to Bosnia
and Herzegovina from all corners of the world. The
political leaders, the peace-keepers, the journalists and the
humanitarian workers: all of them helped Bosnia - some
more, some less, but nevertheless, they helped all the same.
My delegation, therefore, would like to note with emphasis
paragraph 35 of draft resolution S/ 1995/ 1033, which
recognizes the good will and sacrifices of the international
community in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

No matter how difficult and tragic the past four years
have been, the peace that was reached in Dayton on
22 November and signed in Paris yesterday will move
Bosnia and the whole region forward. Many injustices are
yet to be remedied, but we are confident that they will be.
The momentum of peace that has carried us through since
early autumn gives us hope and confidence. The timely
deployment of the multinational Implementation Force
(IFOR), which will be authorized by the present draft
resolution, will continue this momentum.

The momentum of peace, however, cannot stop there.
The economic and electoral aspects of the Peace Agreement
must be implemented with the same commitment and
vigour. IFOR alone cannot secure a lasting and just peace
in Bosnia. To recall the words of my President spoken at
Paris on Wednesday,

"All of us participating in this historic act face
the responsibility not to allow the peace efforts that
have been achieved with such difficulty to fail".

We regret that the agreement on normalization of
relations between Croatia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro), including mutual
recognition, was not signed in Paris. It has always been
Croatia's position that unconditional recognition is a
prerequisite for the equitable resolution of all outstanding
issues between any two sovereign States.

 

Bearing in mind that the present draft resolution is
extensive in its content, my delegation would like to
emphasize just one paragraph that is of particular
importance to my Government. Paragraph 8 recognizes
the right of all Bosnian refugees and displaced persons to
return to their homes of origin in safety and calls on the
United Nations to play a leading role in their repatriation.
My Government, as members may well know, is
greatly burdened by the costs of the care of about
400,000 refugees and displaced persons now in Croatia,
costs that are now approaching $2 billion. But we are
even more concerned about the welfare of the close to
320,000 Bosnian Croat refugees and displaced persons
who are now living throughout Europe. This number
represents almost one half of the Whole Bosnian Croat
community. They must be provided with an opportunity
to return to their homes or must be compensated for their
property fairly and in a timely manner. We, of course,
would prefer the former. The Bosnian Croat community,
but also Bosnia and Herzegovina as a whole, would be
significantly weakened politically if the majority of them
did not return to their homes.

The present situation may allow the earliest
repatriation to those Bosnian Croat refugees and displaced
persons whose homes of origin are on Federation
territory. Their number is by no means small. It may be
as high as 200,000. The viability of the Federation and of
the multiethnic fabric of Bosnia rests primarily upon the
ability of this group of Croats to return home before the
elections planned for next autumn. This Bosnian Croat
community, which has often weathered severe
international criticism - some of which may have been
warranted - also deserves enormous praise for its
defence of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Its struggle for
national rights and autonomy was wholly justified in view
of the persecutions and depopulation it has suffered
throughout the history of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Let me conclude by briefly presenting the position
of my Government on the 12 December report of the
Secretary-General concerning the implementation of
another Dayton-related accord, the Basic Agreement on
Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium, or the
occupied Vukovar region of Croatia. Croatia is concerned
that the options outlined in the report put counter-
productive emphasis on region-external risks and not
enough emphasis on the most important element of the
Agreement, namely, rapid dernilitarization.

 

The Croatian Government cannot accept an attempt to
build a new and improved safe area in the occupied
Vukovar region, nor should the Security Council. This
approach would achieve nothing more than to preserve the
status quo. This is not in the interest of the parties nor of
the international community. Therefore, I should like to use
this opportunity to state for the record that the proposals
contained in the Secretary-General's report of 13 December
regarding the deployment of a large international force to
Croatia is unacceptable to my Government.

Croatia is still of the view that a force of less than
5,000 is satisfactory for implementation of the Basic
Agreement. The size of the force that is at present in the
Vukovar region may even be adequate. But if the Council
should decide to increase the size of that force, its numbers
can again be reduced immediately following the first month
of the implementation period. In fact, the military aspect of
the new implementation force can be drawn down
completely after the 30-day demilitarization period ends.
The civilian aspect, meanwhile, can be strengthened.

The demilitarization period should begin as soon as
possible, and therefore we call on the members of the
Council to consider and decide on this issue next week, and
certainly before 25 December. We believe that any delay in
addressing the implementation of the Basic Agreement
would minimize the possibility of its success. Croatia,
therefore, cannot, under any circumstance, accept a new
force that would take more than a month to deploy. The
momentum for peace that is evident in implementing the
Peace Agreement in Bosnia should be emulated and utilized
to secure peace in Croatia as well. This important linkage
between Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina is also noted
in the 13 December report of the Secretary-General, which
notes the threat that:

"failure to implement one would present to
implementation of the other". (S/1995/103], para. 46)

