The President: I will now make a statement in my capacity as representative of South Africa and on behalf of the African members of the Security Council - the Niger, South Africa and Tunisia - and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1). Let me begin by joining other delegations in thanking Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for her briefing on the activities of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). Furthermore, we recognize and commend MONUSCO's fundamental role in the protection of civilians and in addressing the perennial instability in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. Our delegations commend the role and leadership displayed by Special Representative Zerrougui with regard to critical issues in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to MONUSCO discharging its mandate effectively. We would also like to take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report of 30 November (S/2020/1150), prepared in accordance with paragraph 51 of resolution 2502 (2019). The A3+1 statement is structured around the following issues: the political situation, neighbourhood relations, the security and humanitarian situations, the phased and responsible drawdown of MONUSCO, and cooperation between the United Nations and the Southern African Development Community (SADC). On the political situation, our delegations note with concern the political tensions observed during the period under review. The A3+1 welcomes the meeting organized in the Democratic Republic of the Congo by the Chairperson of the African Union (AU) Commission, His Excellency Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, between the coalitions led by President Felix Tshilombo Tshisekedi and former President Joseph Kabila, held on the margins of Mr. Mahamat's working visit on 2 and 3 December. It is our hope that this initiative will contribute positively to finding a lasting solution in order to preserve peace and security in the country. Furthermore, we strongly support the Secretary-General's call on all stakeholders to resolve their differences through dialogue, in the greater interest of the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. On neighbourhood relations, the Niger, Tunisia, South Africa and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines are satisfied with the implementation of the strategic approach to conflict resolution and peacebuilding in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region. The virtual summit among the Presidents of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Angola, Rwanda and Uganda is indicative of the resolve of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region as a whole to address the threat posed by armed groups in the Great Lakes subregion. The trust- and confidence-building initiatives with neighbouring countries demonstrate a continued commitment towards the full implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as observed in the recent bilateral cooperation talks held between the Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi. It is our view that the improving security situation in certain parts of the country is also due to those regional meetings. On the security situation, we are pleased to see an improvement in various regions of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. However, the A3+1 wishes to reiterate its concern over the ongoing indiscriminate attacks against civilians, security personnel and MONUSCO, as well as the harassment and kidnapping of humanitarian aid workers by armed groups in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. We condemn those attacks in the strongest terms and call on the country's authorities to bring the perpetrators to justice. The A3+1 welcomes MONUSCO's increased engagement with, and outreach to, local communities. We also commend the community-based disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) approach and framework, which ensure that local communities play an integral role in resolving conflict and in creating measures to promote long-term peace, stability and development. Such interventions by MONUSCO contribute to countering disinformation and reducing anti-MONUSCO sentiment. The military operations conducted by the Force Intervention Brigade (FIB) against the Allied Democratic Forces, as detailed in paragraph 12 of the Secretary General's report, are also a welcome development. It is in that context that our delegations commend MONUSCO, the FIB and all troop- contributing countries (TCCs) for their efforts to stabilize the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and protect civilians from the ongoing threat posed by armed militias and groups in the region. The Niger, Tunisia, South Africa and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines emphasize the importance of protecting civilians and urge the coordination of deployment so as to avoid creating security gaps. It is our hope that the Democratic Republic of the Congo will continue with efforts to finalize and implement a strategy aimed at addressing the peace and security challenges, including through building the capacities of the defence and security services. Against that backdrop, our delegations underscore the importance of addressing the root causes of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and encourage efforts to support its Government in the DDR process. We also call for international support for broader peacebuilding in the relevant regions of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Furthermore, our delegations underscore the importance of developing and implementing a comprehensive and coordinated security sector governance and reform programme in the Democratic Republic of the Congo that, among other things, ensures women's representation at all levels and recognizes the role of young people in peacebuilding and recovery, as articulated in resolution 2553 (2020). The A3+1 also calls for further efforts by regional and international partners to tackle the illicit extraction of and trade in mineral resources, which remain a key driver of conflict and a major source of revenue that sustains armed group activities in the east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. On the humanitarian and health situations, our delegations reiterate our concern about the volatile situation. In addition to the challenges related to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, a worsening economic situation and the hazards of climate change have intensified harsh living conditions for many in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Today, an estimated 21.8 million people are experiencing acute food insecurity and 5.2 million remain internally displaced. We express our concern at the increase in COVID-19 and call for sustained international support of the country's authorities so as to mitigate the pandemic's negative impact on the Congolese people and the economy. On a positive note, we commend MONUSCO for its support in helping the Government address the outbreak of the Ebola virus disease. Turning to the Mission's effectiveness, it is commendable that MONUSCO is increasing its operations in spite of the COVID-19 pandemic and in creating spaces for women and girls in the context of the women and peace and security agenda in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The A3+1 is therefore satisfied with the integration of female engagement teams in major units, which has contributed to improving the force's performance. Our delegations continue to be concerned about the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the overall Mission and its personnel. In that regard, we call for the safety and security of all personnel to be ensured as the Mission continues to discharge its mandate. We regret the loss of six MONUSCO personnel from Malawi, Ukraine and Bangladesh, who died after contracting the virus, and convey our condolences to their families. On the phased and responsible drawdown of MONUSCO, the Niger, Tunisia, South Africa and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines continue to emphasize the utmost necessity of the Council's unwavering commitment to providing MONUSCO with all the necessary means to execute its mandate in close collaboration with the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The A3+1 reiterates its considered view that a budget-driven, rushed exit of MONUSCO would be disastrous and undermine decades of investment in peacekeeping. We underscore that MONUSCO and its FIB should be adequately capacitated in accordance with the recommendation of the report prepared by Lieutenant General (Retired) Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, entitled "Improving Security of United Nations Peacekeepers", to address the challenges with regard to the effectiveness of the entire United Nations Mission without compromising existing capacity, including key force enablers. With regard to the cooperation between the United Nations and SADC, the A3 +1 support SADC's long- standing commitment to assisting the Democratic Republic of the Congo to achieve sustainable peace, security and stability and are encouraged by the AU- United Nations cooperation and their undertaking to continue engagement in support of the consolidation of stability and democratic governance in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In this context, our delegations underscore the SADC Extraordinary Organ Troika Summit's appreciation and support for the United Nations, as well as its pledged regional support to the development and implementation of a joint strategy on the progressive and phased drawdown of MONUSCO in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We commend the completion of all negotiations undertaken to reconfigure the FIB, including the strengthening of FIB headquarters by staff officers from non-FIB TCCs, as this will ensure the FIB's operational effectiveness in conducting targeted operations against negative forces in the eastern the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in protecting civilians. The SADC continues to request the accelerated approval of all planned operational orders directed at conducting targeted operations against negative forces jointly with the Forces armees de la Republique Democratique du Congo - or single-handedly - as the continued delays embolden armed groups' attacks against the defenceless population in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and they greatly undermine and erode the confidence the population has in MONUSCO to protect civilians. In conclusion, the A3+1 reaffirms its commitment to promoting and achieving an African continent that is peaceful and prosperous and that contributes to a world that is just and equitable through effective multilateralism at subregional, regional and global levels. It is for this reason that our delegations support the Secretary-General's recommendation for the extension of MONUSCO's mandate for one year, with its current authorized troop and police strength and strategic objectives, namely, the protection of civilians, indeed, all the people in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I now resume my functions as the President of the Council. I give the floor to the representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
