Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I welcome the initiative to convene this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including

the Palestinian question. I also thank Mr. Robert Serry,
Special Coordinator for the United Nations Peace
Process in the Middle East, for his presence here today.

Since 1947, when Peru was a member of the United
Nations Special Committee on Palestine, my country
has consistently maintained a clear position on the
question of Palestine, in accordance with the rules and
principles of international law. Peru recognizes the
need to implement General Assembly resolution 181
(II), which established the basis for the creation of two
States on the territory of Palestine, one Arab and one
Jewish, living side-by-side as neighbours within secure
borders, in mutual recognition, in a climate of peace
and security and free of threats or acts of force.

Consequently, and conscious of the inalienable right
of the Palestinian people to set up an independent State
and in the belief that the establishment of a Palestinian
State is a key element for the peaceful and definitive
resolution of this conflict, Peru has recognized
Palestine as a State and supported the resolutions
adopted on this matter in the United Nations, including
our co-sponsorship of the historic General Assembly
resolution 67/ 19, which granted Palestine the status of a
non-member Observer State of the Organization.

Based on those same principles, Peru voted in
favour of Palestine's request to become a member
State of UNESCO. The importance Peru attaches
to this subject was shown by the recent official visit
by President Humala Tasso to Israel and Palestine,
which served to reassure both parties regarding Peru's
historical position of support for the two-State solution
and to reiterate our support for the Palestinian people.

In the same spirit, and consistent with respect for
the two-State solution, Peru recognizes the undeniable
right of the State of Israel to develop in peace and
harmony with its neighbours, within secure borders
and free of any threat to its people. Peru therefore
firmly condemns all acts of aggression against Israel.

While we recognize Israel's right to preserve its
own existence and security, it must be said that that right
must be exercised with respect for human rights and
within internationally defined and recognized borders.
In that connection, my delegation reiterates that the
acquisition of territory by force is inadmissible under
international law, which is why any actions seeking to
impose its laws, jurisdiction and administration are null
and void. We call on Israel to immediately cease the
practice of settlement, house demolitions and evictions
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including

East Jerusalem, in accordance with the provisions of
numerous resolutions of the General Assembly.

In keeping with our longstanding and consistent
commitment to the peaceful settlement of disputes,
my delegation reaffirms its full support for and
encourages efforts seeking lasting peace in the Middle
East, which can be achieved only as a result of direct
negotiations between the parties and on the basis of the
full implementation by all parties of their obligations
under the Madrid terms of reference, the Quartet road
map and other agreements, as well as full respect for
international law, including the relevant Security
Council resolutions. In that regard, my delegation
regrets the latest developments that led to the suspension
of the direct negotiations under way with the support of
Secretary of State John Kerry.

Peru believes that a united Palestine that recognizes
the fundamental right of Israel to exist is an essential
element for reaching a final political solution to this
protracted conflict. My delegation therefore hopes that
the parties will resume the dialogue in order to relaunch
the peace process in the Middle East.

