Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this very timely debate and for choosing
so wisely the topic of our discussion. I also wish to
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.

As a long-standing advocate of a more integrated
approach to security and development, Brazil sees the
adoption of today's resolution as a positive step in the
platform for our future work.

Very often, the immediate threats to which we
tend to react are but manifestations of structural
constraints that may make societies prone to violence
and conflict - poverty, the lack of food security, the
absence of opportunities and resources, unresolved
political grievances and unheeded calls for greater
inclusion, equality and dignity.

In that regard, it is essential to have in mind, as
recognized by the Council for over a decade, that
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding are
closely interrelated and that the quest for peace requires
a comprehensive, concerted and determined approach
that addresses the root causes of conflicts, including
their economic and social dimensions.

The approach requires increased awareness by
the international community regarding the imperative
of integrating measures in favour of sustainable
development, with food security, into strategies aimed
at the promotion of peace and security. The reiteration
of the message was a fundamental objective of the
debate presided over in the Council by the Brazilian
Minister of External Relations, Antonio Patriota, in
February 2011 (see S/PV.6479).

Brazil and many other delegations have long
stressed the need for the Security Council, from the
earliest possible stages of the drafting of peacekeeping
mandates, to look beyond the immediate horizon of
events into the root causes of conflicts. One way to
do that is to incorporate, from the very beginning and
throughout the whole life ofa mission, key peacebuilding
objectives into relevant peacekeeping mandates and to
make sure that those priorities are reflected in mission
planning and force generation.

We hope that resolution 2086 (2013), adopted
today, will contribute to further integrating all the
relevant bodies and stakeholders in the endeavour.
We welcome in particular the encouragement for the
Security Council to benefit from the advisory role of
the Peacebuilding Commission.

As we recognize the progress achieved in developing
the principles and practices of multidimensional
peacekeeping, we also have to face the challenges to
the implementation of complex mandates. Apart from
integrated mission planning and force generation,
strengthening the civilian component of peacekeeping
missions is essential. Only with the right civilian
capacity can United Nations missions perform tasks
such as supporting State reforms, strengthening rule-of-
law institutions, promoting human rights, assisting
national authorities in articulating peacebuilding
priorities and liaising with political actors in support of
political processes.

We need to provide those capacities in sufficient
numbers and with adequate resources, and we must
ensure that mandates remain consistent with the
reality on the ground. The experience of developing
countries in those areas should be better tapped into.
Peacekeeping activities with an evident peacebuilding
dimension - such as disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, quick-impact projects and community
violence reduction - must also be adequately supported.
Such activities provide local populations with early
peace dividends, which can greatly contribute to the
sustainability of the peacebuilding process.

Prevention is another important element. Prevention
necessarily brings peacekeeping and peacebuilding
together. To create a protective environment for
civilians, for example, involves a variety of aspects that
must come together, from operational readiness to the
provision of some basic services and from deterrence to
security sector reform.
Lasting and sustainable peace is what every United
Nations peacekeeping mission strives to achieve.
Exit strategies are essential in that regard. They
must be a part of the comprehensive compacts with
national Governments, the people, civil society and
the international community. Exit strategies cannot
become preconceived scripts and formulas.

These strategies will be more successful when
they are owned by societies as an important instrument
to articulate the gradual and effective assumption of
national responsibilities. We must ensure that, when
a peacekeeping mission leaves, it does not carry away
with it the very ability to mobilize still much needed
efforts and resources.

Multidimensional peacekeeping brings the issue
of human resources to the fore. Brazil values and
recognizes the contribution of all men and women,
military and civilian, who carry out ever more complex
tasks on the ground. We pay tribute to all who have
given their lives to the cause of peace under the United
Nations flag.

Our experience in Haiti shows that a
multidimensional approach to peacekeeping is also
about making our peacekeepers ever more sensitive
to the demands of those in need. It is about having
peacekeepers who are respected by civilians not for
the weapons they carry, but for the impact they help to
promote on people's daily lives.

