Ms. Mogashoa (South Africa): I would like to
welcome you to the Council, Madam President. We are
delighted that you are presiding over our deliberations
today. I would like to begin by thanking Mr. Mladenov
for his briefing on the situation in the Middle East,
particularly the question of Palestine, and Mr. Pierre
Krahenbiihl for his briefing on the status of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).

The security and humanitarian situation in all
of the occupied Palestinian territory continues to
be of great concern to my delegation. The escalation
of violence in Gaza has only worsened the already
dismal humanitarian situation, which has persisted for
years. It cannot be denied that the grave situation in
Gaza is a direct result of the illegal Israeli blockade
and occupation of the area. That has shattered any
prospects for normal economic and social development
for the 2 million Palestinian people trapped in what has
been called an open-air prison. In that regard, South
Africa reiterates its call for the complete lifting of
the illegal Israeli blockade, which continues to cause
untold humanitarian, social and economic suffering for
the Palestinian people.

We would like to acknowledge the efforts of all
parties, particularly Egypt and the United Nations,
through the Office of the Special Coordinator, in
brokering a ceasefire agreement in Gaza earlier this
month. My delegation reiterates that violence in all its
forms and from all quarters is unacceptable, and calls
on all parties to adhere to their commitments under
the ceasefire agreement in order to prevent a further
escalation of violence in Gaza.

The cumulative impact ofunilateral actions has had
a destructive impact on the lives of all who live in the
occupied Palestinian territory and has further hindered
the prospect ofthe long-standing aspiration for peace in
the Middle East, based on the established parameters.

Key among those actions is the continuation of
illegal settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian
territory, in direct contravention of a resolution of the
Council. Resolution 2334 (2016) is clear in stating that
any settlements built on occupied land have no legal
validity and are a flagrant violation of international
law. The blatant paralysis in addressing systematic
violations damages the credibility of the Council. My
delegation once again reiterates its call for the full
implementation of all General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions, particularly resolution 2334 (2016).

As we have just heard from the Commissioner-
General of UNRWA, which is tasked by the United
Nations to assist Palestinian refugees in the region, the
Agency is having immense difficulty in carrying out its
mandate due to a lack of funding. That, in turn, also has
a negative impact on the quality of life of Palestinians
in the occupied Palestinian territory.

In conclusion, it must be unequivocally stated that
any proposed peace plan should not allow Palestinian
statehood to devolve into an entity devoid of sovereignty,
territorial contiguity and economic viability. Doing
so would severely undermine previous peacemaking

efforts, accelerate the demise of the two-State solution
and fatally damage the cause of a durable peace for
both Palestinians and Israelis alike.

As many in the Council have stated today and
on many other occasions, the only credible solution
to the situation in the Middle East is that of a two-
State solution, within the 1967 borders and with East
Jerusalem as the capital of an independent Palestinian
State. Every effort must be made to bring all sides
to the negotiating table to allow them to find a long-
term peaceful solution. The Council must do its part to
support the parties in that endeavour and not condone
any violations of its resolutions.

