Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank you,
Madam President, for convening today's meeting on
such an urgent and grave subject. We thank Mr. Staffan
de Mistura and Mr. John Ging for their informative
briefings and continued efforts to help the people
of Syria.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands is extremely
concerned about the situation in Idlib. We fear a repeat
of a horrific scenario we have seen before - the
massive use of military force with a ground campaign
by the Syrian army, air raids by Russia and support
from Iran, at the cost of thousands of innocent lives,
with disastrous humanitarian consequences. There is
no military solution that will bring about long-term
peace in Syria. We need a political transition and a
political solution. In that regard, I will focus on three
issues: first, the need to prevent a further escalation of
violence in Idlib; secondly, the humanitarian situation;
and, thirdly, the political process.

First, we must prevent further escalation in Idlib.
We must prevent further military escalation in the last
de-escalation zone in Syria. Almost 3 million people
are trapped in the Idlib area. As clearly stated by the
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwaitjust now,
the humanitarian consequences of an all-out offensive
will be disastrous. Furthermore, the risk of regional
escalation is high, including the creation ofpossible new
flows of refugees. Parties must uphold international
humanitarian law throughout Syria, and in Idlib in
particular. We heard from the countries involved that
their aim to fight terrorists. Let me remind them that
any measure to counter terrorism must comply with
their obligations under international law, in particular
human rights law, international refugee law and
international humanitarian law. Combating terrorism is
no excuse for launching attacks without distinction or
proportionality. Combating terrorism is no excuse for
attacking innocent civilians, destroying hospitals and
killing humanitarian workers. Combating terrorism is
no excuse for creating a humanitarian disaster.

The guarantors of the Idlib de-escalation zone and
the Syrian regime must work towards a non-violent
negotiated solution. We express our strong support
for the urgent diplomatic efforts made by Turkey and
the United Nations. In view of the meeting of the
Astana guarantors in Tehran today, we call on them,
in particular Russia and Iran, to uphold the ceasefire
and their agreed de-escalation arrangements. Their
earlier commitments include the protection of civilians
as a matter of priority. They must protect civilians, not
attack them.

Secondly, with 1.4 million internally displaced
persons in Idlib, the humanitarian situation is already
of great concern. Many people in Idlib depend on
humanitarian aid for their daily survival. For the sake
of those civilians, once again, we call for the full
implementation of all Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 2401 (2018), which was made
possible by our Kuwaiti and Swedish colleagues.

During the war in Syria, we have seen indiscriminate
air strikes and attacks on hospitals and schools. Now we
know that the Russian military and the Syrian military
have been informed about the exact coordinates of the
remaining hospitals in Idlib, any future attack on such
essential civilian infrastructure therefore falls under
their full responsibility. Humanitarian workers are not
a target. Attacks on hospitals and humanitarian aid
workers are an affront to human decency. Attacking
innocent doctors and nurses is a criminal act. Aid to the
people in Idlib mustbe made available. Parties must grant
sustained, unimpeded humanitarian access, including
through the essential cross-border mechanism. Without
that access, a humanitarian catastrophe is inevitable.
The Council should provide a positive response to the
five requests Mr. Ging mentioned earlier.

Lastly, we need an inclusive, United Nations-led
political process on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015),
which includes a political transition that aims to address
the root causes of the conflict and lay to rest its source.
As I stated before, there will be no reconstruction aid
before a sustainable political transition is in place. We
fully support Staffan de Mistura and commend him and
this team on their persistent efforts.

In conclusion, we will continue our efforts for
accountability for mass atrocities and the use ofchemical
weapons in Syria. At the moment, one member of the
Council continues to block the referral of the situation
to the International Criminal Court. Therefore, we will
continue our efforts for accountability for the mass
atrocities committed in Syria and elsewhere, outside of
the country. Impunity cannot and will not prevail.

