Mr. Hallak (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We are entirely bewildered by the hypocrisy
of the representative of Israel's accusations. The Arabic
proverb is quite apt: if you are guilty of vices, you
should hide. Everyone knows that Israel introduced
terrorism into our region. Israel has introduced its
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons into the Arab
region. Without its support and that of certain countries
with great influence in the Security Council, Israel's
nuclear-weapons programme would have disappeared
long ago.

During the 1973 Yom Kippur War, Israel
threatened to use nuclear weapons against Egypt and
Syria. And Israel has used various types of weapons of
mass destruction in its aggression against the peoples
of the region. The Committee established pursuant to
resolution Security Council resolution 1540 (2004)
works to ensure that biological, chemical and nuclear
weapons do not fall into the hands of non-State actors.
However, Israel has offered all kinds of assistance
in the form of weapons, munitions and intelligence
to terrorist groups in Syria, especially to Da'esh and
Jabhat Al-Nusra and affiliated groups. In doing so, as
usual, it is in violation of all of the Council's resolutions
concerning counter-terrorism. Israel is not party to any
treaty on weapons of mass destruction. If that proves
anything, it is Israel's hypocrisy in its possession
of many types of weapons of mass destruction. The
Council must assume its responsibility to prevail upon
Israel to put an end to all its military, chemical and
biological weapons programmes.

Turning to the statement made by the representative
of the Turkish regime, everyone knows, and reports of the
Council themselves note, that sarin gas was trafficked
from Lybia into Turkey on a commercial aeroplane
and that terrorists supported by the regime used those
weapons in the city of Gaziantep, a Turkish town now
known as Turkish Tora Bora. We demand that the
Turkish regime repudiate those facts instead of hurling
accuations against the Syrian Government, which
has demonstrated to the entire world what the former
has done in terms of arming, training, supplying and
providing other assistance and access to international
terrorism - Islamist terrorism coming from Turkish
territory. The relevant reports on counter-terrorism,
including those of the 1540 Committee, are replete
with facts that underscore the hypocrisy of the Turkish
regime and the support and assistance it provides to
terrorists when it comes to using chemical weapons on
Syrian territory, originating on the Turkish border.

The allegations made by the representative of the
Turkish regime that his country has no weapons of
mass destruction are completely false: tactical nuclear
weapons of a nuclear Power are based on Turkish
territory.

The meeting rose at 5.25 pm.
