Mr. Jele (South Africa): South Africa adds its voice
to those who have already congratulated you on your skilful
stewardship of the Council's business during this month.
We also extend our appreciation to Ambassador Owada of
Japan for the most able manner in which he presided over
the Council's deliberations during the month of January.
The Secretary-General has placed before the Council
a comprehensive report on the present status of the peace
process in Angola, for which we thank him. My delegation
also commends the ongoing efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to engage both
parties in intensive consultations aimed at accelerating the
peace process.

It is most disappointing that the inauguration on 25
January 1997 of the Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation did not take place as envisaged in the
December 1996 revised timetable of the Joint Commission,
because UNITA withheld the dispatch of its deputies and
officials nominated for the Government of National Unity
and Reconciliation pending the resolution of the issue of the
special status for its leader, Mr. Savimbi.

Although in general the ceasefire continues to hold
throughout Angola, it is a source of serious concern that
there are still sporadic incidents of violence involving both
parties, as these incidents could lead to an escalation of the
conflict. In order to achieve lasting solutions to these
problems, it is therefore important that both parties
strictly observe the ceasefire and refrain from maintaining
illegal checkpoints. We also feel that the dismantling of
UNITA's four remaining command structures, as well as
the provision of information on the strength and military
equipment of the military detachment of the UNITA
President, are issues which need urgent attention. My
delegation is nevertheless gratified by the induction into
the Angolan Armed Forces of the nine UNITA generals,
which commenced on 20 December 1996, as well as by
the arrival in Luanda of UNITA deputies and some
ministers. We would, however, have had cause for greater
optimism had all UNITA deputies and officials arrived in
Luanda by the deadline of 12 February 1997. This would
have facilitated an earlier installation of the Government
of National Unity and Reconciliation.

We concur with the observation in the
Secretary-General's report that in order to complete the
implementation of the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol
and to consolidate the gains made so far in the peace
process, a continued, although reduced, presence of the
United Nations in Angola will be required until the end
of 1997. As the peace process enters a new phase, it will
indeed be essential that the United Nations maintains its
presence to ensure the completion of the process.

We would also like to commend the international
donor community for its tireless efforts in assisting the
Angolan people with demining and with the repair of
their war-ravaged infrastructure. More and generous
assistance is needed to promote and sustain peace and
stability.

We would also like to reiterate our previous plea for
President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi to meet inside
Angola as a matter of urgency. We believe that such a
meeting is critical and would provide a welcome
opportunity to address the issue of the status of Mr.
Savimbi and other outstanding matters. However, my
delegation believes, like many others, that any attempt in
the course of addressing this issue to introduce linkages
which impact on the implementation of the agreements
should be regarded as unacceptable. We therefore urge
the Council to take a firm and unequivocal stand in this
regard.

As the new Government in Angola will not be
formed as envisaged, my delegation supports the
extension of the mandate of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) until 31 March
1997. We urge that the Government of Angola and

 

UNITA be prevailed upon to expedite the establishment of
the Government of National Unity and Reconciliation, and
we are in full agreement with the request contained in the
resolution just adopted that the Secretary-General report to
the Council on 20 March 1997 on the status of the
formation of the new government.

The Council has repeatedly drawn attention to the
reluctance of UNITA to implement outstanding military and
political aspects of the Lusaka Protocol. We therefore feel
strongly that the time has come for this body to act
decisively and consider the implementation of appropriate
measures against UNIT A if it does not comply with its
commitments.

