Mr. Negewo (Ethiopia): We thank the United States
presidency for convening today's high-level briefing
on non-proliferation. We are very pleased to see you
presiding over this important meeting, Mr. President.
Non-proliferation has indeed been high on the Council's
agenda and it is therefore timely and relevant that we
are discussing the issue at the highest level.

A few days ago, the world paid tribute to the late
Kofi Annan. In a speech he gave in 2006 he said,

"Can there be any threat more alarming, in
today's world, than that of a nuclear or biological
weapon falling into the hands of terrorists, or
being used by a State as a result of some terrible
misunderstanding or miscalculation? The more
States have such weapons, the greater the risk.
And the more those States that already have them
increase their arsenals, or insist that such weapons
are essential to their national security, the more
other States feel that they too must have them, for
their security."

This is indeed the reality that we are facing today. Indeed,
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is
posing grave threats to global peace and security. From
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and Iranian
nuclear issues to chemical attacks in Syria and the
Salisbury incident in the United Kingdom, proliferation
risks have become one of the most serious challenges of
our time. The international non-proliferation regime is
under serious strain and global anxieties about nuclear
weapons are at the highest level since the end of the
Cold War, as Secretary-General Antonio Guterres said.

We believe it is absolutely vital that we
comprehensively address the risks of proliferation.
We have no option but to strive to find negotiated
solutions through political and diplomatic means to
some of the most difficult issues that we are currently
facing. We have all been observing the developments
following the recent summit meeting between you,
Mr. President, and Mr. Kim Jong Un, the outcome of
which has given us some sense of hope for progress
towards the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula
and the advancement of peace in North-East Asia.
We encourage such endeavours, as we have first-hand
experience in resolving and bringing peace through
diplomatic means to the no-war, no-peace situation that
existed for 20 years between Ethiopia and Eritrea.

We earnestly hope that you will maintain the
momentum generated recently with a view to finding
a comprehensive, peaceful, diplomatic and political
solution to the issue of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea in line with the relevant Security
Council resolutions. The Council should continue to
support such endeavours. In that regard, the talk of
a follow-up summit is indeed encouraging. We also
welcome the outcome of the third inter-Korean summit
in Pyongyang and hope it will lay a foundation for
concrete action towards sustainable peace, security and
complete and verifiable denuclearization on the Korean
peninsula, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions. The Council should support the
relevant parties in making progress in that direction.
In the meantime, we believe that the continued
implementation of the sanctions regime will be critical.

With regard to the Iranian nuclear issue, we remain
convinced that the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) represents a significant achievement for
multilateralism. However, we understand the challenges
and difficulties inherent in the broader implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015). While we recognize that
the withdrawal of the United States from the JCPOA
represents a serious challenge, the commitment of the
remaining participating countries will be critical to

its full implementation. We hope they will continue
to make every possible effort to address the major
challenges and to contribute to the full implementation
of the agreement, which remains vital to the global
non-proliferation architecture.

In addressing the proliferation risk posed by
non-State actors, we believe that the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004)
continues to play a significant role. Strengthening the
Committee's assistance framework for Member States
aimed at addressing gaps in implementation continues
to be important in comprehensively addressing
the proliferation risk posed by non-State actors,
including terrorists. The Council should also pay
particular attention to strengthening the collaboration
between the Group of Experts of the 1540 Committee
and members of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team pursuant to resolutions 1526 (2004)
and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities.

Finally, multilateral agreements such as the
Biological Weapons Convention, the Chemical Weapons
Convention and the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons continue to make an immense
contribution to the prevention and elimination of the
proliferation ofweapons ofmass destruction. At a time of
great risks ofproliferation, it is in all of our best interests
to preserve those important multilateral agreements in
order to guarantee our collective safety and security
and ensure their full and effective implementation.

I would therefore like to conclude by reaffirming
Ethiopia's unwavering commitment to continuing
to fulfil its international obligations by taking all
the necessary measures to prevent weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery from falling
into the hands of State and non-State actors, including
terrorists, as well as by fully implementing the relevant
Security Council resolutions in that regard.

