Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I would like to express
my sincere congratulations to you, Sir, on your
leadership of the Security Council for this month. I
also thank the Secretary-General for his recent report
on the situation in Afghanistan and its implications
for international peace and security (S/2015/684), and
my good friend, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, for his comprehensive briefing. I also thank
Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, for his briefing
and his presence today. I am very grateful for the role
Spain is playing as the penholder of Afghanistan and
for its capable work in the Security Council.

This is my last statement to the Security Council
on the situation on Afghanistan, as I am leaving at the
end of this month to assume my new responsibilities.
As I sit in the midst of friends and colleagues in the
Council Chamber, I would like to express my heartfelt
appreciation, especially to those I have had the pleasure
of working closely with in the past few years. I thank
them for their friendship and cooperation.

In recent months, Afghanistan has experienced a
challenging security situation in terms of increasing
violence and heinous attacks by the Taliban and other
terrorist and violent extremist groups. While the
enemies of Afghanistan have failed to achieve the
aim of gaining control of territories and breaking the
will of the Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF),
they have continued their brutal campaign of violence
and coercion trying to destabilize the country and
terrorize the Afghan people. We have seen those
heinous attempts in a number of highly sophisticated
recent terrorist attacks, such as that of 7 August, which
claimed hundreds of casualities, including women and
children.

In the face ofincreasing violence and instability, the
ANSF, which assumed full responsibility for security
after the departure of thousands of international forces,
have through their sacrifices, patriotism, resilience and
commitment demonstrated time and again that they
are ready to face the challenges posed by the Taliban
and terrorist and violent extremist groups. The ANSF
are at the forefront of the defence of the country and
security of the Afghan people; they present a bulwark
against letting Afghanistan slip back into the chaos
and destruction of the vicious civil war, as happened
in 19905.

The National Unity Government is committed to
making every effort to move Afghanistan on a path
of stability, peace and security. The Government
has reached out with the message of peace and
reconciliation, not only to the Afghan Taliban, who
are willing to stop fighting and join the peace process,
but also to neighbouring countries. One of the first
steps taken by President Ghani was to embark on a
process of ending the undeclared state of war between
Afghanistan and Pakistan and starting a new era of
peace and cooperation. That process has been largely
supported by the Afghan people and the first rounds of
peace talks with the Taliban led to a surge of optimism
about the prospects for peace and an end of the violence.
Despite some of the apparent setbacks in the process of
peace talks following the announcement of the death
of the Taliban leader Mullah Omar and the benighted
leadership changes in its ranks, we are hopeful that the
prospect of a political settlement will not fade; however,
it requires reciprocal steps, a responsible attitude on
the part of all sides, mutual determination and real
commitment.
The regional cooperation agenda is not limited
to peace and security, but extends to the economy,
development and prosperity as well, since the future
of the region can be fostered and strengthened only
through connectivity and greater cooperation. We all
know that the stability of Afghanistan at the heart of
Asia is essential to the stability of the wider region.
Integrating Afghanistan as the centre of an economic
hub focused on transit, transportation and trade for
the next two decades remains imperative to achieving
economic self-sufficiency and shared economic
prosperity.

Afghanistan's vision for advancing regional
economic goals - whether through its role as the
Asian roundabout between the energy suppliers in
Central Asia and the energy consumers in South
Asia, or through the growing number of cross-
border agreements to share services in health, rural
development and training - is bound up with its
economic agenda for the transformation decade. The
sixth Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan, held earlier this month in Kabul, also
elaborated further on ways to develop and consolidate
partnerships towards promoting regional economic
cooperation in Afghanistan and across the region. We
look forward to the next ministerial-level meeting of the
Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process in Islamabad as another
important step in strengthening confidence-building
and partnership in the region.

As we approach the first anniversary of the
establishment of the National Unity Government,
greater attention is being paid to ensuring the effective
implementation of vital reforms to strengthen economic
growth, improve governance, eradicate corruption,
introduce electoral reforms and protect human rights,
particularly the rights of women. The promotion of good
governance is a cornerstone of the Government's reform
agenda. One of the central pillars of the reform agenda
is to effectively tackle the scourge of corruption. The
institutions created by the Government - such as the
National Procurement Commission, the comprehensive
reorganization and review of the Supreme Court
and other measures dealing with institutions and
individuals involved in corruption - are essential to
the transformation of the anti-corruption efforts into
practical, measurable outputs.

The efforts of the National Unity Government
against corruption also include a series of important
measures in dealing with the illicit drug trade, with its
overall implications for the economy, polity, society
and the rule of law in all parts of the country. The
Government is focused not only on curbing this illicit
trade, but also on tackling all financial channels that
are providing the basis for criminal networks to be
linked at all levels in the region and globally. In order
to achieve that goal, the Government has formed an
interministerial commission to clamp down on the
narcotics trade and the financial corruption that goes
with it.

To further the reform process, the National Unity
Government has taken important steps to revise the
election law and presented its reform proposal to the
Government. The recommendations of the Commission
include the allotting of one-third of Parliament's 250
seats to political parties, the restructuring of the
current Independent Election Commission; the creation
of a clear voter identification system ahead of future
polling, and moving to an electoral system that divides
provinces into smaller voting districts that can be easily
quarantined in case offraud. The proper implementation
of that reform process would bring about necessary
changes by ensuring free and fair elections in the future.
In order to reflect those reforms, the election law was
revised earlier this week by a presidential decree, and
a calendar for the parliamentary and district council
elections will also be announced in the near future.

Afghanistan's partnership with the international
community has been paramount to the achievements
of Afghanistan over the past 14 years, and is essential
to realizing the lasting goal of peace, stability, and
prosperity in the years to come. Without the engagement
of the international community and the United Nations,
be it in the form of aid, expertise, manpower or the
sacrifices of soldiers and civilian workers, the progress
seen in Afghanistan would not be possible today.
The Afghan people and the Government are grateful
and recognize the contributions of the international
community as a whole, and particularly those of all
Afghan partners.

The role of the United Nations has been pivotal in
Afghanistan in the past 14 years, not only by coordinating
international civilian activities for establishing peace
and security, but also by supporting the Government
in all areas of political stability, good governance,
institution-building, aid coherence, human rights and
the coordination of humanitarian needs. The Tripartite
Commission and the Government of Afghanistan
have embarked upon a full re-examination of the role,
structure and activities of all United Nations entities in
Afghanistan. I am happy to say that Mr. Haysom and
his colleagues played an important role in moving this
process forward. The Commission examined the United
Nations engagement in the country, with a focus on the
areas where the United Nations adds the most value
and with a view to ensuring that the United Nations
serves to maximize the support of the international
community for Afghanistan and its people.

The discussion focused on three themes: the United
Nations principle of engagement, the Government's
commitment and obligations and the future United
Nations presence in Afghanistan. The Government is
certain that the outcome of these efforts will provide the
country, the Security Council and the United Nations a
framework for the effective engagement of all United
Nations activities and entities, including UNAMA and
all United Nations agencies, funds and programmes in
Afghanistan. The framework for review will allow the
beginning of a new relationship between Afghanistan
and the United Nations in the coming years.

The success of the transformation decade is
strongly based on the constant engagement and support
from our international partners, not only today but in
the future. To further this goal, the agreement reached
during the senior officials meeting earlier this month
on a renewed mutual accountability framework is a
significant milestone in Afghanistan's relationship
with the international community. Afghanistan looks
forward to the future conferences on Afghanistan in
Warsaw and Brussels.

Although much has been gained in Afghanistan,
much remains to be addressed. As President Ghani has
noted, 2015 will test Afghanistan's will and capacity as
a nation to address reforms across all sectors - social,
economic, security and electoral. I would like to
reiterate that the challenges faced by Afghanistan are
many; but the country and the people have proven, time
and again, that it wants peace over conflict, progress
over repression, unity over factionalism, prosperity
over hostility and inclusive growth over isolation.

Today Afghanistan's vibrant civil society, free
media, improved social indicators and successful
democratic transition of power all signal that there
is significant potential to put the last three decades
of devastation behind us and move forward. In order
to do so, Afghanistan must protect the gains made in
the last 14 years and present a united front against all
agents who are working to destabilize the country. The
role of our neighbours in the region, as well as of the
international community, is essential in supporting
Afghanistan during its transformation decade to
achieve lasting peace and stability.

