Ms. Sukkar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Mark Rutte, Prime
Minister of the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the
members of the delegation of the Netherlands for
holding this important meeting. I also thank Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres and all who briefed the
Council and shared valuable information with it.

We align ourselves with the statement delivered on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan is one of the
pioneer States in spreading peace and security in the
region and the world. We participate in peacekeeping
troops and in sharing our experience in international
peace and security. Jordan plays an important role in
dialogue and mediation for peace. We engage positively
in peacekeeping tasks based on the principled positions
of our foreign policy and the principles of moderation
and respect for international conventions and treaties.

For decades, the Kingdom has taken part in
peacekeeping operations all over the world under the
umbrella of the United Nations. We have provided more
than 100,000 participants in Croatia, Darfur, South
Sudan, the Congo, Mali, Haiti, the Central African
Republic and others. In that regard, we underscore that
peacekeeping operations should never be an alternative
to engagement in political processes that would ensure
sustaining peace, peacebuilding and finding solutions
to the root causes of conflicts and wars. We stress the
need to work for conflict prevention and to provide the
appropriate means and conditions for sustaining peace.

The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan values the efforts
of the Secretary-General in the reform and restructuring
of the peacebuilding sector in order to make missions
more effective. That is the responsibility not only of
troop- and police-contributing countries, but also of
all relevant stakeholders, beginning from the design
of a realistic and achievable mandate, all the way to
providing adequate human and financial resources and
equipment, as well as the required political will. Host
countries, regional and local organizations, mission
commanders also share responsibility. We emphasize
the triangular consultation between the Security
Council, the Secretariat and the troop-contributing
countries, as well as the importance of multilateral
engagement and partnerships in facing challenges and
achieving world peace.

The resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly on sustaining peace, in addition
to the plan of action based on the Cruz report, are a
good starting point to identify the challenges faced by
peacekeeping operations and develop a realistic long-
term strategy to tackle these challenges.

Excellent training is one of the main pillars of
the success of peacekeeping troops and for improving
their performance. In that regard, the Government
of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, represented
by the Jordanian armed forces and the Directorate of
General Security, pays particular attention to training.
We believe that providing quality training is an
effective and principal requirement. Hence, in 1996
we established a training institute for peacekeeping
operations where we train members of the Jordanian
armed forces who will be participating in peacekeeping
operations. Since 2003, we have been providing
training courses for foreign participants. Our training
institute is accredited by NATO and a member of the
International Association of Peacekeeping Training
Centres. We have trained more than 66,000 troops from
Jordan and other countries. We added another centre
for peacekeeping training in 2013, which is supervised
by the Directorate of General Security. We continue to
support the Secretary-General's efforts with regards
to the zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse.

The Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan supports the efforts of the Secretariat aimed at
increasing the participation of women in peacekeeping
operations. We currently have 30 women participating
in the police component of the peacekeeping missions
in Darfur, South Sudan and Abyei. Of the 12 female
officers trained in the institute, we have also deployed
three female officers from the Jordanian armed forces.
They are now staff officers in the Congo. Our goal is to
increase the percentage of women to 15 per cent by the
end of 2018. That reaffirms the importance that Jordan
attaches to the participation of women and to enhancing

their role in peacekeeping operations. Women play an
active and important role in peacekeeping.

In conclusion, the role of the United Nations should
move from peacekeeping phase to post-conflict work.
We call for the continued collective support of the
international community as the world around us changes
so that we can build active partnerships at all levels
and address the root causes of conflicts and disputes
in order to prevent them. Jordan supports all efforts
towards enhancing peacekeeping and strengthening
the links between peace, security, development and
human rights. Those are the main pillars of the United
Nations for achieving international peace and security
and providing a better life for all.

