Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands would like to express
its sincere thanks to Secretary-General Guterres for
his briefing. We thank the Bolivian presidency for
convening this briefing on a critical topic, which the
Security Council has discussed only once since 2013
(see S/PV.6982).

Over the decades, we have seen that the control
and exploitation of and access to natural resources have
contributed to fuelling armed conflict. There are many
steps that the Council and the United Nations can take
to tackle the issue and to promote the use of natural
resources for sustainable peace. Allow me to focus
on the role of natural resources in three phases of the
conflict cycle: in preventing conflicts through adequate
risk assessment; during a conflict through transparency
and accountability; and in building sustainable peace.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands consistently
calls for adequate risk assessments and analyses of all
root causes and threat multipliers. That is as relevant
for natural resources as it is for climate change and
water stress. Activists and affected communities in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have called attention
to the links between that country's mineral wealth and
its protracted armed conflicts. It is important that such
calls find their way to the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission and that our future actions
be based on adequate risk assessments and analyses.
We commend the Secretary-General for his efforts in
that area and look forward to hearing more from the
Secretariat during the Arria Formula meeting on water,
peace and security to be held later this month. We must
ensure that conflict-, gender- and climate-sensitive
mandates take the availability, extraction and
governance of natural resources into account.

With regard to my second point, concerning
accountability and transparency, natural resources are
a broad concept, and it would be a mistake to solely
focus on extractive industries. There are several lessons
learned with regard to accountability and transparency.
Like the Secretary-General, I would like to mention
the Kimberley Process. The multi-stakeholder
approach of the Kimberly Process was successful in
reducing the trade in blood diamonds. It facilitates
cooperation among Governments, the private sector,
producers of rough diamonds, traders, watchdogs and
non-governmental organizations.

The Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible
Supply Chains of Minerals from Conflict-Affected and
High-Risk Areas of the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development and the United Nations
Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights
form a basis for collaborating with the private sector
to ensure that human rights violations and bribery,
for example, are adequately addressed in conflict and
high-risk areas. We expect all companies to undertake
due diligence to contribute to responsible sourcing
and production. The illegal exploitation of and trade
in natural resources remain root causes of Violence in
ongoing conflicts such as in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the Central African Republic, South Sudan,
Somalia and Libya. In line with that, there is also an
imperative role for Governments to play. Governments
must choose to dismantle war economies and economies
of predation in which the trade of natural resources is
used to finance the interests of a few rather than the
interests of many. The gains of ending the conflict and
dismantling networks should be seen as more important
than utilizing the networks of ivory traffickers, gold
and diamond smugglers and mineral dealers to earn a
profit. We must change the cost-benefit equation. In that
context, what can the Council do? It can act with regard
to dismantling those networks. Tools such as adequate
reporting and political pressure must be utilized.

The illegal trade in natural resources should
be grounds for sanctions, as revenues from illegal
exploitation and trade are used to destabilize countries.
Political will, however, is absolutely necessary to do
that. The Council must also continue to evaluate and
build on experiences from peacekeeping operations,
such as the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
both of which play roles in combating the illegal
exploitation of resources.

Natural resources are key to building sustainable
peace. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and the sustaining peace agenda underline the
importance of adopting an integrated approach and of
creating more inclusive societies. Governments need
to take responsibility, be equipped to combat the illicit
trade in and trafficking of natural resources and be
able to manage their related industries. If Governments
do not shoulder their responsibility, the Council has a
responsibility to act. We know that the development
of the responsible sourcing of and trading in natural
resources contributes to creating decent jobs and,
ultimately, to social and economic growth.

In conclusion, when looking at the role of natural
resources in conflicts, it is imperative to do so
throughout the conflict cycle. We call on the Council
to call for appropriate risk assessments and analyses;
to urge Member States to work with all the relevant
stakeholders to address the issue; to take up the
responsibility to act when required in combating the
threat; and to make use of the tools at its disposal to
continue to build sustainable peace.

