Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I thank you, Sir, for
placing this matter on the agenda today. After following
the due process provided for in the working methods of
the Security Council, you have my support.

May I also thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing. We also welcome
His Excellency Mr. Daeic', First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Serbia, and thank him for his briefing. We also take
note of the statement delivered by Ms. Citaku.

South Africa welcomes the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,
with the support of the United Nations country
team, whose efforts have contributed significantly to
creating an environment conducive to compromise,
reconciliation and stability in Kosovo, as outlined in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2019/102). South
Africa also commends the efforts of Belgrade and
Pristina in the European Union-facilitated dialogue
towards normalizing relations, despite challenges faced
by both leaders in finding a sustainable and peaceful
political solution.

Surely the imposition of 100 per cent tariffs on
Serbian goods and the transformation of the Kosovo
Security Force into regular armed forces do not
contribute to creating an environment that is conducive
to finding a durable solution in Kosovo. Perhaps the
Kosovo Administration may want to reflect on those
decisions, with the possibility of suspending or
totally revising them as a contribution to establishing
an environment of peace in which negotiations can
take place.

South Africa also wishes to recognize the efforts of
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
Mr. Zahir Tanin, and their support for the peace process
in Kosovo. It is not easy. It is a very difficult process.
We wish to reiterate that the presence of the United
Nations in Kosovo is critical to reaching a solution
and encouraging cooperation among all parties, as per
the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999). However, we
remain concerned about the renewed tensions in Kosovo
with regard to the special protective zones where
construction activities persist. All relevant parties
should commit to upholding and protecting religious
integrity and heritage and to respecting the rule of
law, as well as the decisions of the Implementation and
Monitoring Council.

South Africa wishes to reiterate the sentiments
of the Secretary-General in his report regarding
continued engagement with the authorities, civil
society and bilateral and international partners.
That will play an important role in ensuring active
support for peacebuilding and intercommunity trust-
building efforts in Kosovo. We hope that the spirit of
dialogue will build the foundation for negotiations
on an inclusive, fair political settlement that will be
acceptable to both sides.
