Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the outset,
Mr. President, I welcome your outstanding initiative in
organizing this joint briefing on the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh),
Al-Qaida and associated groups, undertakings and
entities; the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-
terrorism; and the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). I
would also like to convey the Senegalese delegation's
most heartfelt congratulations to the Chairs of the
Committees - which is to say, to you, Mr. President, as
well as to Ambassador Van Bohemen and Ambassador
Oyarzun Marchesi - for the outstanding quality of
their briefings and their leadership in heading the
activities of those bodies.

There could be no more opportune time for
convening this meeting, given the recurring violent
terrorist attacks throughout the world. It is therefore more
than urgent to counter the attempts of extremist groups
to take possession of weapons of mass destruction.
However, suppression and military responses can never
be sufficient in themselves in the fight against terrorism
and violent extremism. Given terrorist groups' ability
to change and adapt to a situation, the fight requires
a multisectoral approach, one that necessarily includes
preventive, suppressive and protective measures.

Resolution 1540 (2004), a preventive text that
the Security Council adopted unanimously, founded
on Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
nearly 12 years ago, constitutes a major advantage
in our attempts to prevent non-State actors from
getting their hands on weapons of mass destruction.
The comprehensive review of the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), both in a retrospective as
well as in a forward-looking way, affords us a unique
opportunity to refocus our actions and strategies in a
comprehensive, coordinated and cohesive approach
to meet the numerous challenges facing peace and
security throughout the world. The rapid progress in
terms of science and technology, globalization, as well
as the constant change in terms of the business world,
are all factors that non-State actors can utilize to assist
them in gaining hold of weapons of mass destruction.

My delegation welcomes the regional approach,
which the 1540 Committee has decided to adopt
in its programme of work. In partnership with the
Inter-Parliamentary Union and the United Nations Office
for Disarmament Affairs, the first inter-parliamentary
meeting on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) took place in Abijan on 22 and 23 February
and was attended by more than 72 African legislators
from 18 States. The meeting was an opportunity to
discuss issues related to preventing the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction in Africa and to reflect
on ways to strengthen the national legal frameworks in
place to implement the resolution. This initiative should
be reproduced in all regions of the world, given the
crucial role that lawmakers play in the development and
adoption of legal frameworks necessary for avoiding
the consequences that could occur if nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons were to fall into the hands of
non-State actors, including terrorists.

The other event that reflects the partnership between
the 1540 Committee and Africa is the participation of
the newest members of the Committee, including the
Chair, in the assistance and review conference on the
implementation of resolution 1540 in Africa, organized
by the African Union on 6 and 7 April in Addis Ababa.
We also call for extending the cooperation between
the Committee and the African countries, most of
which have received its support as they implement the
resolution. To that end, strengthening the Committee's
capacities is more necessary than ever, if it is going
to extend its assistance activities to all countries that
request them.

Terrorist groups are increasingly using the
Internet and social media to incite people to violence
and to recruit, finance and plan terrorist acts. In this
regard, it is essential that the relevant provisions of
resolutions 1540 (2004), 2178 (2013) and 2253 (2015)
be implemented effectively by States, in particular
through strengthening their cooperation in information
sharing and through better collaboration with private
service providers with a view to improving regulation
and control systems.

In addition, the recruitment by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and other extremist groups
of foreign terrorist fighters, whose number exceeds
30,000 and who come from over 100 countries, is
another major challenge that we must confront in an
urgent, effective and coordinated manner. These
fighters are a real threat to their countries of origin, as
well as to transit and destination countries. In our view,
to eradicate this phenomenon, better cooperation with
respect to border control is imperative. However, the
measures to be taken to this end should not undermine
the principle of the free movement of people and goods.
In this regard, my delegation wishes to commend the
remarkable work done by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), which deserves
our full support and cooperation, given its countless
activities taken on under the guidance of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, whose
recommendations contained in the country visit reports
should be regularly assessed with the full cooperation
of the States concerned.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Senegal's
willingness and unwavering commitment to remaining
active in the effective implementation of the relevant
resolutions ofthe Council in the fight against terrorism,
particularly resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011), 2253
(2015), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004).

