Allow me first to renew our congratulations to the delegation of the Dominican Republic on its successful presidency of the Security Council in April, as well as our thanks to the delegation of the People's Republic of China for steering the work of the Council in March. We also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing. The world today is living through an extraordinary situation, brought about by the outbreak of the novel coronavirus, that requires extraordinary measures to counter an enemy that threatens all of humankind. That situation is compounding the suffering of the Palestinian people, who live under the Israeli occupation of their territory, have poor health facilities and rely largely on humanitarian assistance, including food and medical supplies. My country admires the steps taken by the Palestinian Authority, in spite of those constraints and its limited means, to combat the pandemic, in particular through its lockdown, testing and the isolation of infected persons and their contacts. In that light, my country is concerned about the terrible consequences that could ensue from the pandemic, especially for Palestinians, unless the Israeli authorities allow the delivery of humanitarian aid, medical equipment and medicines throughout the Palestinian territories. Faced with such a state of affairs, all sides have an obligation to respond to the call by the Secretary-General for a comprehensive ceasefire, which my country has supported, and to do all in their power to combat the coronavirus pandemic. My delegation welcomes the joint appeal made by the Secretary-General's envoys to the Middle East to all parties to the region's conflicts for a ceasefire. Morocco also appreciates the joint call made by Miguel Angel Moratinos, the High Representative for the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations, and Adama Dieng, Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide, in which they laid particular emphasis on the importance of unity, solidarity and international cooperation in combating the coronavirus. The Palestinian people continue to suffer under the Israeli occupation of their territory, daily violations of their legitimate rights and conduct on their land that flouts internationally recognized resolutions and international humanitarian law. Such conduct includes ongoing settlement activities in the West Bank and East Jerusalem, house demolitions and systematic assaults on the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound, all of which has a knock-on effect on the Palestinians' socioeconomic situation and undermines the chances of peace in the region. Morocco, whose King Mohammed VI chairs the Al-Quds Committee of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, stands with the Palestinian people as they strive to achieve their legitimate right to establish an independent State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, within the borders of 4 June 1967, and reaffirms the importance of halting settlement activity and implementing resolution 2334 (2016). East Jerusalem is part of the Palestinian territories occupied in 1967, and it is the capital of the State of Palestine. It is therefore one of the final-status issues that must be resolved through negotiations between the Palestinians and the Israelis, lies at the heart of the conflict in the Middle East and is key to any resolution reached by the Palestinians and Israelis. Morocco rejects any unilateral actions affecting 77/99 78/99 Jerusalem that are contrary to resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980). Morocco further rejects any unilateral steps that would undermine the legal and historical status of Jerusalem as a holy city and the cradle of the three monotheistic religions. With regard to Palestine refugees, Morocco reiterates its support for the mandate of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and its efforts to alleviate their suffering in the countries of the region and to facilitate their access to basic services, in particular children's education and medical care, especially in these exceptional circumstances with the spread of the coronavirus. For its part, the Bayt Mal Al-Quds Al-Sharif Agency, the executive branch in the field of the Al-Quds Committee, continues to support the city's people through a range of key projects concerning, in particular, cultural and urban heritage conservation, social assistance and the preservation of the Palestinian national archives. Morocco continues, as before, to believe that the Palestinian question will be resolved. The stalling of talks between the Palestinians and Israelis has nonetheless stymied any chance of breaking the cycle of violence, tension and mutual mistrust. It is therefore up to the international community to step up and work with a will effectively and creatively to bring the Palestinians and Israelis back to the negotiating table so as to achieve a two-State solution within the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as the capital of the State of Palestine. Such negotiations must be based on sound foundations and characterized by a sincere desire, within a specific timetable, to restore confidence between the parties and lay the foundations of a viable Palestinian State that would exist alongside Israel in security and peace, in line with internationally recognized resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. We also appreciate the international efforts to foster lasting peace and security in the Middle East.
