Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation wishes to
thank you, Sir, at this early stage of your presidency,
for convening this urgent meeting of the Security
Council to consider the grave situation in Palestine. We
associate ourselves fully with the statement made by
Ambassador Kumalo of South Africa as Chairman of
the Non-Aligned Movement. We are grateful to
Ambassador Al-Kidwa of Palestine for updating us on
the latest developments and for his very restrained
remarks, in spite of the provocation on the ground. It
must have been extremely difficult for him to do so.

The entire world watches with utter consternation
and disbelief the blatant and ruthless actions taken by
Israel to intimidate, terrorize and subdue the
Palestinian people and their leadership. Day and night,
through its overwhelming military might, Israel has
unleashed a reign of terror - for that is what it is -
against the Palestinian people. I am therefore not at all
embarrassed to sit where I am. It is at least a symbolic
support for the people of Palestine at this critical time.

With the all-out military onslaught mounted by
the Israeli armed forces against Palestinian towns and
cities and the siege being laid to the headquarters of
President Yasser Arafat in Ramallah, the intent of the
Israeli Government has become crystal clear. Indeed,
the Israeli Government has made no bones about its
real intention. Its objective, carried out in the name of
destroying the so-called "infrastructure of terrorism", is
actually to dismember and dismantle the infrastructure
of the Palestinian National Authority and to cripple and
render impotent its leadership. In doing so, it is
destroying the very foundations of political dialogue
between the two sides that had been painstakingly laid
down and built upon through the Madrid and Oslo
processes. By isolating President Arafat and rendering
him "irrelevant" - that is the word that has been
used- the Israeli Government is tearing up all the
agreements, accords and understandings arrived at
between the two sides since the beginning of the peace
process. This is insanity and it must be stopped. The
Israeli Government must be told in no uncertain terms
that there can be no military "solution" to the problem,

as no military might, however overwhelming, can ever
vanquish the will and determination of the Palestinian
people to establish an independent and sovereign State
in their homeland. If there is just one lesson that Israel
should have learned throughout this entire tragic
conflict in the Middle East, it is that lesson.

The situation in Palestine is a matter of grave
concern to the international community, but especially
to the Islamic countries. In this regard, my delegation
wishes to draw the Council's attention to the statement
issued by the foreign ministers of the States members
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) at
their current meeting in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
While the special ministerial meeting of the OIC was
convened for the specific purpose of dealing with the
issue of the global campaign against international
terrorism and the role of Islamic countries in that
campaign, the ministers found it necessary to
pronounce themselves on the situation in Palestine.
This statement will be formally communicated to the
President of the Security Council very shortly by Mali,
as the current chairman of the OIC foreign ministers,
but, as the host of that meeting, Malaysia deems it
appropriate to highlight at this important meeting of
the Council the salient points of that statement, which
are as follows.

The Conference strongly condemns Israel's recent
storming of Palestinian cities and villages, as well as
the headquarters of the Palestinian presidency, and its
endangering the life of President Arafat and other
Palestinian leaders. The Conference considers this
assault a violation of all international norms and laws
and the culmination of State terrorism practised by
Israel.

The Conference requests the Security Council,
the two sponsors of the peace process and the European
Union to assume their responsibility to immediately
stop the Israeli aggression and effect the withdrawal of
Israeli troops from all occupied Arab and Palestinian
territories.

The Conference reaffirms the continuing support
of the Islamic States for the Palestinian people's
struggle against Israeli occupation and for the
restoration of their inalienable national rights,
including the right of return for refugees and the right
to self-determination and to establish their sovereign
State, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.

While condemning Israel's practice of State
terrorism, the Conference calls on the international
community to take immediate action to stop the Israeli
aggression and illegitimate practices and to lift the
blockade. The Conference also requests the Security
Council to take the necessary measures to provide
international protection for the Palestinian people and
to apply deterrent sanctions against Israel.

The Conference considers Israeli terrorist actions
and aggressive practices as posing a threat to
international peace and security and as dragging the
region towards an all-out war, and therefore
necessitating immediate action by the Security Council
under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter.

The Conference welcomes the Arab peace
initiative taken at the recent Arab summit conference in
Beirut and requests the Security Council to put in place
a mechanism for its implementation in accordance with
the relevant resolutions of the Council and
international legitimacy.

It is the hope of my Government and that of all
OIC member States that, in addressing the critical
situation in Palestine, the Council will give serious
consideration to this statement. Several of the OIC
member States have spoken before me and my
delegation fully associates itself with their eloquent
and even passionate statements.

All peace-loving countries abhor terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations and have joined in the
global alliance to fight this scourge. The Islamic
nations have done no less and are meeting in my
capital city, Kuala Lumpur, to coordinate their actions
so as to contribute effectively to this campaign, from
which we must emerge victorious. However, it is
necessary for the international community to
differentiate between terrorism per se and the
legitimate struggle for independence against foreign
occupation and alien domination. While the killing of
innocent civilians by individuals or groups of
individuals cannot be justified and must be condemned,
so must the massacre of innocents by the apparatus of
the State. If we, the international community, are
serious in our quest to combat terrorism, there cannot
be double standards.

The Council must exercise its responsibility
under the Charter and take immediate action to stop the
carnage. It must act promptly to save the Palestinian
people and its imperilled leadership, who is about to be

disposed of by an Israeli Government that is bent on a
military victory at all costs. While we welcome the
adoption of Council resolutions 1397 (2002) of 12
March 2002 and 1402 (2002) of 30 March 2002 as
positive steps in addressing the situation, we call on the
Council to back its pronouncements with immediate
and concrete action. It is imperative for the Council to
follow up on these resolutions, in particular, resolution
1402 (2002) which, inter alia, calls for an immediate
ceasefire and the withdrawal of Israeli troops from
Palestinian cities, including Ramallah. It is important
for the Council not to allow itself to be sidelined again.
To take no action would be tantamount to condoning
the aggressive policies and actions of the Israeli
Government and, worse still, would allow the situation
to explode into a catastrophe of monumental
proportions, which we would all regret.

The situation in the occupied territories is
intolerable to the Palestinian people. Indeed, it is
intolerable even to watch on the television screen. My
delegation has warned time and again that unless
immediate and resolute efforts are made by the Council
to stop the violence we might reach a point of no
return. In our view, that point has almost been reached.

We continue to hold the belief that what is
urgently needed to stop the violence and arrest the slide
towards war is for the Council to authorize the dispatch
of a United Nations or international peacekeeping or
monitoring force to the occupied territories, or at the
very least to dispatch, initially, a Council fact-finding
mission. We are therefore grateful to the Chair of the
Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement
for renewing the Movement's proposal to the Council
just now.

Given the deep antipathy between the
Palestinians and the Israelis, the intervention of a
neutral third party is imperative. This is where we feel
the Security Council can and should play a critical role.
Along with others who are prepared to do so, it must
become fully engaged in the effort to stop the violence
and must join in the search for a lasting peace between
the Arabs and the Israelis. It must stop the rampaging
that is relentlessly going on in the occupied territories.
It must help give substance to the vision of a
Palestinian State that was articulated in Council
resolution 1397 (2002).

The United Nations, and the Security Council in
particular, remain the last hope for the Palestinian
people. They look to the United Nations, as the
champion of the oppressed, for the restitution of their
rights as a people - rights that they have been
deprived of for decades. My delegation is hopeful, Sir,
that under your astute leadership, the Council will be
able to muster the necessary political will and the
wisdom and courage to do what is right and just for the
Palestinian people.

In conclusion, Sir, let me commend you most
sincerely for allowing non-members of the Council to
address the Council before members have the
opportunity to speak. I can assure you that this is very
much appreciated by the non-members.

