The Deputy Secretary-General: I would like to
thank the members of the Security Council for the warm
welcome that I have had today; it is truly humbling.
I would also like to congratulate the United Kingdom
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
in March.

As Deputy Secretary-General, as an African and
as a Nigerian, I truly welcome the Council's visit to the
Lake Chad basin to witness first-hand the impact of the
Boko Haram insurgency - even more so because, as a
child, I grew up in Maiduguri and know that terrorists
are not born, but created by a set of circumstances.

Security Council field visits around the world have
been instrumental in highlighting the links between
peace, development and human rights, and that has
been recognized in the remarks made this morning.
I thank the Council for the much-needed attention
now brought to that troubled region. The Lake Chad
crisis provides a powerful illustration of the complex
multidimensional challenges facing our modern
world. A successful response requires mobilizing our
assets holistically to implement the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals.

The United Nations is focused on six main pillars
of engagement: political; humanitarian assistance;
human rights; recovery and development; justice,
law enforcement and the financing of terrorism; and
technical support to the regional Multinational Joint
Task Force. Three other dimensions are being added:
gender; defections and arrests of Boko Haram militants,
with its own challenges given the number of youth and
girls; and support to Member States in developing a
regional plan of action to prevent violent extremism.

It is essential that we address the Boko Haram
crisis in a holistic manner. That means looking beyond
the security lens and addressing root causes, including
inequality, exclusion and the full array of economic,
social, political, cultural and religious grievances. To
that end, the United Nations continues - through the
efforts of Mr. Fall and Mr. Chambas, the Secretary-
General's Special Representatives for Central Africa
and West Africa and the Sahel, respectively - to
encourage Member States and the leadership of the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Economic Community of Central African States to
convene a joint summit on Boko Haram.

We and the Council are keenly aware of the
deteriorating humanitarian and human rights situation,
which has displaced millions of people in the region.
Approximately 10.7 million people in the Lake Chad
basin need humanitarian assistance now. More than
7 million require food support, including 515,000
children with severe acute malnutrition. Drought is
inevitable and there is a real risk of famine, which can
be averted with the urgent action that we need now.

The World Food Programme is reaching more
than 1 million people in north-east Nigeria and is
expanding its efforts. UNICEF has assisted 4 million
people with basic health care and safe water. But,
despite the considerable contribution of the recent Oslo
donor conference, demand outstrips the resources.
I urge Member States to ensure that the $1.5 billion
humanitarian appeal for the Lake Chad region is fully
funded, and I implore affected Governments to ensure
full, safe and unimpeded access to all affected areas
and populations.

At the same time, we must pay attention to the
need to better coordinate our responses and ensure that
resources are used in the most efficient manner possible.
We must also close the gap between humanitarian
assistance and development interventions. Lasting
recovery will entail supporting the reconstruction
of schools and health centres and reviving essential
infrastructure, such as agriculture and water supplies,
that supports the necessary livelihoods.

Effective prevention of future radicalization and
violence will also entail comprehensive responses that
benefit all members of society, especially marginalized
communities and youth. I was in Bamajust three weeks
ago, where we have one of the largest camps, and to
see how children were thriving with the opportunity
of education, albeit not in the right circumstances.
But certainly the transition that UNICEF was able to
provide was really a sign of hope, and one that we need
to invest in reinforcing the recovery and the investments
that are needed.

The situation in the four countries affected by Boko
Haram continues to be defined by grave human rights
abuses committed by Boko Haram and in the context
of counter-terrorism actions. In response, the United
Nations is deploying additional human rights officers
to collect information on violations ofhuman rights and
international humanitarian law. The United Nations is
also assisting affected States to ensure their counter-
terrorism efforts comply fully with international human
rights law, humanitarian law and refugee law. There is a
need to strengthen justice mechanisms and ensure due
process for defectors and suspected terrorists.

In the Niger and Chad, the United Nations
has been able to facilitate the release of dozens of
children suspected of being Boko Haram fighters and
to deliver them to child protection actors. In Nigeria,
the United Nations has been given access to detention
facilities in Maiduguri to monitor the conditions under
which women and children captured during military
operations are being held. Cameroon has also indicated
an interest in cooperating with the United Nations on
this issue.

The plight of women and girls associated with
and affected by Boko Haram is of particular concern.
The United Nations and partners have provided
care and support to approximately 6,000 women and
children formerly associated with or captured by
Boko Haram, but many more are still displaced in
camps, detained by the authorities or are struggling
to reintegrate into their communities, where many
face stigma and discrimination. Many are survivors
of sexual violation, exploitation and abuse. They need
comprehensive assistance. We also need to scale up
efforts to provide access to sexual and reproductive
health and psychosocial support and livelihood support
for female-headed households. We must ensure that
women have key roles in the response - from food
distribution and camp management to all efforts to
counter violent extremism and to restore State authority
and build peace.

This month is about women - it is our women's
month. It is fitting that the United Kingdom, which has
championed the issue of women and peace and security
in the Council for many years, holds the Council
presidency. But I also want to commend the Council as
a whole. In the past two months, members have heard
from the female civil society leader from Nigeria,
Fatima Askira of the Borno Women Development
Initiative. Council experts have met with senior United
Nations leaders from the region in a dedicated meeting
on women and peace and security in the Lake Chad
basin, and during the Council's mission this past week,
members met with female legislators, civil society
leaders and the internally displaced.

Addressing the root causes ofthis crisis is necessary
for durable peace in the region. Let us note that it
will also to help alleviate the phenomenon of mass
migration to Europe by people who feel they have no
choice but to look for better opportunities far from their
homeland. The United Nations development system
is working on national and cross-border initiatives
to support poverty reduction, capacity development,
effective governance, natural resource management,
early recovery, disaster risk reduction, social cohesion,
peacebuilding and resilience.

One priority must be the regeneration of Lake
Chad itself. The lake and its wetlands have now lost
90 per cent of their water due to unsustainable water
management practices and climate change. I commend
the Lake Chad basin countries' commitment to the
lake's regeneration, but the support of the international
community will be essential. I would also like to
acknowledge at this point the support of the Chinese
Government for its work on some of the feasibility
studies that have been needed to look at the possibilities
and the financing of that recharge.

The Council's recent visit to Lake Chad has
highlighted the urgency and complexity of the crisis
faced by the region's people and the threat it poses to
international peace and security. My clear message today
is that the solution lies in holistic thinking. The 2030
Agenda provides a blueprint and a tool for providing a
better future for the people of the Lake Chad basin. A
fundamental requirement for success there and around
the world is solidarity and partnership - a global
partnership for sustainable development, especially in

the most fragile contexts where people most need our
solidarity and support for their right to a life of dignity.

To that end, I welcome the work being done by
the World Bank in the Lake Chad basin, as well as in
Somalia, Yemen and South Sudan. I would also like to
commend the commitment of the African Union and
Africa's regional organizations to peace, security and
the integrated implementation of the 2030 Agenda and
Africa's own Agenda 2063.

I sincerely believe that the Council's visit has
boosted the potential for partnership and provided
much-needed hope for the people of that region, but
also the impetus for us, in the United Nations system,
to gather all the assets that we have and to put them to
a much more effective and efficient use for the sake of
those who deserve so much more attention than we have
been able to give in the recent past.

