Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): Allow me
first to thank you, Mr. President, for your initiative in
organizing the resumption of a debate on this item that the
Security Council began in July 1999 on the initiative of
Malaysia. Today we can learn from the new light shed on
this subject by the recent report of the Secretary-General.
My delegation thanks the Secretary-General and
congratulates him on his excellent report, which provides a
good overview of the demands now being placed on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes in
a peacekeeping context.

The representative of Portugal will soon make a
statement on behalf of the European Union; clearly, France
associates itself fully with that statement. I wish only to
make a few brief comments at this stage.

Everyone agrees that the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants is an indispensable part
of the settlement of conflicts. But that task can succeed in
the long term - and I stress "in the long term" - only if
a number of conditions are met. First of all, disarmament
and demobilization must come about through agreement
among all belligerent parties. To impose it by force
inevitably means a return to war. For if those bearing arms
are given no guarantees, can they be expected to let
themselves be disarmed without resistance? Therefore,
agreements between belligerent parties - before
peacekeeping operations are set up - must include specific
provisions in this regard. As the Secretary-General
stresses in his report, a lack of clarity on this point carries
inherent risks and can have serious future consequences.

Secondly, in the three-part process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, the third part is without
doubt the most important. We must not confuse causes
with symptoms: taking up arms is a way - a violent
way - of responding to a situation such as
underdevelopment, inequitable distribution of wealth,
ethnic rivalry or political oppression. To permanently
convince combatants to lay down their weapons and,
more important, not to take them up again in the future,
four guarantees are required: personal safety; equitable
and effective political participation; genuine economic
prospects for them to meet their needs and the needs of
their families; and a social status as attractive as that of
warrior, which they are being asked to renounce.

My next point is that the international community
must speedily demonstrate its firm resolve to contribute
to the success of these programmes, and in particular to
create the climate of confidence that is indispensable for
success. A lasting commitment by the parties to a conflict
to keep their commitments depends on this.

We consider that there are three priority approaches
in a strategy that must be comprehensive and long-term.
I note that the Secretary-General has rightly stressed that
any activities in this sphere must indeed be
comprehensive and long-term.

The first approach relates to adapting the mandates
of peacekeeping operations. When a disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process is deemed
necessary, relevant provisions must appear in the mission
mandate. It is important to understand the importance, as
stressed by the Secretary-General, of involving the United
Nations at the earliest possible stage in the process
established by a peace agreement.

Secondly, there must be better coordination on the
ground among all actors, something that has been
mentioned by a number of other speakers. The mandates
of peacekeeping operations that include a disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration element must set out a
clear division of labours and an effective allocation of
responsibilities among all the organizations and all the
actors involved in implementing the programme. During
the peacekeeping phase, the special representative of the
Secretary-General in the mission area should

 

unequivocally assert his or her authority in this area and
should understand his or her role as a coordinator.

The third area is that of financing, as rightly
mentioned by a number of delegations; the representative of
the United Kingdom, for example, spoke of the problems
now being faced in Sierra Leone. The fact is that the lack
of financial resources too often causes the failure of a
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme,
which cannot be completed because of this problem. It is
particularly regrettable that these tasks - which no one
doubts are decisive for effective peace-building - all too
often depend on voluntary contributions, which by their
very nature are unpredictable. There should be a more
decisive joint effort so that, at least in the early stages, we
can draw on the budgets of peacekeeping operations. The
Secretary-General's initiatives regarding seed money for
"quick impact projects" within the assessed budgets of
peacekeeping operations deserve every encouragement.

The presidential statement that will be issued
following this debate must reflect our ongoing, determined
commitment to the success of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration processes, particularly in a peacekeeping
context. The report of the Secretary-General has helped us
clearly to identify remaining obstacles and the objectives
we should keep clearly in view. We fully support the
presidential statement, and, as always, hope that its
principles and recommendations will be implemented every
time we deal with a case of this kind.

