Mr. Motoc (Romania): My delegation is
delighted, Mr. Minister, to see you personally chairing
the second important meeting of the Council in a row.
As I will point out further on, it seems that more that
one connection can be established between these
meetings.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his carefully balanced report on the situation in Kosovo
(S2005/335). I would also like to thank the Special
Representative for his briefing today, for his work in
Kosovo and for providing us with a useful technical
assessment of standards implementation.

As always, we convey our appreciation and
gratitude to the men and women of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo UNMIK)
and its partners on the ground - the European Union
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) - and well as to the Kosovo Force
(KFOR). Romania would like to assure the Special
Representative of its full support.

I welcome the participation at this important
meeting of the representative of Serbia and
Montenegro, Minister Nebojsa Covic, President of the
Coordination Centre of Kosovo and Metohija.

Romania fully associates itself with the statement
that will be made shortly by Ambassador Hoscheit of
Luxembourg on behalf of the European Union.

Romania is pleased to note that the "standards
before status" policy, designed in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999), is starting to bear fruit. We
welcome in this regard the continuing trend reported
by the Secretary-General in standards implementation.
We welcome in particular the cooperation with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia and the subsequent demonstration of the
growing political maturity of Kosovo's leaders.
Romania concurs with the Secretary-General that
standards are above all goals in and of themselves.
They are the roadmap not only to the political process
to determine the future status of Kosovo, but also to
the very connection to and integration with the larger
European family.

Indications of the growing investment that
Belgrade and Pristina are making in the sectoral
dialogue are encouraging, but the recently expressed
readiness to engage in political dialogue as well must
be supported so that it can materialize.

We encourage the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government and the inhabitants of Kosovo, of all
ethnicities, to keep up and enhance efforts for a stable,
democratic, tolerant and truly multi-ethnic Kosovo,
and we support those efforts. However, the day when a
Kosovo Serb or Albanian walks freely, fearlessly and
in full dignity anywhere in Kosovo is not here yet. That
was one of the promises of resolution 1244 (1999), and
the Security Council must continue to uphold it.

In this context, we share the concern of the
Secretary-General that deficiencies remain in all
categories of standards, including in key priority areas.
Much remains to be done, and we need to see more
concrete, tangible results in many fields, such as
returns, freedom of movement, rule of law and
protection and preservation of the religious and
cultural heritage. The provisional authorities of Kosovo
need to accelerate the implementation of the standards
policy.

Given the current situation in Kosovo, and
considering that uncertainty neither benefits regional
stability nor encourages the sustained efforts needed
for creating a tolerant and democratic environment, a
comprehensive review of the implementation could be
initiated, as recommended by the Secretary-General.
We believe that this review should be seen as a means
to encourage the further implementation of the
standards by showing which specific areas need to be
addressed most urgently. We also believe that the
Council should look beyond this first comprehensive
review and plan accordingly for a continuation of the
review mechanism.

The process on Kosovo is of paramount
importance for the entire region, and understandably, it
is followed with great attention by political leaders and
public opinion in South-East Europe.

Recently, the heads of State and Government of
countries participating in the South-East European
Cooperation Process (SEECP), meeting in Bucharest,
expressed support for the full implementation of the
standards policy and for respect for Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). They called for a renewed and
constructive dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade.
The leaders of South-East Europe also declared that the
process of standards evaluation, the commencement of
negotiations on the future status of Kosovo and the
establishment of a democratic and multi-ethnic society
in Kosovo are of great significance for the region's
overall stability.

We believe that in this way a genuine "voice of
the region" has expressed itself very clearly on what it
expects with regard to Kosovo. The matter before the
Council today obviously had high priority on the
agenda of the Romanian chairmanship of the SEECP,
and we trust that the same kind of attention will be
central to the activities of the current Greek
chairmanship as well.

Romania considers that effective mechanisms
need to be put in place to counter organized crime and
promote sustainable economic growth in Kosovo.

More generally, we believe that there is no
solution outside a European and Euro-Atlantic
perspective for the region, including for Serbia and
Montenegro. There have been encouraging signs of
advancement in that direction lately. Opening up
European and Euro-Atlantic perspectives to Serbia and
Montenegro and Kosovo will facilitate the process and
ensure a positive attitude and more willingness to carry
out the necessary reforms.

On a particular note, Romania considers that a
substantive dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade
and between communities in Kosovo - including,
especially, on political matters - is essential at this
moment. Such dialogue should contribute not only to
the advancement of the political process, but also to a
better environment of trust and confidence. In this
respect Romania welcomes the openness for dialogue
expressed recently by the high-level authorities of
Serbia and Montenegro and of Serbia. In the same
vein, we call on the Kosovo Serb representatives to
assume their role in the political life in Kosovo. In fact,
we do not envisage an effective and viable solution for
Kosovo that is not be based on genuine dialogue and
compromise among those concerned.

Yesterday the Council took up, in the frame of an
inspired Danish initiative, the issues of peacebuilding
and preventing relapses into conflict. On the topic
today, the best peacebuilding offer we see for the
Western Balkans is their inclusion in the mainstream
European and Euro-Atlantic integration processes.
What Romania wishes to see in the Western Balkans is
sustainable security and stability, based on democracy,
freedom and tolerance. That is a complex challenge
that has Kosovo as a nodal point. To achieve it we need
commitment, political maturity, dialogue and vision
from all involved.

I would like to conclude by asking the Special
Representative to give us a few more elements on
measures taken in Kosovo to fight organized crime,
which is an important challenge for the entire region.

