Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
you, Sir, for convening this open debate and align
myself with the statement to be delivered by the
representative of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries and the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of Uganda on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

The main development since the previous open
debate on this issue (see S/PV.8517) has been the
attempts to implement the so-called deal of the century
by convening a workshop on Palestine in Bahrain. That
initiative is based on ill intent, wrong assumptions
and unrealistic approaches, and is therefore definitely
doomed to fail. It is based on ill intent simply because
it has been proposed by the United States, a country
that is well known for its biased policies rendering
unconditional support for Israel, as well as unjust
practices towards the Palestinians. The latest examples
include moving the United States Embassy to Jerusalem
and recognizing Israel's sovereignty over the occupied
Syrian Golan, both of which are in flagrant violation of
the pre-emptory norms of international law.

Basically during the past seven decades, the
Security Council has been unable to force the occupying
Power to end the occupation because of the unreserved
support of the United States for Israel. Such systematic
United States support, even when Israel is committing
the most heinous and barbaric crimes, has emboldened
the Zionist regime to continue, with total impunity, to
commit all international crimes systematically.

Relying on such support, Israel has also continued
its expansionist policies and illegitimate practices
in oppressing the Palestinians, in gross violation of
their basic rights. One example of such brutality is the

decade-long illegal blockade by Israel on Gaza, turning
it into the largest open-air prison in the world. That
inhumane blockade must come to an end. Moreover,
the so-called deal of the century is based on wrong
assumptions simply because it is aimed at buying all
causes and aspirations, honour and dignity, property
and territory, and the inalienable rights of an entire
nation. It is certainly an illusion and will therefore
definitely fail completely.

The cause of Palestine is based on the struggle of
a nation for freedom, liberty, independence, complete
control over all its ancestral lands, preserving its
religious and cultural identity and sites, and saving its
honour and dignity. Diminishing and reducing such
noble and holy causes to economic improvement is the
most wrong-headed assumption ever for resolving the
question of Palestine. Additionally, the so-called deal of
the century is based on an unrealistic approach, simply
because all Palestinian groups, without exception, have
strongly rejected it.

Furthermore, Al-Quds Al-Sharif, in addition to the
Palestinians, is dear to all Muslims, and no Muslim in
the world is ready to accept such a disgraceful plan.
Al-Quds Al-Sharif is and will remain the capital
of Palestine.

History tells us that no nation has compromised
on its sacred causes, and the nation of Palestine is
no exception. The mere struggle and resistance of
Palestinians over the course of the past seven decades
clearly indicate how resolute, determined and persistent
they are in realizing their noble objectives of liberty
and independence. They have suffered economically
for seven decades to liberate their lands. What they
need is freedom and liberation. Once the occupation
ends, they know very well how to improve the economy
of their independent State.

At the same time, the international community
should maintain its strong support to the Palestinians
in their struggle to liberate their homeland. Under the
pretext of economic improvement, the main aim and
true nature of the so-called deal of the century are to
consolidate the occupation. The world must resist that
unjust move. The Council must also end the vicious
cycle of being bullied by one of its permanent members,
which unlawfully and brazenly continues rendering
this organ inactive and ineffective, regarding Israel.
That hypocritical policy should come to an end and the
Council must be able to play its Charter-based role in
support of Palestinians.

Ultimately, like any other crisis, the question
of Palestine cannot be solved without addressing its
root causes. There is no magic solution. The unlawful
occupation of Palestine is the main source of the crisis
and it can end only by ending the occupation.

Finally, the Israeli representative, in total disregard
for the agenda of today's meeting, which is respected
by all and focused on the Palestinian question,
unsuccessfully tried to distract our attention from the
crimes and unlawful policies of its regime. He should
have explained why they continue the occupation of
Palestine, investing in death and destruction, invading
other countries, imposing an inhumane blockade on
Gaza, killing innocent children, demolishing homes,
schools and hospitals, promoting racism, developing
all types of weapons of mass destruction, including
hundreds of nuclear weapons, refusing to join treaties
banning weapons of mass destruction, in particular
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, and rejecting the establishment of a nuclear-
weapon-free zone in the Middle East. It must stop its
fabrications, lawlessness, brutality and crimes and be
held accountable.

