Ms. Patten: I thank you, Madam President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on my recent
visit to Somalia, which took place from 14 to 18 July, at
the invitation of the Federal Government.

While it was my first visit, Somalia has been a
priority country for my mandate over the past decade.
Following the signing of a joint communique on the
prevention of sexual violence in May 2013, my Office,
through the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and
Sexual Violence in Conflict, has been actively working
through the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia and other United Nations entities to support the
Government in strengthening its formal justice system.

The purpose of my visit was to engage with the
Federal Government and the federal member states,
to take stock of ongoing efforts, to understand the
challenges and to determine the nature of support
to be extended to the Government in its efforts to
prevent and respond to conflict-related sexual violence.
During my mission, I visited Mogadishu and Baidoa.
In both locations, I met with senior Government
officials, parliamentarians, United Nations and African
Union officials, front-line service providers and civil
society representatives.

I could not meet with survivors due to security
constraints, but I am satisfied with the level of
information I obtained from the United Nations system
and implementing partners who stressed how sexual
violence in Somalia remains a matter of grave concern.
The number of cases documented is just the tip of a
deeply structural problem, with countless women and
girls subjected to, or living in fear of, sexual violence.
I emphasize the word "countless", as victims are often
invisible and inaccessible, with nowhere to report these
crimes and nowhere to turn.

It is an environment in which women and girls
are particularly vulnerable to conflict-related sexual
violence owing to deeply entrenched gender inequality
and discrimination, continuing insecurity, weak rule
of law, large-scale displacement, limited reach of
State institutions, lack of access to areas controlled by
Al-Shabaab and the recurrent humanitarian crises.

In Baidoa, the President of South-West state and
other members of his cabinet, the Ministers of Justice
and Gender Equality, informed me of persistent
insecurity, particularly in internally displaced
persons camps, with displaced women and girls from
marginalized minority groups facing the highest risk of
sexual violence owing to a lack of, or limited access to,
protection mechanisms.

I met with more than 35 civil society organizations
and front-line service providers in Mogadishu, who
depicted a situation in which sexual predators are
emboldened by a weak legal system and the stigma
attached to reporting, leading to justice being elusive
for most victims. They highlighted how the conflict has
eroded the strength of all key institutions, especially
the criminal justice system, thereby severely limiting
human rights protection for survivors and their ability
seekjustice in a secure and dignified manner.

They raised the serious challenges that they face in
reaching vulnerable women and girls, especially those
with disabilities, due to insecurity, restrictions imposed
by parties to the conflict and targeted attacks on aid
workers. The majority of survivors do not have access
to comprehensive health services, including sexual and
reproductive health services. AI-Shabaab has banned
most non-governmental organizations and all United
Nations agencies from areas under its control.

Concerns were also raised about the common
practice of abduction by Al-Shabaab and forcing
families to endorse forced marriages. In that regard, I
was encouraged by an innovative pilot project in Baidoa,
supported by International Organization for Migration,
which provides rehabilitation and reintegration
assistance to women and girls formerly associated with
Al-Shabaab. Social workers shared information about
several cases, including that of a 17-year-old girl who
was abducted and forcibly married to a member of
Al-Shabaab, but escaped with her two children born
from rape, and that of another young victim who paid
So.Sh50 million, the equivalent of $2,500, in order to
escape Al-Shabaab. In recognition of the potential of
that project and the urgent need to reach more victims
of violent extremism and terrorism, the United Nations
Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict, the
inter-agency network that I chair, is already working to
replicate and scale up that initiative.

Impunity for the perpetrators of crimes of sexual
violence was also raised as a major concern, with
victims' fears of stigmatization and reprisals, the
weakness and complexity of the legal system, the lack
of an adequate legislative framework and functional
judicial system and the use of traditional justice systems
resulting in chronic underreporting.

Despite ongoing efforts by the Government to
strengthen the formal justice system, many survivors
of sexual violence depend on traditional mechanisms
for justice - including customary law, xeer and
Sharia - through which they are forced to marry their
rapist to avoid bringing shame and stigma upon the
family. Local culture, with its custom of compelling
victims to marry their assailants or accept livestock
as compensation for their assault, constitutes a major
obstacle to justice. Concerns were expressed about the
safety of a 9-year-old girl who was raped by a 27-year-
old brigadier soldier in AdaIe a few days before my
visit and about the likelihood of the case being settled
through traditional justice system.

Despite that extremely challenging situation, I am
pleased to inform the Council that my dialogue with
the national authorities was frank and constructive.
There was no attempt to deny or downplay the extent
and gravity of these crimes. In fact, there was a clear
acknowledgement that sexual violence has been, and is
being, perpetrated by all parties to the conflict, as well
as an expression of political will to address that scourge.

Despite some commendable efforts by the
Government, such as the constitutional review, the
sexual offences bill approved by the Federal Cabinet
since May 2018, efforts led by the Attorney General's
Office and training of the Somali police, Somali
armed forces and national intelligence security agency
throughout 2018, progress is slow, with terrorism
remaining a major threat to peace and stability in
the country.

As a direct outcome of my Visit, the Government
committed to working with the United Nations system
to develop a new implementation plan for the joint
communique, in the form of an action plan on ending
sexual Violence in conflict, which will focus on key
elements of resolution 2331 (2016), which outlines the
nexus between terrorism and conflict-related sexual
violence, and resolution 2467 (2019), which calls for a
holistic, survivor-centred response to conflict-related
sexual violence.

The Government also expressed the commitment
to work towards the delisting of its forces from the
annex to the annual report of the Secretary-General
on conflict-related sexual violence and has sought the
technical support of my Office to establish a road map
in that regard. In the latest report of the Secretary-
General's (S/2019/280), the Somali National Army, the
Somali Police Force and allied militia, as well as the
Puntland forces, are listed as parties credibly suspected
of committing or being responsible for patterns of rape
and other forms of sexual violence. In my engagement
with the Deputy Prime Minister and other Government
officials, I made it clear that the full implementation
of the joint communique will be key on the road
towards delisting.

Other key messages that I imparted to the
Government included the importance of tackling
conflict-related sexual violence primarily as a matter
of peace and security, by engaging the Ministries of
Defence, Internal Security and Justice, alongside the
Ministry of Women, Human Rights and Development.
The importance of addressing the root causes along with
a recognition that ending sexual violence necessitates
ending the gender inequality and discrimination that
underpins both the abuse and accompanying social
stigma, starting with the ratification of relevant
international and regional women's rights instruments.

There must be a prompt enactment of the sexual
offences bill, which is still before the Parliament, which
notes that the Somali penal code classifies sexual
violence as merely an offence against modesty and sexual
honour. There is a need to strengthen the participation
of the federal member states in all the initiatives of
the Federal Government, and most especially in the
development and implementation of the new action
plan. Last but not least, I stressed how critical it is to
engage a broad range of stakeholders, including the
Government, civil society, traditional and religious
leaders and the donor and diplomatic community.

I agreed with the Federal Government of Somalia
to deploy technical expertise from my Office at the
earliest convenience to support the elaboration of a new
action plan to address and respond to conflict-related
sexual violence. My Office will be working closely with
the United Nations system as a whole in supporting the
Government of Somalia.

Although peace remains elusive and violence and
insecurity have become normalized through decades
of conflict, survivors and front-line service providers
remain resilient. What they want, above all, is a
response from their Government and the international
community that shows that they are not forgotten.

