Mr. El-Amine (Comoros)(sp0ke in French): I am
honoured to speak before this Council and to convey to
you, Sir, my warm and sincere congratulations on your
presidency of the Security Council. Your country has
always lent an attentive ear to the problems faced by the
African continent. Your initiative in convening this
meeting of the Security Council to consider the situation
in Africa is a good omen for us. We believe this to be a
strong message from the Security Council to the
international community on the eve of the third
millennium, and hope that this message will mark the end
of an era of tragedy, conflict and poverty in Africa.

 

The commitment clearly expressed here in favour of
the African continent cannot but encourage and strengthen
the efforts already made by the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) and regional groups, and safeguard what has
been achieved by African preventive diplomacy.

We have followed with great interest the exhaustive
report presented by the Secretary-General; we also welcome
and commend the tangible results obtained so far in the
resolution of conflicts in Africa.

My country, the Islamic Federal Republic of Comoros,
has not been spared the crises which are tearing apart
children of the same family, the same region and the same
country. That is why I wished to participate in this open
and pragmatic discussion, to shed more light on the
situation in the Comoros. The Secretary-General of the
OAU and the representative of Algeria referred to this
matter.

For more than two years this archipelago has been
undergoing a unique crisis, which has challenged the very
foundations of the State and threatened its unity and
territorial integrity. One of its islands revolted, proclaiming
sometimes that it would join the former colonial Power and
sometimes that it was for independence, pure and simple.
The Comorian State can in no way accept the Balkanization
of the archipelago. When the matter was brought before the
Organization of African Unity, it spared no effort to reach
a peaceful, just and durable solution.
It must be emphasized that this unfortunate and
disagreeable choice of the separatists was motivated by the
precarious economic situation and by anxiety and despair
about a gloomy and negative future, with an economic life
dominated by an agricultural sector threatened by a slump
in the sales of its products, public finances characterized by
considerable deficits, a chronic deficit in the balance of
payments, a very heavy external debt, salary arrears of
sometimes more than six months per year, resource
limitations that make it impossible for the Government to
take proper charge of education and health in a country
where the number of young people is more than 65 per cent
of the population, widespread unemployment, and so on.

In other words, this was a legitimate problem to deal
with, but the way it was done was unacceptable.

Thus, the problem is more economic than political,
and any initiative to resolve it must necessarily take into
account both aspects at once.

In this connection, we were pleased to welcome the
special session on small island States, and we took due
note of all the commitments made.

In the Comorian crisis, the mediation initiated by the
OAU led to the organization of an inter-Comoros
conference, which was held in Madagascar five months
ago and which gave rise to enormous hopes for a happy
outcome of this crisis. Agreements, which we believed to
be an ideal framework to preserve the unity of the
Comoros, were drawn up and placed before the parties
involved in the crisis for signature.

To the surprise of all, the separatist delegation did
not sign those agreements and asked for a delay in order
to consult its base in Anjouan. The delay aroused the
wrath of certain Grande Comore extremists, who rose up
when the delegations returned to Moroni. The delaying
tactics and the total abdication of the political authorities
in the face of this situation only made the climate more
and more tense and unbearable. The feelings of hatred
and xenophobia towards our innocent brothers in Anjouan
culminated in a mass exodus of our Anjouanese brothers
to their island of origin.

Our country recently came close to a humanitarian
disaster, but, fortunately, avoided it due to the actions of
the national development army. A transition Government
was immediately set up to establish peace and to lay solid
foundations for a state of law, in the framework of the
implementation of the Antananarivo agreements.

The Comorian Government endorsed the
recommendations and the resolutions of the thirty-fifth
summit of the OAU, held in Algiers, and is working
feverishly to set up as soon as possible republican and
democratic institutions. We urgently appeal to the
international community to support this transparent
process of institution-building.

I should like to pay tribute to the OAU, to the
countries of the region - particularly South Africa - to
France and to the entire international community for their
solid commitment to helping Comorians recover their
unity within their common borders. But now we have to
go beyond defending principles and ask ourselves whether
the deterioration of the crisis is not partly due to the
complicity of separatists. The direct dialogue between the
powers in Moroni and the Anjouan group reflected the
desire of the Comorian head of State to find in these
meetings among Comorians the necessary energy to

 

conclude a peace of the brave that would benefit and unite
all. Dialogue continues to be our watchword.

The new authorities are convinced that an independent
Anjouan has no future. The island will be only a tool in the
service of various traffickers, a staging post for money-
laundering and perhaps even a toxic waste depot controlled
by the international mafia.

The economy of the region, security, peace and
stability will thus be threatened. Thus, the efforts being
made in Moroni and the good offices of the pan-African
organization must be supported by the United Nations and
the entire international community.

Can we now ascertain who has been financing the
separatists for more than two years if Anjouan has no
resources of its own? Who is providing the weapons? Who
is maintaining the militias and the various armed factions?
There are gray areas which need to be clarified if we want
to avoid permanent instability in the Indian Ocean, which
would cause lasting tensions.

The helping hand of the Comorian authorities, the
flexibility in their desire to reach a final response respecting
everyone's desires, the consolidation of peace, security and
democratic freedoms and the oft-repeated affirmation of the
desire to preserve the security and the rights of the
Anjouanese in Grande Comore have not had any effect on
the stubbornness of the separatists.

The State must be consolidated. The efforts to improve
the situation and the economic and political restoration of
the central authorities have to be supported. The
international financial authorities and our various partners
must agree to resume their dialogue with Moroni and apply
themselves more to the task of breathing new life into the
governance of public affairs, because it would be fatal if,
on top of the secessionist crisis, the State were to be
weakened. There would be no way to save the fragmented
country, and the Comoros would therefore become a kind
of Somalia, which would be a danger to the rest of the
world.

I hope that the voice of reason will be heard and that
together we can help the State of Comoros find the strength
to defend the interests of its people.

