Mr. Bessho (Japan): Ijoin with others in paying
tribute to and thanking Ambassador Samantha Power
for the tireless dedication with which she has tackled
the numerous difficulties that the world faces. It has
indeed been a pleasure working with Ambassador
Power, even if for only six months in my case.

I would like to thank the three briefers for their
detailed reports on this important topic.

Two days ago, we marked the first anniversary of
efforts to commence the implementation of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), and the launch
of meetings on resolution 2231 (2015) at the Security
Council. We are encouraged by the very positive
statements made by JCPOA members over the past few
days and today, reaffirming their strong commitment
to respect and implement the agreement. Japan fully
agrees on the importance of implementing the JCPOA
and resolution 2231 (2015), and will continue to strongly
support both.

One of the most visible examples of the support
we provide to the implementation of the JCPOA is
our cooperation with the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), which verifies and monitors that
Iran's nuclear programme is being used exclusively for
peaceful purposes. Japan has announced that it will
provide assistance through the IAEA for the purposes
of implementing nuclear safety and safeguards
commitments. The IAEA is playing an invaluable role
in that regard, and we offer our full support.

The international community has wholeheartedly
backed the implementation of the nuclear- and JCPOA-
related elements of resolution 2231 (2015). In addition,
the Council is also responsible for closely monitoring
the implementation of the provisions of annex B of
the resolution. Japan commends the efforts of the
Secretariat to provide an objective and comprehensive
report on that area. We are aware of some alleged
cases that may contravene the provisions of annex B,
in particular regarding the arms and travel bans. We
encourage the Secretariat to continue to examine those
cases. The Council should utilize tools such as the
Yemen Sanctions Committee and Somalia Sanctions
Committee to obtain the relevant information. As the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), I am pleased to
cooperate with the facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), the Secretariat and other bodies.

Possible contraventions of the arms and travel bans
are particularly serious, because they have both direct
and indirect impacts on the regional situation. Japan
believes that one of the most significant by-products of
the JCPOA is its potential to contribute to peace and
security in the Middle East. We believe that Iran can,
and should, play a constructive role in addressing the
difficult situations in Syria and Yemen. The Council
is responsible for closely monitoring the situation and
taking appropriate measures as necessary in order to
prevent actions that could undermine the stability of
the region.

A significant achievement of resolution 2231
(2015) during the past six months was achieving the
full functionality of the procurement channel for
processing nuclear-related proposals. Japan appreciates
the efforts of the facilitator and the Secretariat to make
the mechanism useful and transparent for all Member
States, thereby ensuring the necessary information
security and confidentiality. We will continue to
support work under the resolution 2231 (2015) format
in that regard.

Many of us today have welcomed the steady
implementation of the JCPOA and resolution 2231
(2015), and we hope to see the participation of
the delegation of Iran in future meetings. Japan is
committed to working closely with Council members,
JCPOA members and Iran, both individually and
collectively, so as to enable the most effective possible
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).

