Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): Let me convey Nigeria's
profound appreciation to the German presidency of the
Security Council for having convened this timely
meeting on children and armed conflict. I commend
your personal leadership, Mr. President, in planning
and organizing this important meeting. Germany has
not only demonstrated excellent leadership of the
Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, it has also taken a determined stance
on compelling moral issues, including attacks on
schools and hospitals in situations of armed conflict.

Let me also add Nigeria's voice to those who
have expressed appreciation to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Coomaraswamy and
Executive Director Anthony Lake for their inspiring
statements. I must also thank the Secretary-General
and his team for the painstaking and lucid report
(S/2011/250) on the subject.

Over the past 12 years, significant progress has
been made in identifying children at risk and engaging
with those who would otherwise threaten their well-
being and reintegrating and rehabilitating children who
have been affected by war.

The development of the monitoring and reporting
system, the steady growth in the implementation of
action plans and the refocusing on the fundamental
principles of international humanitarian law have in
many instances made the world a safer, if not more
peaceful, place for children.

In spite of these notable improvements, several
challenges still exist. Of particular concern to most
delegations, including mine, is the troubling trend of
attacks and other violations against schools, hospitals,
pupils and staff. It is critical that parties to armed
conflict are made to recognize the special status such
institutions enjoy as safe havens in time of conflict.
That status must be inviolate. It must be inviolate, as
impeded access to health care and education will have
devastating and long-lasting humanitarian
consequences. In protecting these safe havens, we
recognize the human rights to education and health as
enshrined in the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights and the Convention on the
Rights of the Child.

There is indeed an accountability gap for
violations against children affected by armed conflict,
which we should breach. Impunity for violations
against children, which remains an ever-present feature
of conflicts, is a symptom of a wider issue of capacity.
States involved in conflict are resource-starved and
therefore lack the manpower to devote to the
investigation of crimes against children. It is the
obligation of the international community to
adequately resource such Governments, provide the
necessary technical assistance and guidance for the
drafting and implementation of national action plans.

In addition, justice-sector capacity-building
should constitute a vital part of our peacekeeping
activity. In support of national efforts, the Security
Council should be unremitting in applying these
targeted measures against the perpetrators of grave
violations against children. We must remain open to
ensuring that the work of the Working Group benefits
our wider policy bodies, including the sanctions
committees, where appropriate. It is our sincere hope
that the resolution adopted today will move beyond the
incremental improvements made thus far and breach
the accountability gap once and for all.

Nigeria unequivocally endorses the cooperative
approach to child protection that features prominently
in the report of the Secretary-General. We are
unequivocal in our support for the highly effective
partnership between the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, as well as the functional
partnerships between UNICEF and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.

The in-country task forces, peacekeeping
operations and special political and peacebuilding
missions should also be commended for their efforts to
systematize approaches to child protection within their
respective mandates. Their engagement with civil
society and State actors is a prerequisite for long-term
improvement in this regard. A notable model for such
cooperation is the United Nations regional strategy on
the protection of children affected by the Lord's
Resistance Army.

Nigeria is a signatory to the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and a
founding signatory to the recent N'Djamena
Declaration. We believe that these actions underscore
our commitment to standards for the protection of
children, particularly those who are vulnerable to
armed conflict. We are and will remain an active
participant in the effort to shield our young people,
enforce their rights and, more importantly, to hold
accountable those who violate those rights. It is our
collective duty, we believe, and our vocation to protect
the innocent and the vulnerable from the ravages of
war. It may be helpful for us Council members to
consider ourselves in loco parentis. We are, in fact, part
of the larger community that it takes to raise and
protect each and every child. Accordingly, we must all
be watchful, vigilant and even fierce in our
commitment to keep armed conflict from indelibly
scarring our youth.

