Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): The Republic
of Korea appreciates the United States delegation's
initiative in convening this important debate, as well as
the fact that you, Sir, are personally presiding over this
meeting. We would like to welcome Foreign Minister
Al-Jaafari of Iraq and to thank him for his remarks. We
also wish to thank Special Representative Mladenov for
his briefing.

The Republic of Korea is gravely concerned about
the situation in Iraq and strongly condemns the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other terrorist
organizations for their criminal acts ofterrorism. ISIL's
outrageous chain of violence in the form of killing,
kidnapping, raping and torturing innocent civilians
must be stopped.

Having lost our own citizens to such cowardly
acts in the past, we believe that those responsible for
such heinous crimes should be brought to justice by
any means and as soon as possible. We are also deeply
concerned by the worsening humanitarian situation in
Iraq. Millions of Iraqi people, including women and
children, are suffering from the scourge of the conflict,
and tens of thousands are displaced.

In that regard, we pay tribute to the devoted work
of humanitarian organizations, including the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the World
Food Programme, the International Organization for
Migration and the International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies. Nonetheless, even in
such dire circumstances, we believe in the imperishable
spirit of the Iraqi people and in the collective strength
of the international community. The people of Iraq
have made their choice. Their choice is the path towards
peace, democracy and the reconstruction of Iraq.

The Republic of Korea welcomes and strongly
supports the new Iraqi Government. We are encouraged
to know that the new Government in Iraq is committed
to strengthening Iraq's nascent democratic institutions,
addressing deep-rooted issues through dialogue and
standing firm against the spread of terrorism. With a
view to assisting the people and the Government of
Iraq, the Republic of Korea has given $1.2 million in
humanitarian assistance so far and plans to make a
larger contribution in the near future.

In Syria, we have recently pledged $5 million more
in humanitarian aid, bringing the total to $11 million.

While we continue to hope for a better future through
such international support, we are also conscious that
no help from outside can replace ownership by the Iraqi
people of their future. The inclusive leadership of the
Iraqi Government is a sign of concern for the unity
of all Iraqi people. The future of Iraq - the future of
any society, for that matter - cannot and should not
be shaped by ideological extremism. It should be the
common yearning of the people for safety, stability and
prosperity that moves society forward. The people of
Iraq have made the right choice in their stance against
ISIL. The Security Council should strengthen its
support for their fight. We believe that the voices heard
today will bear fruit in the form of a robust international
commitment to assist Iraq.

Last but not least, we fully support Special
Representative Mladenov and all the staff of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and commend their
dedication to fulfilment of their mission.

