Mrs. Marsudi (Indonesia): The very existence of
nuclear weapons is threatening the world's existence.
Their total elimination is the only guarantee of
avoiding a global catastrophe. Indonesia is therefore
a strong and consistent supporter of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), whose
objectives can be achieved only through a balanced,
comprehensive and non-discriminatory implementation
of its three pillars. In that regard, I wish to emphasize
three points.

First, Indonesia continues to make nuclear
disarmament its highest priority. That is our long-
standing position both at the national level and as a
member of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Yet, despite the successful outcome of the 2010 Review
Conference of the Parties to the NPT, the disarmament
pillar is the least implemented. I repeat ~ the
disarmament pillar is the least implemented. We should
not forget that non-proliferation earns its legitimacy
from the larger objective of nuclear disarmament.
When non-nuclear-weapon States give up their rights
to such weapons, nuclear-weapon States have to
disarm. Furthermore, treaties on nuclear-weapon-free
zones, including the Treaty on the Southeast Asia
Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone and Mongolia's nuclear-
weapon-free status, are crucial to global disarmament
and non-proliferation. Indonesia therefore calls upon all
nuclear-weapon States to ratify the relevant protocols
to all treaties establishing nuclear-weapon-free zones,
withdraw any reservations or interpretative declarations
that are incompatible with their object and purpose, and
respect the denuclearization status of those zones.

My second point is that we must ensure the right of
all States to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
The NPT enjoys wide support, despite barring
proliferation, because it guarantees the right to peaceful
uses of nuclear energy. In that connection, Indonesia
would like to affirm that nuclear non-proliferation
should not bar peaceful use, that preferential treatment
should be given to non-nuclear-weapon States for the
promotion of peaceful uses of nuclear energy and that
all parties should continue to support the International
Atomic Energy Agency in discharging its safeguards
and verification mandate.

Thirdly, we must focus on the ultimate objective
of the NPT. All parties must support the NPT
process. As such, the intention to dismantle existing
disarmament arrangements is damaging to our spirit
and commitments, and therefore must be prevented.
With great power comes great responsibility. We urge
the nuclear-weapon States to set a positive example that
better reflects their responsibilities.

We regret that the 2015 Review Conference of
the States Parties to the NPT was unable to produce
an outcome. Nevertheless, we must remain committed
to the 2020 review conference and beyond, and make
every effort to avoid another failure. This time, we must
ensure that any outcome of the 2020 review conference
should be no less ambitious than or backtrack from
the commitments of the previous outcomes. That
will require genuine political will and flexibility on
the part of the nuclear-weapon States. Indonesia also
believes that once the Treaty on the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons enters into force, it will contribute
to furthering the objective of the total elimination of
nuclear weapons, as enshrined in article VI of the NPT.

Finally, former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
once underlined that a world free of nuclear weapons
would be safer and more prosperous. Therefore, let
us all affirm our commitment to the NPT and make
nuclear weapons a thing of the past. Indonesia stands
ready to engage constructively with everyone in the
NPT process.

