Mr. Traore (Guinea) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Mr. President, I should like to convey to you the
apologies of your Guinean colleague, Foreign Minister
Francois Fall, who, for reasons beyond his control, was
unable to take part in this important meeting. I should
also like, on behalf of the Government and the people
of Guinea, to reiterate our sincere condolences to the
Government and the people of the United States and to
the families of the victims of the tragic accident that
befell the space shuttle Columbia on 1 February 2003.
In addition, I should like to wish a warm welcome to
you, Mr. President, and to reiterate my delegation's
sincere congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. You may be assured of our
full cooperation.

To France, I wish to reaffirm my delegation's
appreciation of the outstanding way in which it
conducted the Council's activities last month. I should
also like to welcome the presence among us of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, and of the other
important personalities around this table.

The organization of this meeting on the situation
of Iraq - the fifth gathering in 10 days - rightly
attests to that question's importance for the Council.
My country is grateful to the Government of the United
States for its initiative to share with the States
Members of the Organization intelligence and other
information concerning Iraq's weapons programmes.
My delegation takes note of the important statement
just made by the Secretary of State of the United
States, Mr. Colin Powell. It will make an immediate
report to the competent authorities with a view to a
proper evaluation.

We continue to hope that other States will follow
the lead of the United States by making available to the
inspectors any information that they might have. That
is one of the recommendations of resolution 1441
(2002), which, if it had been fully implemented, would
have already allowed the inspectors to make more
progress on the ground and thus to advance towards
their goal.

On 27 January, my delegation followed with
attention and interest the presentation by Mr. Blix and
Mr. ElBaradei of their progress report on the
inspections. My delegation's examination of that report
enabled us to make certain observations, some of
which should be recalled. From the point of view of
procedure and form, progress has been made. After two
months of work on the ground, we note that, thanks to
the cooperation of the Iraqi authorities, the inspectors
had easy access to more than 200 sites, including
presidential sites and private residences. That also
aided in the establishment of infrastructure that the
inspectors need to carry out their tasks, including by
facilitating the establishment of offices in Baghdad and
in Mosul. That enabled the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to
make a partial evaluation of the Iraqi arsenal, four
years after the departure of the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM).

With regard to substantive questions, there is still
a way to go. Indeed, many questions remain in the
biological, chemical and ballistic areas. In particular, it
is important to state that, according to the inspectors
themselves, the Iraqi declaration of 7 December 2002
is inadequate, because it merely repeats information
earlier transmitted to UNSCOM, contains little that is
new, and is of marginal use. The interviews of
scientists are not taking place to the satisfaction of the
inspectors. The U-2 planes cannot carry out
reconnaissance flights. In brief, the inspectors have
confronted a series of difficulties in their work.

In the light of those elements, we must state that
Iraqi cooperation has been much more forthcoming on
questions of procedure than on those of substance. That
is why we appeal unequivocally to Iraq to abide
scrupulously by its obligations under the provisions of
resolution 1441 (2002). It must resolve to move from
passive to active cooperation with the inspectors and to
realize that frank and more determined cooperation
remains the key to a peaceful solution to the crisis.

More specifically, the Baghdad authorities must
give precise responses to the many questions that are
still pending - for example, by providing convincing
evidence of the unilateral destruction of certain
biological and chemical weapons; by encouraging
scientists and experts who took part in weapons
programmes to submit to private interviews, according
to the modalities set forth in resolution 1441 (2002); by
providing, without delay, an updated, credible list of all
scientists associated with weapons programmes; and,
finally, by authorizing reconnaissance flights by U-2
planes.

Furthermore, while the promise of better
cooperation that was made on 20 January is
encouraging, the Iraqi authorities must translate it into
concrete, verifiable and sustained action, because the
international community, having learned from the
procrastination of the past, cannot be satisfied by mere
words. Moreover, my delegation believes that the
possibility of the suspension and lifting of sanctions
should encourage Iraq to cooperate with the inspectors
in order to alleviate the ordeal and suffering of its
people.

The existence of many grey areas, on the one
hand, and the relative progress made on the ground, on
the other, prompt my delegation to state that the
inspections must go on. To that end, my delegation
urges UNMOVIC and IAEA to pursue their efforts to
explore every avenue opened by the inspections and to
fulfil the goal of their mission. In providing them with
a clear and strengthened mandate, resolution 1441
(2002) also gave them the means to succeed in that
mission.

My country, Guinea, has always favoured the
peaceful settlement of crises and of the Iraqi crisis in
particular. I feel compelled to restate that position,
because my delegation believes that there is still a
chance for a peaceful settlement and that we must seize
it. We reiterate our full confidence in and full support
for Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei, as well as for their
respective teams, and remain convinced that they will
continue to act with unflagging rigor and
professionalism in the fulfilment of their mandate.

In conclusion, we are now at a crucial moment
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
the foundation of our shared Organization. We must
cherish that imperative and strive together in unity to
build a world of peace and cooperation.

