The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Australia,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brazil, Canada, Cuba, Egypt,
India, Indonesia, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Malaysia,
Morocco, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, the Sudan,
Tunisia, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gillerman
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Baali (Algeria), Mr. Listre (Argentina),
Mr. Dauth (Australia), Mr. Almansoor (Bahrain),
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh), Mr. Sardenberg
(Brazil), Mr. Heinbecker (Canada),
Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba), Mr. Aboul Gheit
(Egypt), Mr. Nambiar (India), Mr. Jenie
(Indonesia), Mn Spatafora (Italy), Mr. Haraguchi
(Japan), Mr. Goussous (Jordan), Mr. Rastam
(Malaysia), Mr. Bennouna (Morocco),
Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Kumalo (South Africa), Mr. Erwa (Sudan), Mr. Hachami
(Tunisia), Mr. Cengizer (Turkey) and Mr. Al-
Shamsi (United Arab Emirates) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 12
September 2003 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document S/2003/886 and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council to be held
on Monday, 15 September, regarding the situation
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Roed-Larsen to take a seat at the
Council table.

I should like to inform the Council also that I
have received a letter dated 12 September from the
Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic
to the United Nations, which reads as follows:

"We would like to kindly request the
inscription of His Excellency Mr. Yaya
Mahmassani, Ambassador and Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States to the
United Nations, on the list of speakers for the
meeting to be held on Monday, 15 September
2003."

That letter will be published as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2003/887.

Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Yaya Mahmassani.

There being no objection, I invite Mr. Yaya
Mahmassani to take the seat reserved for him at the

side of the Council Chamber.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 15 September 2003 from the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, which
reads as follows:

"In my capacity as Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, I have the
honour to request that I be invited to participate
in the debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, under rule 39
of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council."

On previous occasions, the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. In accordance with past practice
in this matter, I propose that the Council extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, Mr. Papa Louis Fall, to take a seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in response to
the request contained in a letter dated 12 September
2003 from the representative of the Sudan to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2003/880).

Before we actually go into the order of speakers,
could I just state the blinding obvious, which is that we
are going to have three substantial contributions to
begin with . That will be followed by contributions by
members of the Council. Currently we have about 24
other speakers actually inscribed and my expectation is
that that list may well increase.

So, in the interest of trying to make this into an
orderly meeting of, I hope, appropriate length today, I
have asked the three principal speakers who will begin
the debate to confine their remarks to 15 minutes in
duration. After that, I am in the hands of members of
the Council, but my earnest plea would be that brevity
all around would, I think, help us substantially. I will,
when it comes to extending the debate beyond the
members of the Council, look for advice from
colleagues as to whether or not a guillotine on the
duration of contributions would be in order, if indeed
we have so many speakers.

Having said that, we will now move on to hear a
briefing by Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General.


