Mr. Amil (Pakistan): On behalf of the delegation
of Pakistan, I would like to say how pleased we are to
see China, a great friend, presiding over the Security
Council. We wish you every success, Sir. I should also
like to congratulate Ambassador Michel Kafando of
Burkina Faso on his successful presidency of the
Council last month, and to thank Special
Representative Kai Eide for his briefing this morning.

We are grateful for the opportunity to participate
in this important discussion. The objective of durable
peace, stability and development in Afghanistan is
faced with daunting challenges. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2008/617) portrays a mixed
picture and an overall deterioration of the situation in
Afghanistan. Four months after the Paris Conference,
that is a cause for concern, and this is a time for
reflection.

The challenge in Afghanistan is without doubt
difficult and complex. There is no quick fix. It requires
the sustained engagement and commitment of the
international community in support of Afghanistan.
With such support, considerable progress has been
made in recent years. That foundation needs to be
consolidated. A truly comprehensive strategy is
required to address the remaining intricate challenges
of reconciliation, security, drugs, governance and
development. To ensure effectiveness and success, such
a strategy must be built around and pursued with full
Afghan ownership. Capacity-building in all fields and
at all levels is an essential element of that strategy. In
that regard, the report of the Secretary-General points
out serious gaps and shortfalls, which must be
addressed.

Lack of security remains a major problem and
concern. However, the report does not seem to be very
clear on the reasons for the insecurity. While it
provides some statistics, it is devoid of information on
the multiple and complex factors that contribute to
insecurity in Afghanistan. Moreover, it provides a
myopic view of the cross-border issue, with an isolated
reference that is not only unsubstantiated, but on which
the United Nations Mission of Assistance in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) has neither the capacity nor
expertise for independent verification. We expect due
caution to be exercised in that regard in the future.

Security has to be addressed in all its aspects,
including the threats posed by the Taliban insurgency,
Al-Qaida, lingering warlordism, factional rivalries and
criminal and other illegal armed groups, as well as the
increasingly strong nexus with the drug trade. It is
obvious that these problems are primarily rooted in
Afghanistan and have to be addressed accordingly.
Attempts to externalize the problems are obviously
self-defeating, and we disagree with some of the
remarks made by the representative of Afghanistan
today. Apart from being incorrect and misleading,
those remarks run counter to the constructive
engagement between our two countries at the highest
political level.

Besides, security cannot be detached from the
wider issues of reconciliation, improved governance,
development and reconstruction. That myriad of
challenges requires a collective effort based on
cooperation and shared responsibility by all.

Much more needs to be done on counter-
narcotics. Short-term measures need to be
complemented by comprehensive, durable and long-
term solutions based on alternative livelihoods and
development. As the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime recently reported, there is no point in
reducing opium cultivation if farmers switch to
cannabis. That is happening in some of the provinces
that are opium-free, for example in the north. The issue
needs to be seriously researched and addressed.

The worsening humanitarian situation,
particularly aggravated by rising food prices, has to be
addressed on an urgent basis. In the battle for hearts
and minds, that freedom from want is as essential as
the freedom from fear, which unfortunately is also
being negatively impacted by the rising toll of civilian
casualties in Afghanistan.

Genuine national reconciliation can significantly
boost Afghan and international efforts to bring about
peace and stability in the country. Winning the support
of the peaceful majority is essential to isolate and
break the insurgency. We support the Afghan efforts for
reconciliation as part of the comprehensive approach.

The United Nations has a central role in the
international efforts in Afghanistan. UNAMA is not
merely an outpost, reporting on the situation on the
ground. It has a well-defined mandate, and we
appreciate the work being undertaken for its fulfilment.
It would be useful in that regard if the report were also
to shed more light on the efforts and measures the
Mission has deployed, in terms of number and
sophistication, to carry out its overall coordinating role
to facilitate a more robust and delivery-oriented
support process.

We agree with the observation of the Secretary-
General that in the end success depends on the full
implementation of the commitments undertaken by the
international community. The recommendation to bring
about a political surge also hits the right chord. It
underlines the need to look beyond the military option,
which, though necessary, is not the sole solution. In our
view, that should be complemented by an economic
development and reconstruction surge. The promises
need to be translated into tangible benefits for the
Afghan people, which is the surest way to win their
hearts and minds. We believe that an objective ground
analysis of the development needs and full use of local
resources and capacities must be part of the efforts to
improve aid effectiveness for development in
Afghanistan.

A peaceful, stable and prosperous Afghanistan is
in the interests of regional and international peace and
security. It is, above all, in Pakistan's vital interest.
Apart from our Afghan brothers and sisters, no country
or peoples has suffered more than Pakistan from the
direct consequences of the decades of conflict and
instability in Afghanistan. We have hosted millions of
refugees over the years. We have been afflicted with
drugs, arms and environmental degradation.

Along with Afghanistan, Pakistan will therefore
be the primary beneficiary of peace in Afghanistan. It
will enable us to restore calm in our frontier regions,
whose traditional peace has been inflamed by war and
instability in Afghanistan, especially after 2001, when
many Al-Qaida and Taliban elements crossed the
border into Pakistan. It will enable the dignified
repatriation of the remaining Afghan refugees, an
essential step for the security and stability of the
region. It will enable our two countries to serve as the
hub for interregional trade and an energy corridor, a
strategic objective with immense potential for our
economic development. Pakistan's commitment and
support for the success of the international efforts in
Afghanistan is, therefore, clear and resolute.

Afghanistan and Pakistan are together facing the
brunt of the terrorist threat. We are suffering from its
deadly impact on a daily basis. As President Zardari
said in his address to the General Assembly (see A/63/PV.10), Pakistan is a great victim in the war on
terror. We live with it, we are the target of terrorism,
but we will never succumb to it.

As a result of our role in the counter-terrorism
campaign, the security environment on our side has
deteriorated sharply. Thousands of innocent civilians
have fallen victim to terrorism in Pakistan. The
horrendous attack last Friday on a jirga in Orakzai
Agency is the latest of those condemnable acts.
Sensitive to the sentiments of our people, the new
democratic Government is in process of reaching the
national consensus necessary to confront and defeat the
terrorists. We are following a new holistic strategy
against extremism and terrorism, employing political
dialogue and socio-economic measures, but retaining
the option to use force whenever required, as
demonstrated by our ongoing campaign against
terrorists and extremist militias in Baj aur.

Pakistan's contribution in the fight against
terrorism is well known. Much of the success against
Al-Qaida and the Taliban has been achieved with our
support and cooperation. If the number of soldiers
deployed and sacrifices made is a measure, Pakistan
alone has done more than the combined effort of the
international partners in Afghanistan.

In his statement in this Council on 9 July (see S/PV.5930), my Foreign Minister outlined several
steps, including matching military measures that can be
taken by all sides to promote cooperative efforts based
on shared responsibility and full respect for
sovereignty and territorial integrity in order to more
effectively address the security challenge, including
border control.

We are determined to carry out our part. We
remain committed to working together with
Afghanistan and the international forces towards that
objective. Pakistan will continue active cooperation
within the Tripartite Commission, which has been
recently re-energized.

Naturally, we expect reciprocity in such support
and cooperation, based on goodwill and respect for

each other's sovereignty and territorial integrity and on
a mutual commitment not to allow our respective
territories to be used against each other. No foreign
troops will be allowed to operate inside Pakistan. As
my President said in the General Assembly, we cannot
allow our territory and our sovereignty to be violated.
Such actions are not helpful in eliminating the terrorist
menace and actually serve to empower the forces
against which we fight together.

Our relationship with Afghanistan is rooted in
history. It is a multifaceted engagement between our
two peoples, who are bound by age-old fraternal,
cultural and religious ties. The destinies of our two
countries are interlinked. In his statement to the
Council, Foreign Minister Qureshi outlined a vision of
diversifying and strengthening this relationship. He
called for overcoming suspicion and building trust and
goodwill, a sentiment also echoed and reciprocated by
Afghan Foreign Minister Spanta.

I am pleased to note that we are firmly on that
track. We intend to press forward on all possible
avenues of cooperation. The recent meeting in New
York between President Zardari and President Karzai
and the meeting between the two Foreign Ministers
have built upon the positive momentum of the earlier
contacts at the highest political levels. The two sides
have agreed on a comprehensive and constructive
engagement on multiple tracks, including political,
military, intelligence and economic cooperation.

Foreign Minister Spanta is expected to visit
Pakistan during this month. Pakistan will be hosting a
meeting of a mini-jirga in Islamabad on 27 and
28 October. We expect that people-to-people forum to
make a useful contribution towards bringing about
peace and stability in Afghanistan. The Pakistan-
Afghanistan Joint Economic Commission is expected
to meet in Kabul in November. We are arranging to
convene the Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan in Islamabad in January
2009.

We will continue to help the reconstruction
efforts in Afghanistan. Of our total commitment of
$320 million, $130 million has already been utilized on
various socio-economic and infrastructure projects.
Despite the shortage of wheat in Pakistan, we are
fulfilling our commitment to provide 50,000 tons of
wheat at concessional rates to Afghanistan.
Meanwhile, as we continue to host millions of
Afghan refugees, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the international
community need to do more for their early repatriation
and their rehabilitation inside Afghanistan.

Let me conclude by saying that, through mutual
cooperation and the support of the international
community, we can achieve our common objective of
peace, stability and prosperity in Afghanistan and the
region. We have to succeed. We owe it to our present
and future generations.

