Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to warmly congratulate you,
Mr. President, on C6te d'lvoire's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and to assure you of
our full support in your work.

(spoke in English)

I would also like tojoin other speakers in expressing
our appreciation for your initiative to convene today's
discussion on the role on international actors in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts. The subject is
of particular importance to my delegation. I hope that
from my statement, members will understand why
that is so. First, let me say that Ukraine aligns itself
with the statement to be made by the observer of the
European Union.

Having faced military aggression for almost five
years, Ukraine firmly believes in the need to strengthen
the existing instruments and to further improve and
fine-tune the applicable practices at the disposal of
the international community in order to increase the
efficiency of our collective efforts in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts. It is especially pertinent in
today's world, where it is extremely difficult to achieve
a climate oftrust and confidence. Instead, bellicose and
confrontational policies and actions set the overall tone.

There is no doubt that, as a universal body enjoying
a unique level oflegitimacy, the United Nations must be
as active as possible in preventing potential conflicts, as
well as in addressing the ongoing ones. As the previous
Secretary-General stated in his report on the United
Nations and conflict prevention of 2015 (S/2015/730),
while Member States bear the primary responsibility
for conflict prevention, the United Nations, with its
universal membership, impartiality and the legitimacy
derived from the principles of the Charter, has an
important and unique role to play. The United Nations
has played its role in various regions at different times.
However, in a number of cases, it was and still is notably
absent. In our opinion, that means that the potential of
the United Nations is far from being fully realized. It
also means that the Organization must, as a priority,
step up its efforts in the areas of both the prevention
and the resolution of conflicts.

In that regard, from the perspective of a European
country, we would like to see more robust practical
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). It is highly commendable that the practice of
yearly briefings to the Security Council by the OSCE
Chairperson-in-Office has been established. Annual
staff-level meetings also contribute to building closer
ties between the two organizations. However, the
practical cooperation is rather limited, while the two
sides could benefit greatly from a closer partnership.

It is well known that the OSCE remains at the
forefront of international efforts towards the resolution
of the Russian-Ukrainian conflict. The OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine has indeed become
an indispensable part of the political efforts to find a
solution to the conflict. The Mission's reports serve as
a valuable source of information about the real situation
in the temporarily occupied areas of Ukraine, marked
by a significant Russian presence and regular inflows
of modern Russian weaponry through the uncontrolled
segment of the Ukraine-Russia State border.

The idea ofestablishing a full-fledged peacekeeping
operation in the occupied areas of the Donbas region
of Ukraine mandated by the Security Council is still
on the table. If it comes to fruition - and we hope
that it does - the eventual multinational presence,
in implementing its tasks, will also have to closely
coordinate with and support the work of the OSCE,
including by creating the proper security conditions for
the unhindered implementation of its mandate by the
Special Monitoring Mission.

We are convinced that confidence-building
measures constitute an important step in the process
towards a political and diplomatic resolution of any
conflict. From that perspective, the release by the
Russian Federation of all Ukrainian political prisoners
and illegally detained persons, including the crews
of the three Ukrainian naval vessels captured on
26 November in international waters in the Black Sea,
will be a crucial benchmark for assessing Moscow's
readiness to embark on the path of de-escalation.

In order to make progress towards the resolution of
the Russian-Ukrainian conflict, it is also necessary to
create a solid security foundation, which should involve
not only concrete measures and steps in the conflict-
affected areas of Donbas but also the de-escalation of
the situation in the Black Sea and Azov Sea region. The
latter includes the immediate release by Russia of the
24 Ukrainian prisoners of war whom I mentioned and
the return of the vessels seized in the Black Sea, as well
as restoration of the freedom of navigation through the
Kerch Strait and in the Sea of Azov.

We believe that the OSCE and its Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, with the support of
the Normandy format countries and other partners, can
play an indispensable role to that end. For our part, we
are ready for constructive negotiations to find a solution
to the conflict. We will also welcome productive and
results-oriented contributions to the process from
the United Nations, the OSCE, the Normandy format
countries and other partners.

In conclusion, my delegation strongly believes
that boosting United Nations conflict prevention and
resolution capacities, expanding its respective toolbox,
and encouraging and supporting its cooperation with
relevant regional organizations on such issues is a
worthy goal for States Members of the United Nations
to pursue.

