Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I
start by thanking the Secretary-General for his
presence, for his powerful statement and for his
wisdom in advising the Council over these past weeks.

I said at the Council's open debate on Iraq, on
17 October, that no shadow of a doubt remained that
Iraq has defied the United Nations - not any particular
Member State: the United Nations - over the last 11
years. I itemized on that occasion the ways in which
Iraq has sought to frustrate and hinder inspections since
1991.

With the adoption of this resolution, the Security
Council has clearly stated that the United Nations will
no longer tolerate this defiance. As paragraph 2 makes
crystal clear, Iraq is being given a final opportunity to
comply with its disarmament obligations; a final
opportunity to remedy its material breach of resolution
687 (1991) set out in paragraph 1. The regime in
Baghdad now faces an unequivocal choice: between
complete disarmament and the serious consequences
indicated in paragraph 13.

The fact that this resolution has the unanimous
support of Council members sends, as the Secretary-
General has just said, the most powerful signal to Iraq
that this is the only choice, that it can no longer evade
its obligations under United Nations resolutions.
Because of the strength of this signal, there is at last a
chance that Iraq will finally comply with its obligations
and that military action can be averted.

A key part of the resolution we have adopted
today is the provisions giving inspectors the
penetrating strength needed to ensure the successful
disarmament of Iraq. I am glad that the Council has
recognized that we could not afford a return to the
ambiguous modalities and memorandums of
understanding of the past; that we could not afford
exceptions to unconditional, unrestricted and
immediate access; that we could not afford to have
inspectors again standing by helplessly while crucial
documents are burned or while convoys leave from the
back doors as inspectors arrive in the front; and that we
could not afford interviews compromised by
intimidating minders.

The provisions we have agreed, including making
legally binding the practical arrangements set out by
the inspectors themselves, will significantly strengthen
the hand of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
This will reinforce international confidence in the
inspectors. It will also, I hope, lead Iraq away from a
fatal decision to conceal weapons of mass destruction.
If Iraq is genuinely committed to full weapons of mass
destruction disarmament, it can ensure that inspections
get off to a flying start by providing the complete and
accurate declaration required under paragraph 3. The
United Kingdom has full confidence in Mr. Blix and
Mr. ElB aradei and their teams, and full respect for their
integrity and independence, as they embark on a crucial
and difficult task.

We heard loud and clear during the negotiations
the concerns about "automaticity" and "hidden
triggers" - the concern that on a decision so crucial
we should not rush into military action; that on a
decision so crucial any Iraqi violations should be
discussed by the Council. Let me be equally clear in
response, as a co-sponsor with the United States of the
text we have just adopted. There is no "automaticity"
in this resolution. If there is a further Iraqi breach of its
disarmament obligations, the matter will return to the
Council for discussion as required in paragraph 12. We
would expect the Security Council then to meet its
responsibilities.

Ultimately, the choice lies with Iraq as to whether
to take the peaceful route to disarmament. The United
Kingdom hopes that Iraq will fully cooperate with the
United Nations, meet its obligations and take the path
back to the lifting of sanctions laid out in resolutions
1284 (1999) and 687 (1991). The disarmament of Iraq
in the area of weapons of mass destruction by peaceful
means remains the United Kingdom's firm preference.
But if Iraq chooses defiance and concealment, rejecting
the final opportunity it has been given by the Council
in paragraph 2, the United Kingdom - together, we
trust, with other Members of the Security Council -
will ensure that the task of disarmament required by
the resolutions is completed.

