Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We wish to express
our appreciation to the presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this important debate on the
maintenance of international peace and security:
mediation and settlement of disputes. We also wish to
recognize the role played by Burkina Faso, whose
initiative last year culminated in the report of the
Secretary-General before us (8/2009/189).

In its Article 2, paragraph 3, the United Nations
Charter requires Member States to "settle their
international disputes by peaceful means in such a
manner that international peace and security, and
justice, are not endangered". Article 33 of the Charter
requires Member States to seek a solution by peaceful
means to any dispute that they might be party to.

In this regard, the United Nations has, over the
years, played a useful role in helping to mediate inter-
and intra-State conflicts before they escalate into
armed conflicts, after the outbreak of violence and
during the implementation of peace agreements.
However, peaceful resolution of disputes is a sovereign
responsibility, and, therefore, building effective local
and national capacity should be a priority within States.

Similarly, the African Union (AU) continues to
play a meaningful and active role towards the peaceful
settlement of disputes through negotiation, mediation,
conciliation or arbitration, within its limited resources
and capabilities. The active role that the African Union
2
has played and continues to play in conflict prevention
and resolution in Africa should be seen as
complementing the efforts of the United Nations. The
establishment of the African Peace and Security
Architecture, including the Early Warning System, the
Pan-African Parliament and the Economic, Social and
Cultural Council, the New Partnership for Africa's
Development and the Peer Review Mechanism of the
AU have gone a long way in improving security as
well as creating sustaining conditions of political
stability, good governance and economic development.

Mediation has become an indispensable tool in
the prevention and resolution of conflicts, as more and
more conflicts are intra-State rather than inter-State in
nature. The major advantage of mediation is that it can
be deployed timeously, before the conflict escalates
into a full-blown conflict. It is also cost-effective.
However, mediation is the least-used - or the least-
recognized - among the tools available for conflict
resolution and prevention. We therefore support the
Secretary-General's proposal to strengthen United
Nations capacity in mediation through the Department
of Political Affairs and the Mediation Support Unit.

South Africa welcomes the view expressed in the
report of the Secretary-General that the United
Nations, however, does not have a monopoly on
mediation and that regional organizations could hold a
comparative advantage that allows for early
intervention. The key factors in this regard are
proximity, knowledge of regional dynamics and the
immediate impact of the conflict. Regional and
subregional organizations have demonstrated the
willingness and capability to facilitate such mediation.
Notwithstanding this advantage there is a need for
proper coordination and for ensuring synergy,
coherence and a well-coordinated strategy between all
international actors and regional stakeholders.

We therefore welcome the ongoing cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union in
building capacity in mediation and echo the Secretary-
General's appeal for flexible financing and for
mediation to be properly resourced. In the long term,
the advantages and cost-effectiveness of mediation in
the prevention of deadly conflict are reasons to
embrace its methods, particularly in view of the cost in
human life, displacement and destruction of countries'
political and economic infrastructure that result from
conflicts, as well as the cost of post-conflict
09-30856
peacebuilding and the deployment of peacekeeping
operations.

The role of women as peacemakers cannot be
overemphasized. In this regard, the objectives of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) remain valid
in ensuring gender participation in peacemaking and
peacebuilding activities.

Allow me to highlight some of the factors in
mediation that we believe are crucial to the success of
mediation. Ownership of the mediation process by the
various parties in conflict and the role of support
mechanisms are of critical importance. The success of
mediation efforts at times cannot be measured in the
short term. It is important to allow the parties to find
their own solutions, the process of which tends to be
long and painstaking. There are no quick fixes or one-
size-fits-all solutions.

Mediation must gain the trust of the parties and
keep them focused on resolving disputes by identifying
and addressing the root causes of the conflict and
seeking acceptable resolutions to them. Parties and
leaders must always keep in mind that their national
responsibility to the welfare of their citizens overrides
their narrow individualistic political interests.

Mediation should be seen as a strategic
intervention and should be properly planned for. It
cannot be an ad hoc engagement - hence the need to
build and develop a cadre of mediators with the
necessary training and support.

Interlocking early warning systems, sound
analytical capability and complementarities with
regional organizations and non-governmental
organizations could assist in identifying systemic
challenges that could potentially trigger conflict.

The role of the Security Council should always be
directed at supporting and facilitating the efforts of the
mediator, rather than at frustrating them. The Council
should always avoid the temptation to pre-empt the
outcome of mediation efforts and allow the mediators
the necessary time and space to do their work. Our
experience is that when the Council has interfered by
predetermining the outcome in the mediation efforts
either of the Secretary-General or of regional
organizations, the results have not always been
positive.

We are obviously encouraged by the fact that the
Secretary-General shares the view that mediation, by
09-30856

its very nature, has to be quick, quiet and discreet. In
that regard, the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) has been working hard, at the
subregional level, to facilitate the political process
aimed at reaching agreement between the parties in
Zimbabwe. We applaud the important role that has
been played by SADC in facilitating the Zimbabwe
political parties reaching a power-sharing agreement
that led to the formation of an inclusive Government.
We are convinced that the recent political
developments will provide greater impetus for the
people of Zimbabwe to carry on with the national
reconciliation, economic recovery, reconstruction and
development processes. We call on the international
community to support those efforts, in particular by
lifting the sanctions, which continue to have a
destabilizing effect on the recovery and reconstruction
processes in Zimbabwe.

Finally, South Africa associates itself with the
sentiments expressed in the draft presidential statement
to be adopted later today.

