Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): Mr. President, I thank you
for convening today's public meeting. I also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Jessen-Petersen, for his comprehensive briefing. I
welcome the presence in this Chamber of Mr. Boris
Tadic, President of Serbia, and thank him for his
statement. I also welcome the presence of Mr. Bajram
Kosumi, Prime Minister of the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government. The Government of Japan is
gratified that Mr. Fatmir Sejdiu was smoothly elected
as President of Kosovo on 10 February and expects
Kosovo's constructive engagement in the future status
talks under his leadership.

The focus of today's discussion is the issue of
delays in the implementation of standards. The
Security Council has discussed this issue on numerous
occasions. The international community has many
times reiterated its message that the implementation of
standards will be of direct benefit to Kosovo itself for
the objective of building a democratic, multi-ethnic
society, as well as for the improvement in the daily
lives of the people of Kosovo.

Furthermore, it is clear that progress in the
implementation of the standards has become even more
crucial since the political process for the future status
of Kosovo was launched last autumn. Seeing the delays
and setbacks that have occurred in the implementation
of the majority of the standards to date, we cannot help
but regret the lack of progress. I also recognize the
critical importance of the question of how the
international community can provide guidance to the
political leaders ofa society in a post-conflict period.

Based on these perspectives, I would like to make
the following three points.

First, I would like to address a comment to the
parties directly responsible for standards
implementation, including Prime Minister Kosumi and
the other political leaders of Kosovo. The
implementation of standards should remain a priority
for the purpose of building a democratic, multi-ethnic
society, regardless of the direction of the future status
talks. Japan considers progress in standards
implementation to be one of the important prerequisites
for successful status talks. Japan requests the political
leaders of Kosovo to show, through their actions, their
willingness and capability to build a democratic and
multi-ethnic society. The political leaders in Belgrade
also have the ability to influence the standards
implementation process. It is our hope that, as
envisioned in the Secretary-General's report, the
authorities in Belgrade will support and encourage the
participation of Kosovo Serbs in the political process
in Kosovo.

My second point concerns what the international
community should do. It is essential that we devise a
strategy to bring about a breakthrough on the issue of
the delay of standards implementation. It would be
most effective to concentrate our efforts in high-
priority areas. My Government therefore welcomes the
Contact Group's ministerial statement issued on
31 January, which underscores the importance of the
decentralization process. Progress in decentralization
could serve as a model case as well as create an
improved environment for the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons, an environment in which
Kosovo Albanians and other minorities - including
Kosovo Serbs - would make decisions for their
mutual benefit through direct dialogue. We reiterate
our expectation of a proactive effort by the relevant
parties, including the authorities in Belgrade.
The third point I wish to make is that, in addition
to the measures I have just outlined and in parallel with
those measures, it would be meaningful if we could
make substantive progress with regard to cohabitation
and tolerance among the various ethnic groups in
Kosovo at the community level, focusing on the
economic aspect and on the life of the people. The
Government of Japan will be holding a seminar on
"Community-building in the multi-ethnic societies of
the Western Balkans from the human security point of
view" in late March in Tokyo to follow up on the
Ministerial Conference on Peace Consolidation and
Economic Development of the Western Balkans. We
have already sent invitations to the countries of the
Western Balkans and to other relevant partners. We
hope that the seminar will produce fruitful and
concrete results and thus contribute to the resolution of
the problems in Kosovo, including through reforms in
the area of local autonomy.

