Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank the President of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone and its Prosecutor for
having shared with us their assessments of the work
and the record of the Special Court, as well as for
having expressed to us here their passion for the noble
mission that they were entrusted with. I would also
like to welcome the participation of Her Excellency
Mrs. Ebun Jusu, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation for Sierra Leone, and to
reiterate to her Morocco's commitment to supporting
that friendly country in its efforts to consolidate peace
and to transition towards stability and development.

We welcome the achievements of the Court since
it was launched in 2002. The Security Council had
an opportunity to express its satisfaction last April
following the verdict of the Special Court in the trial
of Mr. Taylor. The Council underscored the importance
of that ruling for the victims of the crimes committed
in Sierra Leone during the conflict as they awaited the
final verdict, which is scheduled to be issued shortly.

That highly symbolic verdict was preceded by
the completion of two other cases involving the heads
of the Civil Defence Forces and the Armed Forces
Revolutionary Council. But beyond those specific
cases, we continue to believe that the importance of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone transcends the goal of
the completion of its trials. The Court contributed to
the process of consolidating peace in Sierra Leone and
in the subregion and to the efforts made to restore the
rule of law and end impunity. As a result of its work
and the outcomes achieved, the Court represents an
innovative model of mixed international justice that is
based on complementarity and national ownership. For
all of those reasons, we endorse the draft presidential
statement that is before the Council.

We noted with satisfaction the efforts undertaken
and the progress achieved by the Special Court with
respect to implementing its completion strategy and
preparing for a transition towards a residual special
court immediately following the completion of its
mandate, by 30 September 2013. While commending
the agreement on the issue between the Government
of Sierra Leone and the United Nations, we deem it
important to maintain the same level of political support
and ensure that it has sufficient resources, so that it can
meet the many challenges inherent in this critical stage
of the process, in particular the protection of witnesses,
the enforcement of sentences, the preservation of
archives, the protection of its physical and legal legacy,
and the creation and the building of the capacities of the
local judicial system.
It is indisputable that one of the major successes
of the Special Court lies in its ability to involve all of
the actors of Sierra Leonean society and in its outreach
and awareness-raising efforts aimed not only at the
general public in Sierra Leone but also at neighbouring
countries. We welcome the fact that those activities will
continue in the context of programmes involving the
Government of Sierra Leone, the United Nations and
local actors, including with respect to setting up a peace
museum to preserve the collective memory.

The progress made on the path to peace, justice
and reconciliation by the people of Sierra Leone is all
to the credit of that brotherly country, which has taken
ownership of its own destiny with the support of the
international community. We were able to see that
directly during the recent visit of the Security Council
to West Africa. In this phase of critical transformations,
it is important that the international community stand
mobilized for Sierra Leone so as to help it overcome
its challenges in terms of strengthening democratic
institutions and promoting economic development.

My country, Morocco, which has supported the
brotherly people of Sierra Leone in the various phases
ofits ending the crisis, continues to stand ready to assist
our brothers in order definitely to close this chapter
of years of conflict and enable it to continue to move
towards stability and prosperity.

