Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I would like to thank you, Madam, for having called
this meeting on peace and security in Africa on the
theme "Prevention of conflicts in Africa: addressing
the root causes". On behalf of the United States,
I would also like to congratulate Rwanda on its
presidency during the present month. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and
recommendations to address the root causes of conflict,
as well as Ambassador Tekeda Alemu for his statement
on behalf of the Chairperson of the African Union.

Violent conflict has been a destructive scourge
in Africa, to which the Council has rightly devoted
significant attention. The good news is that, after a
peak in the 19905, armed conflict has significantly
declined in sub-Saharan Africa, both in the number
of conflicts and in their intensity. The Council and
the United Nations system, together with the African
Union, subregional organizations and other partners,
have significantly helped drive that positive trend. The
less good news is that many risk factors and drivers of
conflict remain.

While every violent conflict is unique and has
its own history, several factors fuel or intensify
risk, including poverty, real or perceived inequality,
the lack of good governance and the rule of law,
proximity to instability and cycles of previous
conflict. The disenfranchisement of youth, minorities
and other groups, or their deliberate manipulation by
non-democratic leaders, are explosive potential drivers
of conflict. On the other hand, capable and legitimate
governance institutions create security, predictability
and mutual confidence, which allow individuals and
communities to resolve disputes and practice politics
peacefully. Free media and a vibrant civil society also
play crucial roles in building citizens' confidence by
increasing transparency and providing communities
with tools to speak up and articulate their concerns
and interests. A key common factor in preventing or
overcoming conflict is the active presence of credible,
capable and widely legitimate governing institutions
able to deal with their citizens' most pressing needs,
economic growth and jobs, basic services and access
to justice.

To the United States, that means we need to energize
efforts on a few key fronts. First, we need to get much
more serious about poverty eradication. Poverty alone
does not cause conflict, but in combination with other
factors, it dramatically increases the risk. That is why the
United States is mobilizing a wide variety of tools, from
the Millennium Challenge Corporation to the African
Growth and Opportunity Act to the Administration's
global health and food security initiatives, all of which
seek to help grow Africa's economies and invest in
Africa's people. All of those bilateral initiatives should
complement multilateral efforts to address poverty and
inequality, not just in Africa but globally. The wider
United Nations system has a critical role to play in that
regard, as does the private sector.

Secondly, we need to strengthen our focus on
governance and institutional challenges, including the
security environment needed for good governance to
take hold. United Nations peacekeeping operations,
when appropriate, can bring about critical security and
political stability that give national actors the space
to build their own institutions and carry out peaceful
power transitions, as well as provide a foundation for
economic growth. Such operations can also create
space for the work of the United Nations and other
intentional partners in key areas such as justice and
security sector reform, rule of law and anti-corruption.
We also need to look at innovative ways to nurture the
next generations of leadership. In that regard, President
Obama's Young African Leaders Initiative is working
to put younger generations at the centre of economic
and political development.

Thirdly, we need to continue to strengthen
peacebuilding. Ninety per cent of the civil wars that
started after 2000 occurred in a country that had had
a civil war in the previous 30 years. We must do better
than that. We need to listen to countries that have gone
through war-to-peace transitions, as in the Group of
Seven Plus, and focus international efforts around what
they tell us they need. United Nations peacebuilding
instruments also have the potential to provide a platform
for the mobilization of national and international
partners around common priorities for transition, as we
have seen in places including, inter alia, Sierra Leone,
Liberia and Burundi.

Fourthly, we must continue to hone our national and
international structures and capacities to anticipate,
prevent and respond to conflicts. The Atrocities
Prevention Board, for example, helps the United States
mobilize action by the United States Government and
further develop tools and institutional changes to enable
more nimble and effective responses in future.

Fifthly, we need to be able to speak candidly and
act credibly to address another kind of root cause:
when leaders are willing to take their populations to
war or wage war against their own people for their own
purposes.

Finally, we need to build stronger and more
dynamic partnerships among all actors engaged in
conflict prevention and response, based on comparative
advantage and the unique capability each can bring.
The United Nations, the African Union and Africa's
subregional organizations, along with the African
Development Bank, the World Bank and major
development partners, all must continue to deepen
collaboration and strengthen their capacities to address
conflict drivers in Africa.

We have much greater knowledge today about
what causes conflict. We have a much wider range of
potential tools at our disposal. Let us use them with
focus, dedication and results.

