Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I make this statement on behalf of the States
members of the Community of Sahel-Saharan States
(CENSAD). I was asked to deliver this statement at a
meeting held on 20 May. The following countries are
members of CENSAD: Benin, Burkina Faso, the
Central African Republic, Chad, Djibouti, Egypt,
Eritrea, the Gambia, Libya, Mali, Morocco, the Niger,
Nigeria, Senegal, Somalia, the Sudan, Togo, Tunisia
and, as observer, Liberia.

At the outset, I extend our thanks and
appreciation to you, Sir, on behalf of the members of
CENSAD, for devoting today's open meeting to
African issues under your country's presidency of the
Council. We highly appreciate the role of the mission
and Permanent Representative of Singapore,
Ambassador Mahbubani, in the Security Council and
throughout the United Nations.

I also wish to express my appreciation and
gratitude to Ambassador Koonjul, Permanent
Representative of Mauritius, for his important role. We
pay tribute to his activities concerning all African
issues within this Chamber and in the framework of the
ad hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa. We also thank Ambassador
Ibrahima Fall and commend his efforts. We agree with
all the ideas and proposals he has put forth to date.

I also thank Ambassador Lavrov for his
successful leadership ofthe Council last month.

We welcome Ambassador Ivan Simonovic',
Permanent Representative of friendly Croatia and
President ofthe Economic and Social Council.

Our Community, established on 4 February 1998,
has a membership of 19 States that transcends the
inherited colonial divisions. Its membership extends
from the Atlantic Ocean in the West to the Red Sea and
the Indian Ocean in the East and from Nigeria and the
Central African Republic in the South to the
Mediterranean Sea in the North. Our Community thus
reflects the object ofthe approach being adopted by the
Security Council and the time it devotes to addressing
African issues. We note with satisfaction the positive
developments in Sierra Leone and Angola, as well as in
the dispute between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Such
developments give us great hope that these issues will
be resolved.

While we encourage such trends, we feel that the
Council's responsibility for African issues remains
important. We also feel that a great deal more needs to
be done to resolve these, the most complex issues in
the world, in which political, historical and social
factors overlap, including the negative legacy of the
colonial Powers in this ethnically complex continent.

Given the special nature of African conflicts and
the overlapping factors I have mentioned, the
establishment of regional and subregional
organizations in the continent has contributed most
effectively to the prevention of certain conflicts and to
the resolution of others. These organizations possess
special knowledge ofthe various aspects of conflicts in
our region.

While we commend the OAU/African Union and
subregional organizations such as the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
the Economic Community of West African States and
the Southern African Development Community for the
role they are playing, I must emphasize that CENSAD
too has effectively contributed to those efforts. It has
been able to assist the international community in the
prevention and even the resolution of conflicts in
CENSAD's geographical area and has taken a number
of initiatives in that regard. We have already had the
honour of informing the Secretariat and the Security
Council of those initiatives.

Allow me to mention a few of the initiatives
CENSAD has taken. First, with respect to the Central
African Republic, CENSAD has made efforts at all
levels since the beginning of the crisis in that country.
It sent a delegation consisting of the Secretary for
African Unity of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, the
Foreign Ministers of Burkina Faso and Chad and a
representative of the Assistant Secretary-General of the
OAU. The delegation met the concerned parties of the
Central African Republic and of neighbouring
countries. The meetings were attended by the
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Central
African Republic, General Lamine Cisse.

CENSAD Foreign Ministers held a meeting in
New York on 15 November 2001, during the fifty-sixth
session of the General Assembly, and took several
decisions to ease the situation in the Central African
Republic. Most important among those decisions was
to mandate the Chairman of CENSAD, Sudan, to
convene a mini-summit for the concerned parties with a
View to resolving the dispute. The results reached at the
ministerial meeting were reported promptly to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan.

In implementation of that decision, the Republic
of the Sudan, in its capacity as Chairman of CENSAD,
called for a mini-summit meeting, which was held in
Khartoum on 3 December 2001, attended by the
President of the Republic of Zambia, the Chairman of
the OAU, the President of the Republic of Chad, the
President of the Central African Republic, and
Brigadier Abubaker Yunis, Secretary of the Provisional
People's Committee for Defence in Libya. The mini-
summit was also attended by the Secretary-General of
the OAU, by the Secretary-General of CENSAD and by
Mr. Lamine Cisse, the Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Central African Republic.

The summit took decisions on the following
matters: the formation of a peacekeeping, security and
stabilization force in Central Africa and an appeal to
the United Nations, the OAU and friendly countries to
provide all forms of assistance to that force; the
formation of a political committee, consisting of the
Foreign Ministers of the Sudan, Chad, Libya, Burkina
Faso and Gabon, the Secretary-General of the OAU,
the Representative of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and the Secretary-General of CENSAD,
to continue contacts aiming at the achievement of
national reconciliation in the Central African Republic;
the establishment of a financial fund for the provision
of urgent support to the Central African Republic, with
contributions from CENSAD member States, other
States, and regional and international organizations; a
CENSAD request to President Patasse to consider
declaring a general amnesty; and an expression of
welcome to the call by the Government of the Central
African Republic to dissidents to return to their
homeland.

The Tripoli summit of March 2002 welcomed the
recommendations of the Khartoum mini-summit and
reaffirmed CENSAD's commitment to following up the
process of peace, national reconciliation and
reconstruction in the Central African Republic.
Furthermore, the summit declared its readiness to join
the efforts of the United Nations, the OAU, the
Economic and Social Council and the Central African
Economic and Monetary Community, and established a
joint committee to that purpose.

With respect to reconciliation between the Central
African Republic and the Republic of Chad, thanks to
the efforts of the chairmanship of CENSAD, a bilateral
meeting was held between the Presidents of the Central
African Republic and of Chad in the capital of Chad in
April 2002, in which full reconciliation was reached
between the two countries. Borders were reopened, and
a committee was established under the chairmanship of
the Secretary for African Unity of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya and with membership including the Foreign
Minister of Chad, the Foreign Minister of the Central
African Republic and the Representative of the
Secretary-General, General Cisse. The goal of the
committee is to restore and normalize relations
between the two countries.

With respect to the situation in Somalia,
CENSAD has made, both at the level of member States
and at the level of its chairmanship, several efforts for
national reconciliation within the CENSAD
community. Other attempts have been made to put an
end to tensions between Somalia and its neighbours. In
this respect, the last summit conference, held in Tripoli
in March 2002, expressed support for the Transitional
National Government in its efforts aiming at the
rehabilitation and restructuring of Somalia. The summit
extended a call to the whole international community
and to the United Nations and the OAU, in particular,
to consolidate efforts to enhance dialogue in the pursuit
of national reconciliation and permanent peace in
Somalia.

CENSAD members have long been working to
bring about national reconciliation in Sudan. The
Tripoli summit requested the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
and the Arab Republic of Egypt to continue their
efforts with regard to the joint Egyptian-Libyan
initiative, which has been accepted by all parties. The
summit also recommended that the initiative be
coordinated with the IGAD initiative. It also
recommended the establishment of a suitable
mechanism for the implementation of the peace plan
and for supporting the efforts of the Government of
Sudan aimed at achieving peace, national reconciliation
and stability in the country.

With respect to the strengthening of peace and
dialogue in Chad, on 4 January 2002 the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya hosted a meeting between a delegation of
the Chadian Government led by the Minister of the
Interior and General Security and a delegation
representing the Movement for Democracy and Justice
in Chad. The meeting resulted in the signing ofa peace
agreement between the two parties.

It is clear from those initiatives that regional and
subregional organizations play an important and
effective role and contribute positively to maintaining
peace and security in the area and that they strive to
create a favourable political and economic climate, as
well as playing an important role in assisting the
United Nations in such endeavours.

The deterioration of economic and living
conditions in many African countries is a major cause
of the emergence, persistence and flaring up of
conflicts in their many forms. These economic
conditions increase tension. The heavy external debt
burden of African countries and the unjust conditions
imposed on many African countries by international
financial institutions exacerbate the already
deteriorated economic situation in their countries,
making them vulnerable to dissension and instability.

Cognizant of these facts, CENSAD member
States have given them priority within the
comprehensive framework of conflict resolution and
crisis management, because there can be no peace with
poverty. Taking these realities into account, the
Khartoum CENSAD summit decided to establish a
special fund to assist the Central African Republic, to
which all States members of the Community will
contribute, despite their dire economic conditions.

The Community calls upon the United Nations,
its agencies, and donor countries to give these African
issues the attention they deserve, if conflict prevention
and resolution efforts are to succeed in the continent.

Despite the Community's efforts, Africa's
problems are so numerous and complex that the
regional and subregional organizations cannot
implement successful and sustainable solutions on their
own. The United Nations and the Security Council
must therefore take a leading role in supporting these
initiatives. We, at the level of our organization, will
assist them in fulfilling their roles. However, this
requires financial resources to enable the countries
Members of the Organization to be in a better position
to play a more effective role in the establishment of
stability, peace and security in this region.
The Security Council's establishment of its ad
hoc Working Group on Africa was an important step
towards the implementation of Security Council
resolutions on the settlement of disputes in the
continent. Furthermore, it will consider ways and
means for enabling the Council to take the steps
necessary to prevent conflicts from breaking out in
some countries. On this occasion we wish to welcome
the Working Group's approach to cooperation,
consultation and coordination with regional and
subregional organizations in our continent. In this
regard, we express our readiness to coordinate, consult
and cooperate with the Working Group in order to
establish the appropriate procedural mechanisms for
the maintenance of peace and security in the continent
and for the provision of appropriate solutions to the
issues that fall within the scope ofthe region.

While recognizing potential risks involved, we
believe that there are initiatives that can be taken by
the Security Council. However, we are all prepared to
share in assuming that risk so that both the
international community and our Community can
intervene at the right moment to eliminate areas of
tension before the tension escalates and spreads to
other areas. Should that occur, containment would be
riskier, most costly and more difficult. It is not
necessary to cite examples, as such areas of tension are
well known to all.

I wish to emphasize once again, on behalf of
CENSAD, our readiness to cooperate, coordinate and
participate in resolving the issues that fall within the
scope of our Community. We also reaffirm that our
commitment does not exempt the Security Council
from assuming its responsibilities in this regard, as
called for by the Charter ofthe United Nations.

Once again, we express our highest consideration
to you, Mr. Minister and President, for holding this
important meeting.

