The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

First of all, I thank Mr. Ging for his briefing. He
has heard the words of appreciation today from Council
members to him and his team for all that they do, and I
would like to add the United Kingdom's voice to those.
We will continue to disburse more than $200 million
to the people of Yemen to support his efforts. I would
also like to thank the Special Envoy for his tremendous
efforts and for those of his team. I hope that the strong
unity that he has heard from the Security Council today
can be a real spur to efforts in taking the matter forward.

I think that it has been very good that we have
all been able to express concern about the reports we
heard today of the attack on the hospital and on the
fish market. There was very strong reassurance from
members of the Council that it was important to uphold
international humanitarian law and the protection of
civilians. I think that that was absolutely unequivocal
from the Council. Obviously, the United Kingdom joins
that stance.

There was also very strong condemnation of the
attacks by the Houthis on the Saudi oil tanker and the
other attacks in the Red Sea and concern about the
arms shipments that are coming through the Red Sea.
I believe that we all look forward to the forthcoming
report of the Panel of Experts on Yemen. There has
been a call from the Council to the Houthis to come
and work with the Special Envoy and to implement the
Security Council resolutions, even as we recognize the
commitment to halting attacks in the Red Sea. I think
that we all feel that it is now time to take this to the
next stage.

There was unconditional support for the efforts of
the Special Envoy and a real hope that the 6 September
talks in Geneva can start a truly viable process. The
Special Envoy can count on all members of the Council
to unify around his efforts and to build momentum for
what he has started

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of Yemen.

