Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Yamamoto for his remarks today.
Under his leadership, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) continues to
provide vital support to Afghanistan. I also want to
thank Ms. Samar for her informative briefing today.

The United States is committed to sustainable
peace in Afghanistan that ensures that it will never
again be a platform for transnational terrorism.
Special Representative Khalilzad is working in close
coordination with President Ghani, Chief Executive
Abdullah and other Afghan leaders, as well as Special
Representative Yamamoto and Security Council
members. Special Representative Khalilzad looks
forward to briefing the Council soon. Today I would
like to update the Council on the progress that has been
made towards peace.

As the Council is aware, in January the United
States and the Taliban reached an agreement in principle
that any comprehensive peace agreement must address
four interconnected issues - counter-terrorism, the
presence of foreign troops, an intra-Afghan dialogue
leading to intra-Afghan negotiations, and a permanent
ceasefire. Regarding terrorism, we have made progress
and may soon be in a position to conclude a draft
text outlining the Taliban's commitments to ensuring
that Afghan soil is never again used for international
terrorism. Of course, we have to be mindful of the
implementation and enforcement of those counter-
terrorism commitments.

In the light of the progress on ensuring that
Afghan soil is not used for international terrorism,
the time will soon come to begin discussions with the
Taliban on the issue of the foreign military presence,
which will continue to be based on conditions. The
United States has made it clear to the Taliban that it
is prepared to reduce its forces. However, we have not
agreed to numbers or a timeline with the Taliban. The
final disposition of foreign forces will be determined
with the post-peace Government. In parallel to our
discussions with the Taliban, we are conducting detailed
discussions with the Afghan Government. We are fully
aligned in our approach, including on the importance
of the Taliban committing to a reduction in violence
leading to a permanent ceasefire. The Afghans demand
and deserve an end to the violence. Let me outline what
we see as a way forward.

First, all parties agree that finalizing a United
States-Taliban understanding on terrorism and the
foreign-troop presence will open the door for an
intra-Afghan dialogue and negotiations. To that end,
we welcome Germany's commitment, together with
Qatar, to convene an intra-Afghan dialogue in Doha in
early July, which will be an opportunity for Afghans to
endorse the urgent need for intra-Afghan negotiations.
Simultaneously, the United States is laying the
groundwork for intra-Afghan negotiations to begin as
soon as possible. Their objective is for the Afghans to
agree on a timeline and a political road map for reaching
a comprehensive peace agreement. The United States
joins other countries in supporting Afghans' desire
for a peace that sustains the social and human rights
gains of the past 18 years. We insist, and indeed we
should all insist, that women, minorities and other
groups be represented in those talks. Additionally, the
United States is consulting with the region on how it
can support peace. The trilateral consensus issued by
the United States, Russia and China and the principles
issued by the United States-Europe group are important
steps forward.

The United States claims no monopoly on the
diplomacy of peace. We thank Ambassador Djani
and the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011) for supporting a temporary travel-ban
exemption for select individuals, and a corresponding
limited asset-freeze exemption, in order to facilitate the
intra-Afghan talks. We encourage Member States to
fully implement their sanctions obligations in support
of peace in Afghanistan.

Peace remains our priority. At the same time, we
believe that election planning must go forward as we
pursue the peace that Afghans deserve. Afghanistan's
Independent Election Commission has announced that
the presidential election will be held on 28 September.
We urge the Afghan Government, the Election
Commission and all political stakeholders to take the
necessary steps to ensure that the election is credible.
The preparations for it include completing voter
registration, refining the voter list, printing ballots and
recruiting and training poll workers. The United States
is providing financial and technical assistance through
the United Nations Development Programme and other
partners to the Election Commission and will continue
to do so.

Lastly, the United States views the United Nations
Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board (JCMB) as
an important tool for coordination between the Afghan
Government and donors. We call on the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the
Afghan Government to ensure that the J CMB maintains
a robust performance and accountability component. We
also request that UNAMA and the Afghan Government
prepare a report on performance and accountability
ahead of the September Security Council meeting on
Afghanistan, which should include an overview of the
JCMB discussions on anti-corruption, Government
accountability and ongoing efforts to ensure fair and
credible elections.

I want to repeat once again that peace is our highest
priority. Thanks to the efforts of many Security Council
members, that goal is within reach. Nothing is agreed
until everything is agreed, and the peace process
will end only when Afghans reach a comprehensive
understanding on a political road map to end the war.
We are committed to providing future updates.

