Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): Mr. President, at
the outset, let me express my delegation's gratitude to
you for convening and presiding over this meeting.

It is with great pleasure and a deep sense of
solidarity that my delegation joins the other members
of the Security Council in welcoming the President-
elect of the Republic of Haiti, Mr. Rene Garcia Preval,
whom I wish to congratulate on his victory in the
7 February presidential elections - a victory in which
all Haitians have a stake. We commend him
particularly for the statesmanship he demonstrated
throughout the elections. This greatly helped to keep
the process of democratization in Haiti on track. Above
all, his ascendance to the presidency, for the second
time in a decade, presents him with a unique
opportunity to heal age-old wounds in order to
reconcile the nation and rally Haitians behind him for
the urgent task of national reconstruction.

Unless the cycle of violence and political
instability is overcome, democracy and meaningful
development will continue to elude Haiti. It is our
hope, therefore, that the Government that emerges
finally will reflect a collective determination to evolve
a new political culture of inclusiveness that transcends
the sharp social and economic divisions that have been
the bane of Haiti's progress over the years.

We look forward to a peaceful second round of
parliamentary elections that has been scheduled for
21 April 2006. This should bring the elections to a
successful conclusion, for which the Provisional
Electoral Council, the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the donors who
provided resources deserve our highest commendation.
At this juncture, I would like to thank my old friend
and former colleague, Ambassador Juan Gabriel
Valdes, for his untiring efforts in the cause of peace in
Haiti.

By the end of April, the President and Parliament
will have been inaugurated into office to begin the
arduous task of transforming Haiti into a more united,
stable and prosperous country. We know from our
modest experience in Ghana as a young democracy that
the momentum for turning away from the turbulent
politics of the past derives from a strong national
consensus in favour of democratic governance. The
huge turnout at the elections has shown clearly that
such a consensus does indeed exist within Haitian
society.

Giving this consensus for democratic governance
practical meaning for the ordinary citizen is a major
challenge. It is our hope that the outcome of the June
local and municipal elections will bring government to
the doorstep of the people. No system of governance
can retain its credibility before the people unless it
enables them, at the very least, to meet their basic
needs for survival.
The newly elected Government of Haiti must
therefore be assisted in building a credible democracy
capable of delivering to the population greater security
of life and property, as well as sustainable access to
potable water, electricity, education, health services
and, above all, jobs. Among the various pressing
demands, the restructuring of the Haitian national
police and judicial system must be accorded utmost
priority so as to enhance law and order and overall
stability.

Time and again, the international community has
been confronted with the grim underlying reality of
most of the conflicts in which we have had to intervene
at such great cost. We have learned that peace and
stability invariably can be guaranteed most effectively
by a system of governance that takes care of the basic
needs of the people. Haiti is no different. Haitians are
the architects of their own future. But given the
endemic poverty in that country and its monumental
economic and social problems, in the post-election
period the international community, in partnership with
the Government and people of Haiti, should embark
upon a massive programme of national reconstruction.
By drawing on the accumulated wisdom of our
collective experience, we can help transform Haiti. We
hope that at the appropriate time MINUSTAH's
mandate will be refashioned to enable it to play a
leading role in such an undertaking.

We thank the Argentine delegation for the draft
presidential statement, which we fully support.

