It is my honour to address this organ once again. I am only sorry that again we must meet remotely due to the ongoing coronavirus disease pandemic. I sincerely hope everyone here is doing well, including all citizens in their respective countries. With so many issues facing the Council, I am thankful that everyone here is still able and willing to take the time to focus on a discussion on Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is an ongoing concern. It is my wish that we meet again in person next spring. By now, Council members will have read my report to the Council (S/2020/1052, annex), in which I have addressed the issues with which Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to grapple, and which I believe still require the continued attention and even stronger support of this organ and the international community. This month, we will celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Dayton Peace Agreement, which has provided 25 years of peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Looking back, Dayton has been a huge success, as it indeed brought peace to the country, and is even more impressive against the backdrop of various international disputes that have remained unresolved for decades, like in the Middle East, the Caucasus and elsewhere. However, as it turns out, the Dayton Agreement, while also a solid framework for future development of Bosnia and Herzegovina, has brought an imperfect peace. After 100,000 people were killed in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the priority of the Dayton fathers was - and rightly so - to stop the bloodshed and produce an agreement enabling future State-building reforms. It is an undeniable fact that significant progress has been achieved in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the first decade after Dayton, with the help of some politicians, like Mr. Dodik. State symbols were adopted and a new common currency, passport, flag, anthem, licence plates and even a national football league were created in order to enable freedom of movement. In addition, the taxation system improved, judicial reforms were implemented and joint armed forces were established in a country where earlier, three armies fought against each other. These are a few among many other changes. I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to and thank my predecessors for their dedicated work in Bosnia and Herzegovina: Carl Bildt, Carlos Westendorp y Cabeza, Wolfgang Petritsch, the late Lord Ashdown, Miroslav Lajeak and Christian Schwarz-Schilling, who will soon turn 90. Regrettably, the international community made one grave conceptual mistake during the implementation of the Dayton Agreement - we invested our trust in some politicians too early and they used our goodwill to reinvigorate nationalistic, divisive policies, especially from 2006 to date. The lack of progress and real reforms is obvious. The blockage of state-level and, lately, Federation-level institutions has become a new normal in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Also normal is the systemic discrimination against so-called others - citizens who do not declare themselves to be members of any of the constituent peoples as. I mention that because some politicians are very ill-prepared to remedy this shameful discrimination that affects about 10 per cent of the citizens. It is also very worrisome that, 25 years after the signing of the Dayton Peace Agreement, some Bosnia and Herzegovina politicians still ignore core European values. The International Military Tribunal in Nuremberg, established 75 years ago, returned the sense of right and wrong to Europe and had a healing effect on some countries, including my home country, Austria. The Nuremberg trials prosecuted individual perpetrators of terrible crimes in the Second World War, including those committed during the Holocaust as the most heinous, and condemned Nazi war criminals forever to the wrong side of history. The same has been attempted through the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), established by this very organ in 1993. Some Bosnia and Herzegovina politicians have failed, however, to understand the historic lesson of Nuremberg, and have completely missed the point of the ICTY and its work. There is no collective guilt for war crimes; there are no bad nations, there is only individual responsibility. But the biggest lesson is that those who choose to ignore or rewrite history instead of accepting the truth, will not have a stable and prosperous future. As the German Foreign Minister Heiko Maas said in a landmark speech only a few days ago, on 28 October, "there is no place in the European Union for those who glorify war criminals". The latest example of glorifying a war criminal is Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency Chair Milorad Dodik's request, on 16 September, that the Presidency honour and pay respect to the convicted war criminal Momeilo Krajisnik, who had died the previous day, with a minute of silence. Some time ago, Mr. Dodik opened a student dormitory in Pale, close to Sarajevo, in honour of convicted war criminal Radovan Karadzi¢, who has been sentenced to life by the ICTY. Similarly, upon his release, Dario Kordic, who served 12 years for war crimes, received a warm welcome organized by a political party and a church honoured him with a Catholic mass of gratitude. I have previously reported to the Security Council on the glorification of war criminals, but on 11 July I repeated my appeal with regard to Srebrenica, where more than 8,000 boys and men were killed and buried. I urged Mr. Dodik to remove the commemorative plaque and rename the student dormitory dedicated to Radovan Karadzic. This is a dormitory where future generations will live and grow up. I repeat that appeal today. If he will not act before the next Security Council meeting in May, he should face a travel ban to all European Union (EU) countries and, eventually, to all States Members of the United Nations. As the German Foreign Minister said, there is no place in civilized Europe for those who glorify convicted war criminals. There is no place for those who do not share European values. That is, why we need a genocide denial law similar to the Holocaust denial law. The importance of shared values was again confirmed recently during the Zagreb summit of the EU. Twenty-five years after Dayton, the reconciliation process should be a non- issue, but the reality is that when it comes to some politicians, it has not even properly started. In many respects, those who should lead that process are farther apart now than at any point after the war. The result is a lack of joint vision for the county, as well as insufficient trust and dialogue to move the country forward. In that regard, I would like to note the adoption, in September, by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers, of the Revised National War Crimes Processing Strategy, pursuant to which the most serious war crimes should be prioritized for prosecution and completion by 2023. The previous National War Crimes Processing Strategy, adopted in 2008, envisioned the processing of the most complex cases by 2015, but was never fully implemented. The success of the new strategy will ultimately depend on the level of coordination, cooperation and discipline of the judicial institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I am hopeful of the outcome. But, in all candour, we need action first and foremost. Words on paper must translate into legal processes and decisions as soon as possible. I would like to be able to report today that all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina look to the future and focus on important issues so as to improve the lives of the citizens, but I cannot say that this is always the case. As the Council knows, the country will hold local elections 10 days from now and, in some cases, instead of hopeful, forward-looking campaigns, I am afraid that we are seeing the usual divisive rhetoric. Most recently, Mr. Dodik, who is the Serb member of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the leader of the main Serb party, the Union of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD), said that Bosnia and Herzegovina is the "wrong country". Well, of course it is the wrong country when one rejects everything, makes no effort to come together to fix it and constantly talks about leaving it. Earlier, Mr. Dodik threatened that Serbs and Croats would present their plan for how Bosnia and Herzegovina should function and that, if not accepted, they would dissociate themselves from the country. To be clear, Mr. Dodik is talking about the secession of the Republika Srpska from Bosnia and Herzegovina - again. Needless to say, there is already a plan for how Bosnia and Herzegovina should function; it is called the General Framework Agreement for Peace. There is no option in the agreement for secession, nor is it possible to cherry-pick provisions from the Dayton Agreement. Such statements are irresponsible, unfounded and show poor leadership. They also completely disregard the well-being and prosperity of the citizens, as well as the peace and stability of the region. Given such rhetoric, I must acknowledge and express my thanks to the Council for its reauthorization of the mandate of the EU-led Operation Althea (EUFOR Althea) military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in fulfilment of its main peace- stabilization role under the military aspects of the General Framework Agreement for Peace. The continued presence of EUFOR Althea remains necessary. As I have noted, Bosnia and Herzegovina is in the midst of campaigns for the 15 November local elections, and I want to express my gratitude and support to the Central Election Commission of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which has endeavoured to organize these elections under extraordinary circumstances, while facing constant pressure and criticism, particularly by the Republika Srpska party led by Mr. Dodik, SNSD, and the Federation-based Croat Democratic Union (HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina), led by Dragan Covie. The members of the Central Election Commission have shown great resolve in addressing hateful rhetoric and seriously tackling numerous allegations of electoral fraud, particularly with regard to the seemingly fraudulent registrations of out-of- country voters. I urge the law enforcement agencies and judicial institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina to support the Central Election Commission in investigating and prosecuting all such cases. The Central Election Commission is also preparing for the 20 December local elections in the city of Mostar - the first such elections in the city since 2008. That is owing to the 17 June agreement enabling the elections signed between HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina President Dragan Covie and the Bosniak-majority Party for Democratic Action President Bakir Izetbegovic. That agreement would not have been possible without the engagement of the international community, particularly European Union Special Representative Johann Sattler and United States Ambassador Eric Nelson. However, as I have outlined in my report, Mr. Covie and Mr. Izetbegovie have since been at odds over a second agreement, signed on 17 June in Mostar, aimed at reforming the Election Law of Bosnia and Herzegovina, due to their entirely different interpretations of what they actually agreed. Most recently, they reached a stalemate centred around the appointment of the new Federation Government, which has yet to be appointed more than two years after the 2018 general elections, and the appointments of judges to the Federation Constitutional Court, which have been pending for more than a year, whose absence renders the Court's vital national interest panel non-functional. I have to note that on both issues, the HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina side is primarily responsible for the blockages. Despite their disagreements, after 12 years without elections, the city of Mostar must hold elections as scheduled, on 20 December. I would further add that the long-overdue appointment of the new Federation Government must be carried out as soon as possible. Holding elections are meaningless if the results are not implemented. The same must be said for the appointments of local Governments in the Federation cantons of Herzegovina-Neretva and Canton 10. Additional Federation deficiencies are exhaustively addressed in my report to the Security Council. Among other issues outlined in my report, I would like to underline the need for Bosnia and Herzegovina to dramatically strengthen the rule of law and bolster the fight against corruption. The rule of law remains a cornerstone of any functional democracy. I would remind everyone that Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to undergo a massive brain drain as talented young people decide to leave the country and build their futures elsewhere. Numerous polls show that people are not leaving primarily due to a lack of economic opportunity, but rather due to weak rule of law. Binding court decisions go unimplemented for years and blatant corruption goes unpunished. Some public opinion polls suggest that 74 per cent of the citizens are unsatisfied with the situation in the judiciary. Those figures attest to what we are saying on a daily basis - that profound, radical and rapid judicial reforms are needed in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that regard, I would like to reiterate that the case of the young, murdered student from Banja Luka, David Dragieevic, the case of Dzenan Memi¢ and the case of the two policemen killed in Sarajevo have not been solved. What those cases have in common is that even after more than two years, investigations have stalled. What should citizens think if even the murder of policemen cannot be solved? It may be of interest to the Council that Austria's Minister of Justice, Alma Zadi¢, is a highly talented and hard-working refugee child from Bosnia and Herzegovina, who studied at the Universita Cattolica del Sacro Cuore in Piacenza, Columbia University and the University of Vienna. I would also underline that, despite repeated calls from members of the Council for the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to implement the 5+2 agenda - the five objectives and two conditions to be fulfilled prior to the closure of the Office of the High Representative and the end of my mandate - regrettably, there has been little progress other than the adoption of the Revised National War Crimes Processing Strategy. I actually see very limited commitment to the implementation the 5+2 conditionality, particularly by those politicians who advocate the closure of the Office of the High Representative. They should find an agreement to implement the State and defence property registration, which are clearly defined. They must also move towards, not away from the implementation of the second condition: the "positive assessment of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, based on full compliance with the Dayton Peace Agreement". Even today, I can state that I will not base my assessment of the fulfilment of the second condition on the use of the negative, anti-State rhetoric. Instead, I will assess the commitment of the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to full and real compliance with the Dayton Agreement and will consider, in that regard, the concrete actions taken by some politicians to undermine the State and the Federation. It is in our common interest to leave behind lasting and irreversible stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which can be achieved only through enduring and genuine commitment to the Dayton Peace Agreement, including the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution. Until that is secured, the international community must uphold all applicable instruments in order to address potential threats to long-term stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including through the use of executive mandates, international judges in the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court and international mechanisms in Breko. On 31 October, we reached the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), which the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina marked in November. I urge the authorities to implement the third national action plan on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), for the years 2018 to 2022, primarily in order to increase the effectiveness of women's roles in trust-building and political leadership. While women are at the core of ensuring socioeconomic stability in the country, they are nevertheless marginalized in political decision-making. We need to explore every avenue that could assist the transformation of Bosnia and Herzegovina into a stable, peaceful and prosperous State that functions and provides for the needs and best interests of all of its peoples - one that is fully integrated with the European Union and other Euro-Atlantic structures. I firmly believe that this is what the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina want too. To achieve that goal, the international community will have to become more ambitious, and the country's leaders more serious. In the past, the international community has employed robust interventionism and hands-off, local-ownership approaches. Given the reality on the ground, perhaps it is time to rethink our current approach. Let us finish the job in front of us, let us unite forces and let us turn a new page in our engagement and open a new chapter. It is not about us being satisfied, but rather it is about the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina, who deserve better and who still have trust in us. For 500 years, Bosnia and Herzegovina has been a country with four basic religions -Islam, Catholicism, Orthodox Christianity and Judaism. It was a pre- emptive small Europe of four religions and 16 minorities, living together for hundreds of years. Living among ordinary people, there are numerous Nelson Mandelas in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Only recently, in Jajce, in Central Bosnia, an imam attended the first mass of a newly ordained Catholic priest. It was also in Jajce that youngsters protested against the division of their high school, which would lead to two schools under one roof - a Croat and a Bosniak one. Those young people were successful and received the prestigious Max van der Stoel Award for their courage and principled stand. It was awarded by Stephanus Blok, the Foreign Minister of the Netherlands, in presence of the First Vice President of the European Commission, Frans Timmermans. This is why I firmly believe that, together with international community as partners, this ancient Bosnia and Herzegovina, full of values, can be recreated and reinvigorated.
