Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): We
would like, first of all, to congratulate you, Mr.
President, as Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), upon the completion of your first
three months in the leadership of the Committee. We
believe that the transition from the previous
chairmanship has been seamless and that through your
vigorous and committed leadership and creativity the
work of the CTC has continued to progress. Of course,
we would also like to thank the Spanish Mission and
the members of your dedicated team who have been
supporting you in this effort, as well as CTC experts
and members of the Secretariat. They deserve our
thanks for their ongoing contributions to the CTC's
success.

As we endorse the work programme for the next
90 days, it is worth recalling some of the
accomplishments since the CTC was established more
than 20 months ago. They include assembling a
substantial body of relevant information about
worldwide counter-terrorism capacity; maintaining an
open-ended and increasingly focused dialogue with
Member States about the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001); determining which countries need what
counter-terrorism assistance, and helping to match such
countries with donors; and acting as coordinator among
other international organizations in the field of counter-
terrorism, thereby working to raise the capacity of all
Member States in this area.

Perhaps one of the Committee's most important
contributions has been to ensure that the issue of
counter-terrorism remains high on the Council's
agenda. Given the number of important international
peace and security issues before the Council, there is a
risk that the Council's focus on combating terrorism
will not be sufficiently intense. Through its steady
work and quarterly briefings to the Council, the
Committee has ensured that the Council continues to
lead in the worldwide effort to build counter-terrorism
capability. However, the Committee has a lot of work
ahead of it. For example, while 35 States have become
parties to all 12 international conventions and protocols
since the Committee began its work - a very
important achievement - over 150 more still need to
do so. Although a number of States have taken strides
towards the implementation of different aspects of
resolution 1373 (2001), many still do not have
adequate legislation in place to combat terrorism-
whether that concerns the regulation of the banking
sector, charities, or the monitoring of borders.

In addition, although all States have submitted a
report to the CTC, some of those reports contain little
evidence of efforts to implement the resolution, and
some States are late in submitting follow-up reports.
As long as a few States are not acting quickly enough
to raise their capacity to combat terrorism, we all
remain vulnerable. The terrorist attacks of
11 September 2001 and those that have taken place
since then highlight this fact.

The implementation of resolution 1373 (2001),
however, ultimately requires more than submitting
reports to the CTC, adopting laws and regulations and
putting in place the proper structures to fight terrorism.
Implementation of the resolution requires that States
apply those laws and regulations and use those
structures against all who are suspected of committing
terrorist acts, including acts of indiscriminate violence
against civilians, regardless of motive or cause. It
requires that States cooperate with other States in the
apprehension, investigation and prosecution of all
suspected terrorists. Those States that do not do all
they can to combat terrorism put all States at risk, as
the international community's capacity to fight
terrorism is only as strong as its weakest link.

In short, while the CTC has made important
contributions to the fight against terrorism, it still has a
lot of work to do in three core areas: reviewing and
assessing States' written submissions, facilitating and
coordinating counter-terrorism assistance and
expanding cooperation with more than 60 international,
regional and subregional organizations. In addition to
that work, we believe that the Committee, including
through its experts, should soon begin to visit capitals
that may benefit from a discussion of the matters that
need to be tackled to further the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) and of the assistance that might
be available.

Given the important work that remains to be
done, it is essential that the CTC continue to receive
the support of, and cooperation from, Member States
and the broader international community it has
received so far. In addition, given the CTC's various
tasks, it is time to start thinking about how the CTC
can best accomplish them. The CTC plays a leading
role in building the capacity of all States to fight
terrorism. We should seek to ensure that the Committee
has what it needs to be as effective as possible.

