Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): I congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of your important responsibility as
President of the Council for this month. We are
confident that, under your able stewardship, the
Council will do productive work this month.

We thank the Secretary-General for his end-of-
mandate report on the United Nations Office in Timor-
Leste (UNOTIL), as contained in document
S/2006/251. In that regard, my delegation expresses its
appreciation to Special Representative Hasegawa for
his useful briefing and for his leadership in bringing
the UNOTIL mandate towards a successful conclusion.

Before I continue, allow me also to join previous
speakers in welcoming Senior Minister Jose Ramos-
Horta of Timor-Leste to our debate today. We have
taken note of his briefing on the internal security
situation in the country following the recent riots. We
are following it closely and hope that a quick solution
can be found in order to return the situation to normal
as soon as possible.

We take note with appreciation of the progress
made by UNOTIL in assisting Timor-Leste towards
self-sufficiency and in ensuring a smooth transition
from the current United Nations assistance to the
country towards a sustainable development framework.
Of no less importance to note is the impressive
progress made by Timor-Leste in many areas of
governance, institution-building and capacity-building,
thanks to the perseverance and determination of its
people and leadership, as acknowledged in the
Secretary-General's report.

We recognize, however, that, as UNOTIL's
mandate comes to an end, continued international
assistance and support are needed for Timor-Leste to
face the challenges before it, and especially to
consolidate the progress made in laying down a
stronger foundation for a democratic system. One of
the enormous challenges ahead is the preparation and
conduct of its first parliamentary and presidential
elections, which are scheduled for 2007. Indonesia, as
the world's third largest democracy and as the closest
neighbour of Timor-Leste, is very much interested in
seeing it succeed in conducting the elections in a
peaceful, free and fair manner. We therefore believe
that the international community must respond
favourably to the needs of Timor-Leste for assistance
and support in meeting that challenge.

We are satisfied with the excellent level of our
bilateral relations with Timor-Leste. The close rapport
between leaders of the two countries continues to grow.
During this UNOTIL reporting period, President Susilo
Bambang Yudhoyono of Indonesia met once again with
his counterpart, President Gusmao of Timor-Leste, in
Bali on 17 February to discuss issues of common
interest and concern of both countries. Just last month,
Foreign Minister Hassan Wirajuda welcomed the visit
of Minister Ramos-Horta to Jakarta to address issues of
importance to both countries. That attests to the
maturity of bilateral relations that enable both
countries effectively to deal with any issues and
problems that arise between them.

The bilateral cooperation between Indonesia and
Timor-Leste also continues to deepen and expand.
Through the two countries' joint commission and its
subsidiary mechanisms, we continue to register further
progress in various areas, including the political, legal,
economic, trade, investment, cultural, health and
education fields. Both countries also continue to make
progress in addressing effectively and conclusively the
residual issues arising from the separation of Timor-
Leste from Indonesia as an independent State in 1999.

With regard to cooperation on matters relating to
the border, I am pleased to inform the Council that the
delineation of the remaining 1 per cent of the land

border between both countries is expected to be
completed by August. Indonesia also looks forwards to
finalizing a new border management arrangement with
Timor-Leste to replace the military liaison arrangement
between the Indonesian military and the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), which expired in June 2005. Meanwhile,
cooperation on border security continues to be
strengthened, and the absence of incidents along the
border during this UNOTIL reporting period attests to
that.

In conclusion, Indonesia, as a neighbour which
shares a common vision with Timor-Leste based on the
principles of peaceful coexistence and forward-
looking, reconciliatory and mutually beneficial
relations, will, for its part, continue to assist Timor-
Leste in achieving self-sufficiency, including better
enabling it to make further progress in fostering peace,
stability and democracy in the country. In that regard,
the Government of Indonesia, on a bilateral basis, also
stands ready to be of assistance to Timor-Leste in
ensuring the smooth, peaceful, free, fair and credible
conduct of its first elections next year.

