Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I am
particularly pleased to be speaking to the Council on
behalf of the current Chairman of the Organization of
African Unity at a time when you, Mr. President, have
taken up your important duties with such distinction,
talent and modesty. I should like to congratulate you
sincerely and also take this opportunity to express our
gratitude to the Ambassador of Argentina for the success
with which he presided over the Council.

I should also like to congratulate the Secretary-
General for the comprehensive report before the Council
and for the important statement he made this morning.

The debate that you, Sir, have taken the initiative of
organizing in the Security Council on the question of
post-conflict peace-building in general, and on aspects of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration in
particular, is all the more timely - and, we hope,
useful - in taking place at a time when, mindful of the
growing complexity of peacekeeping operations our
Secretary-General has taken the initiative of establishing
a group to consider this question as a whole. It is a
question whose importance goes beyond the strict
framework of peacekeeping, inasmuch as it influences the

 

length of time that conflict settlement and the gradual return
to peace and stability will take.

The concept of peacekeeping has been constantly
evolving and gradually changing in recent years with regard
to both the proliferation of operations involving United
Nations forces and resources and the very way in which
such operations are understood, because their scope is
expanding to encompass aspects that are relatively new,
compared to how we looked at this issue not long ago.

The reasons for this development lie, first and
foremost, in the changed nature of the conflicts in which
the international community is being asked to intervene. For
about 10 years now, most conflicts and crises have been
internal and, often, inter-ethnic in nature, characterized by
large-scale massacres and refugee flows. The United
Nations, having been found wanting in Rwanda, Bosnia and
elsewhere, can no longer allow such developments to occur
with impunity.

Furthermore, while the role of the United Nations in
inter-State conflicts is limited to separating the belligerent
parties, placing itself between them, supervising the
disengagement of the forces involved and monitoring
truces, in the case of internal conflicts the mandate of
United Nations forces must be broader and, as a result,
more complex. Not only does it now have to separate the
belligerent parties, but it has to work to eliminate the
factors that might lead to a resumption of hostilities.
Experience acquired in recent years in this area has led us
to the realization that the mandate of peacekeeping
operations must now include post-conflict peace-building
elements in order to prevent a resumption of hostilities.
Such measures include the disarmament of troops and
militias that are not recognized as legal forces, the
collection of weapons illegally held by ex-combatants, the
demobilization of ex-combatants and their reintegration into
society.

Furthermore, even if the conflicts facing the United
Nations are internal in nature, they often involve several
actors in the immediate vicinity of the country concerned,
and even outside the region itself, which makes it even
more difficult to deal with such problems and to settle
conflicts and sometimes creates risks for the United Nations
forces being deployed.

The growing reluctance of some countries to
participate in peacekeeping operations, especially in Africa,
has led to the greater involvement of regional organizations.
This makes even more acute the problem of the relationship
between the United Nations and regional peacekeeping
organizations, against the backdrop of the problem of
financing operations and the material, logistic and military
capacities of the regional organizations in playing their
new role.

In his report of 11 February 2000, entitled "The role
of United Nations peacekeeping in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration", the Secretary-General
goes into great detail about the purpose of these activities
and their potential importance to the future conduct of
peacekeeping operations and, consequently, to the future
of all efforts to make peace and settle conflicts. We are
very grateful to the Secretary-General for his analysis,
which, based on experience gained by the United Nations
in recent years, provides us with a set of useful and
essential tools for gaining a better idea of how effectively
to organize the work of the United Nations in this area.
These elements relate to such important aspects as the
coordination of efforts being made in this process, the
mobilization of resources, capacity-building for United
Nations personnel and the establishment, in general terms,
of an international and local environment conducive to
such work.

Post-conflict peace-building transcends the narrow
framework of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration because it encompasses the search for
equitable, reliable and credible solutions to the political,
economic and social problems at the heart of these very
conflicts. This is therefore long-term work, combining
real political will at the local and, sometimes, at the
regional level with the consistent support of the
international community.

There is no point in silencing weapons and
establishing a relative peace that is often maintained only
by the presence of neutral peacekeeping forces, unless, at
the same time, we courageously and resolutely attack the
very origins of the conflict and try to deal appropriately
with their causes.

Consequently, as the Secretary-General pointed out
so clearly in his report on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development
in Africa, many conflicts in newly independent States
seem to be the result of extreme poverty, which provides
the ideal breeding ground not only for the growth and
nurturing of fanaticism and violence, but for the seizure
of power by force, the absence of democracy and the
consequent lack of prospects for democratic change.

 

Combined with external factors, this can sometimes lead to
the outbreak of conflict.

Post-conflict peace-building must, increasingly, be part
of a new approach based on traditional peacekeeping
activities, accompanied by an ambitious peace-building
programme built on the resumption of economic activities,
electoral assistance, the rehabilitation of public institutions,
the establishment of a national, integrated and
representative army, and, sometimes, the convening of
regional conferences.

This action on the part of the United Nations can
clearly succeed only if the internal, and eventually regional,
context is favourable. This means that there must first be
genuine national reconciliation, which itself must result
from a negotiated political settlement based on power-
sharing and the strengthening of democratic practices. This
also means that when neighbouring States are involved,
their support is desirable, if not necessary.

The facts on the ground, we must admit, are much
more complex, and the situation is more difficult to control,
particularly with respect to the disarmament of ex-
combatants, where lack of trust, fueled by years of war and
the absence of any genuine will to cooperate on the part of
the rebel leaders, often gives rise to insoluble problems.
The problems encountered by the disarmament and
demobilization programme involving the UNITA rebels in
Angola in the context of the Lusaka Protocol were the
principal cause of the resumption of hostilities between that
movement and the Angolan Government forces and
consequently of the withdrawal from the country of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA),
which took place in February 1999. UNITA actually used
the peace process to build up its military capacity and to
start acquiring mass quantities of new weapons. In addition,
the arms handed over by Mr. Savimbi's troops under the
disarmament programme were often obsolete and, in any
case, only a tiny percentage of those weapons were actually
handed over to the United Nations. Clearly, in the case of
Angola, monitoring and follow-up of this aspect of the
peace agreements was neither effective nor conclusive.

The many problems now facing the process of
disarmament and demobilization of the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF) rebels in Sierra Leone within the
context of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) are evidence of the problems faced by the
United Nations on the ground. During the public meeting of
the Council on 13 March last, it was clearly established that
the RUF forces and their chief, Mr. Sankoh, in particular,
were not cooperating in the handing over of all of their
weapons to the United Nations Mission under the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme, as established by the Lome Peace Agreement
of 7 July 1999. Quite the contrary - the quantity, and
particularly the quality and nature, of the arms handed
over by RUF elements - in some cases only ammunition
or hand grenades - leads one to believe that the real
weapons are still in the hands of the movement, in
violation of the agreements concluded.

Since we are speaking of Sierra Leone, I should like
to touch on the question of child soldiers. Their
demobilization and reintegration must be given particular
consideration because they are so vulnerable and because
of the serious traumas they have suffered in wartime.
Very fortunately, in recent years we have seen positive
experiences, for example, with respect to the United
Nations Operation in Mozambique, or, more recently, in
the framework of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic. In both cases the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme, which in
Mozambique led to the establishment of a national army
and in the Central African Republic to the restructuring of
a pre-existing army, on the whole was successful. To a
large extent it enabled the process of peace and
reconciliation to make significant progress and the
countries concerned gradually to return to a situation of
peace and stability.
In both cases, respect by the parties to the conflict
of their commitments went a long way towards ensuring
the success of the operation, even if the process that was
begun in the Central African Republic by the Inter-
African Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the
Bangui Agreements (MISAB), followed by the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic, has not
been finalized completely.

In Kosovo, the determination shown by the
international community and the significant resources
provided made possible the disarmament of UCK
combatants and opened the way to an international effort
towards peace-building and a return to normalcy in that
region. In this specific case, as I said earlier, significant
political, military and human resources were utilized and
went a long way towards facilitating the job on the
ground, even if the disarmament campaign has not yet
been fully finalized, as evidenced by the difficulties
encountered by the United Nations in the last few weeks.

 

We hope that the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) will
show the same determination in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Under the Lusaka Agreement, the
demobilization and disarmament of about 10 armed
movements, which are specifically mentioned in paragraph
9.1 of the Agreement, should be accorded special attention
because of their repercussions on the follow-up to
operations. Both the parties to the Lusaka Agreement,
through the Joint Military Commission, and the United
Nations, through MONUC, must play an active role to
ensure the demobilization of those armed groups - which
are rampant in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in the region - and the implementation of the provisions
of the Accord relating to them.

In this respect, we cannot but express our serious
concern at the recent deterioration of the military situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and we solemnly
call on the parties concerned scrupulously to observe the
cease-fire and to honour their Lusaka commitments in order
to ensure the full and prompt implementation of the 10 July
1999 agreement.

The same effort should be made by the Congolese
parties to the Agreement and by MONUC, so that the
process of establishing a restructured and integrated national
army can take place under normal conditions and be
concluded within a reasonable time period. Assistance, and
financial assistance in particular, from the international
community will no doubt be necessary in order to support
and speed up the process.
Disarmament operations in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo are made even more difficult by the fact that
the situation in the country is related to a regional and
international problem that will be the subject of a United
Nations conference in 2001: the illicit circulation of small
arms and, in some cases, the violation of arms embargoes
imposed by the Security Council.

The proliferation of armed groups and bands in the
Great Lakes region has been made possible in recent years
by the availability of significant and uncontrollable
quantities of arms. The lessons learned from recent
experience highlight the difficulty of making real progress
in the areas of demobilization and disarmament if we do
not control and channel these illicit flows of arms, which
foster tension and make it possible for various rival groups
to rearm and to rebuild their potential to wage war.

It is therefore essential that, simultaneously with the
process of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the
framework of MONUC, the question of the illegal
circulation of weapons in the Great Lakes region be
considered based on a regional approach, and that the
effectiveness of the arms embargo imposed by the
Council on groups in the region be the subject of constant
scrutiny and improvement.

The implementation of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes, particularly in Africa,
relates to a crucial problem that recent experience has
highlighted: the financing of operations to reintegrate ex-
combatants. This is the third phase of the process - after
demobilization and disarmament - and, despite its
important and decisive impact on the success of the entire
post-conflict peace-building effort, it has thus far not been
dealt with properly on an ongoing basis.

It is regrettable that the financing of these
programmes, and in particular the aspect relating to the
reintegration of ex-combatants into civil society, is
dependent on special trust funds and on international
appeals. The unpredictable nature of these funds contrasts
with the importance of the overall financial effort
deployed in the context of the peacekeeping operation,
considering that the financing of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration represents a relatively
small amount compared to the overall resources
committed.

In our view, this situation deserves in-depth
discussion on how the financing of these programmes can
as a rule be included in peacekeeping budgets, particularly
with regard to the reintegration component. Once the
burden of having to find financing had been lifted, the
implementation of these extremely important programmes
could then be carried out according to a predetermined
plan and finalized by offering ex-combatants in the
programmes the possibility of true reintegration into
productive society.

After this relatively brief overview, I would like to
share with the Council some observations that I hope will
be useful to its deliberations.

First, the inclusion of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes into peacekeeping
operations should take place on the basis of a clear,
concerted approach that includes the authorities of the
country concerned as an element of the post-conflict

 

peace-building effort. Disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration measures can take place only within the
framework of a broader programme and as part of an
effective and ambitious peace-building strategy. Those
measures, which are essentially operational in nature and
aimed at preventing a resumption of hostilities, should be
part of a more global vision that addresses deals with the
real causes of conflict.

Secondly, this comprehensive vision requires at least
two essential conditions. First of all, disarmament and
demobilization should be carried out by the parties to a
peace or ceasefire agreement and through direct cooperation
with the United Nations peacekeeping mission, which
should have a sufficiently broad mandate to enable it to
carry out its tasks.

Reintegration should then be given greater attention,
for the reasons we have given here, and should in future be
financed through United Nations mission resources and no
longer on the basis of voluntary contributions, which are so
unpredictable and often fall short of the requirements of
operations. It remains understood that the practice of setting
up special trust funds could be continued, but such funds
should provide assistance supplementary to the main effort.

Thirdly, the mobilization of adequate financial and
technical resources by international financial institutions, in
particular by the World Bank, should be encouraged and
steadily continued so as to ensure the significant support of
these institutions for the efforts of the international
community. The other programmes and agencies of the
United Nations system - such as the World Food
Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the World Health Organization - should continue to play
an important role in providing expertise and resources,
while they seek to improve coordination of their activities.

Finally, the inclusion of post-conflict peace-building
elements in the mandates of peacekeeping operations should
not be seen merely as an operational measure to support the
peacekeeping effort and to prevent the spread of conflict or
the resurgence of war.

While operational imperatives and the need to take
quick decisions mean that the Security Council must
assume a leading role, it should be pointed out that peace-
building activities are not and cannot be the sole purview
of the Security Council. The General Assembly has a key
role to play here. We should recall that, during the
discussions held in response to the proposals contained in
the Secretary-General's 1995 "Supplement to an Agenda
for Peace", a clear majority of Member States said they
were in favour of entrusting these activities to the General
Assembly. However, for practical and other reasons
having to do with respect for the prerogatives and
competencies of each of the United Nations bodies, the
Economic and Social Council must be involved every
time a question touches on economic and social
development.

At the dawn of this new millennium, the universal
mission of the United Nations is being increasingly
validated and reinforced, thereby giving the Organization
broader activities and missions to carry out in the service
of the community of nations. Post-conflict peace-building,
given the diversity of the missions and actions it
encompasses, must take place in a political context and
optimal operational conditions in order to be effective.
That context requires, among other things, the full and
ongoing cooperation of the parties concerned and, clearly,
of regional organizations. In this regard, the Organization
of African Unity is prepared not only to make its
contribution, but also to provide its commitment.

However essential these conditions may be, they
should not be at the expense of another equally essential
element: steadfast and scrupulous respect for the
independence and sovereignty of the States concerned in
these processes. Those principles are clearly established
in the Charter that governs our Organization. In
manifesting such respect, United Nations missions would
enjoy greater support throughout the world and would,
thanks to that legitimacy and support, gain credibility and
effectiveness.

