Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to thank the delegation of Pakistan for having
convened this open debate. Our thanks also go to
Pakistan's Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ms. Hina
Rabbani Khar, for presiding over it. We are also
grateful for the concept note that has been distributed
in the annex to document S/2013/3. We appreciate the
presence of the Secretary-General and thank him for
his presentation.

From a national perspective, it could be maintained
that terrorism is not an endemic evil in my country
or, in more general terms, our Latin American region.
However, from a broader perspective, we find in
that phenomenon one of the greatest challenges that
humanity faces. That is why we categorically reject
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, whatever
its origin. There is simply no pretext to inflict on
innocent persons the horrors, suffering and costs of
that scourge. We believe that a terrorist act, wherever it
occurs, such as the one that took place in your country,
Mr. President, a few days ago, harms and causes
offense to all the planet's inhabitants. That is also why
we must take preventive actions and develop decisive
and collective responses in the context of international
cooperation.

The United Nations plays a fundamental role in
that area. Besides the body of international conventions
and their protocols designed to combat terrorism,
since 2006 we have depended on the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which we generally
update every two years. Furthermore, the Council has
placed itself at the forefront of mobilizing international
cooperation against terrorism. It is unnecessary to list
the numerous resolutions that refer directly or indirectly
to this matter, or to the bodies established to that end.

As the Strategy expressly notes, the fight against
terrorism is not limited to the realm of espionage,
defence and security. It is equally or maybe even more
important to address the causes conducive to the spread
of terrorism, that motivate individuals or groups to use
indiscriminate violence against innocent persons, or at
least incite the use of violence and xenophobia. This
encompasses a broad thematic agenda, ranging from
the promotion of economic and social development
to the strengthening of the institutions of democratic
governance and the rule oflaw. It also entails addressing
the sources of strong tension that reflect a background
of ethnic, religious or ideological differences in the
context of mobilizing the classical instruments of
conflict prevention. This requires assigning a special
role to the virtue of tolerance in the values that we wish
to instil in each of our societies and at the international
level. At the same time, we must take care to avoid
using counter-terrorism measures as a pretext to violate
the basic human rights of our respective populations.

Given the multidimensional character of
this phenomenon, it is difficult to speak about
a comprehensive approach to counter-terrorism
without mentioning the need to adopt the long-
overdue comprehensive convention on terrorism as
soon as possible. In weighing the added value of a
comprehensive convention that would supplement
existing instruments to counter international terrorism,
we find merit, among other aspects, in the following.

First, a comprehensive convention would contribute
to preventing impunity for those who commit acts of
terrorism, which are currently one of the major threats
to international peace and security; secondly, it would
facilitate cooperation and mutual legal assistance
among States to bring to justice those responsible
for such acts; thirdly, it would offer a definition for
terrorism, allowing for the universal criminalization
of such despicable activity; and fourthly, it would fill
existing gaps in the work of the Security Council, and
in particular of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), and the measures applied by the
sanctions committees.

Furthermore, we are concerned about the specific
issue ofthe link between organized transnational crime
and terrorism. This topic is briefly touched upon both
in the concept note circulated by the delegation of
Pakistan and in the draft presidential statement whose
text we will approve this morning. The common aspect
shared by some of the criminal cartels that operate in
our own region with terrorist groups is the absolute
disdain with which they treat human life. There is
already abundant evidence that terrorist groups accede
to criminal activities to finance their violent actions,
but we can also foresee the day when criminal cartels
accede to terrorist activities as part of their strategy of
accumulating illicit wealth.

The need for a comprehensive and holistic approach
to address this complex phenomenon, as suggested in
the concept note, leads us to one final reflection on the
imperative of achieving a greater level of coherence
among the different efforts being undertaken by the
United Nations to meet the challenge of terrorism.
The creation of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force in 2005 marked a step in the right direction,
but one can question whether the goal of coherence is
benefitted by the arguably excessive decentralization of
the efforts of the Security Council to combat terrorism
in its diverse subsidiary bodies, including those
established pursuant to resolutions 1373 (2001), 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 1540 (2004).

We entertain the same doubts regarding the
level of coordination between the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the various
departments of the Secretariat that service the work
of the General Assembly. This is neither the place nor
the time to make specific proposals on how to achieve
greater coherence within the United Nations system in
the area of counter-terrorism, but we members of the
Security Council should at least begin to discuss among
ourselves whether there is enough internal coherence
in the work entrusted to the aforementioned sanctions
committees.

At any rate, we greatly value the work of the United
Nations in combating terrorism in support of Member
States, which ultimately share the main responsibility
in facing this grave scourge.
