Mr. Collard-Wexler (Canada) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I wish to commend Senegal for the
leadership it has shown on this important issue - here
in the Security Council, in the United Nations-World
Bank High-Level Panel on Water and in the Global
High-Level Panel on Water and Peace, as well as within
the la Francophonie.

Increasingly, water issues, particularly in the
context of climate change, are recognized as a major
challenge of the twenty-first century with important
security implications. Water has shaped human
civilization. On it depends population settlements
and migration, social and economic development and
political dynamics. Water plays a fundamental role
in regulating the climate, agriculture and economic
growth. An overabundance of water can lead to
devastating floods, while water scarcity leads to
drought. Both situations have significant implications.

In short, water lies at the heart of sustainable
development. As water is a vital resource for agriculture,
energy and health, it can also be a source of conflict
and an instrument of war. The effective and inclusive
governance of water can therefore contribute to the
establishment of peace.

(spoke in English)

Water-related disputes between States have
historically been resolved through diplomatic channels.
However, the past will not necessarily be a good
predictor of the future, as climate change will amplify
existing water challenges at all levels.

Canada sees this open debate as an opportunity
to shape and advance the water, peace and security
agenda. Greater diplomatic engagement on water,
peace and security is important. Our diplomats should
continue to advance transboundary water agreements
for a world facing future climate-change impacts and
population growth. Our diplomats must be equipped
with the means to monitor and expose the use of water
as a tool of war as a precursor to action by formal
institutions and mechanisms. Member States also need
to work hand in hand with organizations such as the
International Committee of the Red Cross to address
the humanitarian implications of water in active
conflict settings and to bring water into the toolkit of
peacebuilding and mediation efforts.

Finally, water should be a key consideration in
ongoing discussions on climate change adaptation and
the resilience agenda, particularly within fragile States.

