The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Germany, Italy and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Calovski (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia) took a seat
at the Council table; Mr. Reichel (Germany) and Mr.
Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Preventive
Deployment Force, documents S/ 1997/365 and addendum
1. Members of the Council also have before them document
S/ 1997/405, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Portugal,
Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/l997/267, which contains the
text of a letter dated 1 April 1997 from the Permanent
Representative of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting the text of a letter of the
same date from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia addressed to the
Secretary-General.

The first speaker is the representative of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, on whom I now call.


