Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): Madam President,
I would like to thank you first of all for organizing
today's briefing on the prevention of and fight against
genocide. I also thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan
Eliasson and Ambassador Colin Keating for their
insightful statements.

As we mark the twentieth anniversary of the
genocide in Rwanda, this briefing is an opportune
occasion for all of us to reflect on the lessons we have
drawn and applied, or that we have failed to apply, since
that horrendous tragedy took place. Reeling from the
horrors of the Second World War, the international
community adopted the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide in 1948.
Yet ever since, the gap between the intent and
implementation has persisted with tragic consequences.
Names like Khmer Rouge, Srebrenica and Rwanda,
among others, evoke the shocking failures of the
international community to stop genocidal carnage.

Twenty years ago in Rwanda, at least 800,000 people
were slaughtered in mere weeks. It is our moral duty as
human beings to keep the memory of that tragedy alive
for generations to come, in order to educate, prevent
and protect. We cannot give life back to the Victims of
those unspeakable horrors. But we can and must honour

them by learning from past failures and applying the
lessons learned in order to preserve the lives of those
who can still be saved.

The most fundamental lesson of the Rwanda
genocide is that it could have been prevented, as
Ambassador Keating testified to so eloquently earlier
this morning. There were plenty of early-warning signs
of what was about to come, but they were systematically
ignored. The necessary action was not taken, or when
taken was too little, too late. And so the carnage went
ahead, wiping out as much as 20 per cent of Rwanda's
total population, and 70 per cent of the Tutsis. A year
later, horrendous atrocities took place again, this time
in Srebrenica.

Since then, the international community has come
a long way. At the World Summit in 2005, Member
States embraced the concept of the responsibility to
protect. Early-warning offices were set up within the
structure of the United Nations. Special Advisers to
the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide
and the Responsibility to Protect were appointed.
We commend the two Special Advisers for the
dedication and resolve they have shown in carrying
out their lifesaving functions. Furthermore, mediation
and preventive-diplomacy capacities have been
strengthened, and regional organization have increased
their cooperation with the United Nations to that end.
Peacekeeping has continued to evolve, and today the
protection of civilians has become an integral part of
peacekeeping mandates. The Security Council has
expanded its own tools by developing instruments such
as horizon-scanning, which, if used systematically,
can contribute significantly to early warning and
prevention.

The most recent building block of preventive action
is the Rights Up Front initiative, aimed at strengthening
early response and organizational preparedness
incountering human rights violations, which, as
we know too well, are a key early-warning sign of
conflict and possible atrocities to come. With all those
mechanisms and instruments in place, the world today
is in a much better position than it was 20 years ago to
be able to prevent mass atrocities and genocide. And
yet we are all witnesses to the harrowing story of the
suffering of Syria's civilian population as the conflict
has entered its fourth year. Late last year, the Council
had to take urgent action to reinforce protection efforts
in South Sudan.

At the same time, a particularly dire humanitarian
situation in the Central African Republic was unfolding,
reaching new levels of brutality and decimating the
country's Muslim population. We welcome the Security
Council's decision to establish a United Nations
peacekeeping mission there to reinforce the protection
efforts undertaken by the African-led Internatinal
Support Mission in the Central African Republic and
by Operation Sangaris. If only they could - those
brutally hacked or starved to death, tortured, mutilated
and left to rot by the roadside, made to disappear by
force or massively displaced, all because of their
ethnicity, religion or creed in these and other conflict
zones around the world - they would argue that even
today, too little, too late has been done to protect them.

All of this speaks to the fact that further progress
is needed in translating into action the concept of
the responsibility to protect, the most important and
imaginative doctrine to emerge on the international
scene for decades, as Louise Arbour put it. With
adequate information, mobilization, courage and, first
and foremost, political will, genocide can be prevented.
We, the international community, must cultivate and
build that political will, or even the best of concepts and
conventions will fail to protect the world from crimes
against humanity and genocide.

The responsibility to protect to which Member
States committed themselves in 2005 must be honoured
and acted on consistently. National Governments
bear the primary responsibility for protecting
their populations, including through human rights
education and preventive measures, such as countering
incitement, extremism and hate speech, intolerance and
discrimination, as well as by practising accountability
to their citizens themselves. A critical ingredient in
the prevention of mass atrocities is the existence of
legitimate and accountable national institutions that
are inclusive and credible in the eyes of a country's
population, as well as an enabling foundation of the rule
of law, good governance, and respect for all human rights
for all. To that must be added justice and accountability.
Accountability must be assured both nationally and
internationally, through the supporting decisions of
domestic courts and international tribunals. If justice
is not done and perpetrators go unpunished, they will
continue to kill, maim, rape and commit atrocities.

Through ad hoc international criminal tribunals
and especially the International Criminal Court, which
merits our full support, the international community
delivers a stern warning to all perpetrators that there
is no escaping impunity. That in itself is an important
deterrent to those who may be considering engaging
in acts of violence. In that regard, the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda did important work in
pursuing justice, and it has set important precedents in
the development of international criminal law, such as
the first ever prosecution of rape as an act of war. A
significant number of the perpetrators of the genocide
in Rwanda, including former high-level officials, have
been brought to justice. Such a state of affairs should
be the rule rather than the exception. Sadly, for many
Victims of unspeakable crimes around the world,
closure through justice is still beyond reach.
Today, through the adoption of resolution 2150
(2104), marking the twentieth anniversary of a genocide,
we stand with the people of Rwanda in paying our
respects to the victims and expressing solidarity with
the survivors. The international community has a duty
and moral responsibility to make sure that genocide and
crimes against humanity have no place in the twenty-
first century.

