First, I wish to join others in thanking the Dominican Republic and Minister Vargas for organizing this meeting. I also wish to thank Mr. Qu, Mr. Beasley and Mr. Egeland for their insightful briefings, as well as, through them, their teams helping people on the ground. The link between international peace and security and famine is well documented. We have seen it in recent years in Yemen, South Sudan, Syria and the Sahel region. There is no doubt that the Security Council shall deal with this issue, and all the more as we are on the brink of a hunger pandemic, as Mr. Beasley pointed out. This is the reason why France took the initiative to organize an Arria Formula meeting on this topic in 2017. We welcome the progress made since then, with the adoption of resolution 2417 (2018) in 2018 and the negotiation of a draft presidential statement, on which agreement will hopefully be reached very soon. After a steady decline in hunger for decades, we have seen a worrying trend of rising hunger emerge again since 2015. In 2018, 11 per cent of the world's population suffered from hunger, highlighting the immense challenge of achieving Sustainable Development Goal 2, "Zero hunger". Conflicts remain one of the primary drivers of food insecurity, setting in motion a vicious cycle - conflict increases food insecurity, which in turn fuels violence. Conflict also leads to the displacement of people towards places where food resources are not sufficient to feed local populations, refugees and internally displaced persons all together. We are all aware that civilians, especially women and children, are the main victims of this vicious cycle of food insecurity and armed conflict. It is an appalling reality, but the starvation of civilians is still often used as a weapon of war. It is also used as a means of recruitment by parties to armed conflict, who deliberately limit access to food and attack humanitarian workers. As we keep repeating, meeting after meeting, respect for international humanitarian law is a must in all situations of conflict. All parties must respect the rules of war; in particular, they must respect international humanitarian law provisions protecting civilians, including humanitarian workers. As Mr. Egeland emphasized, parties to conflict must ensure safe and unhindered access for impartial humanitarian relief to all people in need. Using starvation as a method of warfare against civilians constitutes a war crime under international criminal law. Such crimes cannot go unpunished. In addition, I fully concur with the representative of Germany in emphasizing the link between climate change, conflicts and food insecurity. We must take into account that many countries affected by conflicts also experience the harmful effects of climate change. The 2020 Global Report on Food Crises, which was released today, clearly shows that extreme weather events are becoming an increasingly important contributor to food insecurity. This is notably the case in the Sahel region and aggravates conflict-driven food insecurity. In this context, France regrets that climate change could not be explicitly mentioned in the draft presidential statement we are negotiating. We are convinced that climate change also drives displacement, which is another source of food crises. France is currently chairing the Platform on Disaster Displacement, a group of States working together towards better protection for people displaced in the context of disaster and climate change. I wish to underline the importance of prevention and early-warning systems in acting more effectively to prevent conflict-induced famine. The Secretary-General and Governments must provide timely information regarding food insecurity levels in order better to anticipate, prevent and mitigate the effects of a food crisis. We are convinced that improving food security and nutrition contributes to peacekeeping and to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. That is why France is increasing its financing of food aid, from about €40 million in 2019 to more than €50 million in 2020. Our food assistance this year covers regions affected by conflicts, while also taking into account the impact of the current coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis. Indeed, that is where I would like to conclude. Today, with the propagation of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is more important than ever to reach lasting solutions to the conflicts that lie at the heart of these humanitarian tragedies. We reiterate our full support for the call of the Secretary-General for an immediate and global ceasefire to facilitate the response to the pandemic. We have a collective responsibility and moral obligation in this regard. The Security Council must remain mobilized. France will continue to play its full part in that regard.
