Mr. Zulqarnain (Pakistan): My delegation
welcomes this debate on the situation in the Middle East.

Despite the Council's regular deliberations on this
agenda item, turmoil and disorder have continued to
rise in the Middle East, exposing the inadequacy of our
efforts to end the illegal occupation, the annexation of
territories and the violation of basic human rights in
the region. While existing conflicts grow and intensify,
new conflicts have emerged, threatening to plunge the
region into a fresh vortex of violence and instability.
Tellingly, we have gone backwards in more ways than
one, and nowhere is that grim assessment more apparent
than in Palestine. With every new illegal settlement that
goes unchecked, the occupying Power is emboldened
to continue eroding by design the viability of the two-
State solution, blatantly disregarding the international
consensus on the issue.

On the humanitarian front, a modern-day tragedy
is playing out daily in the Gaza strip, where millions of
innocent people have been subjected to an excruciating
blockade in contravention of all prevalent international
laws and human rights. Thousands of civilians,
particularly women, children and the most vulnerable,
are constantly under threat, exacerbating the perpetual
cycle of violence and increasing the risk of a broader
escalation of the conflict. While the Secretary-General
has repeatedly said that there is no plan B for Palestine,
realities on the ground are being deliberately engineered
to tip the scales in favour of the occupying Power. My
delegation reiterates that a viable, independent and
contiguous State of Palestine, established on the basis
of internationally agreed parameters, the pre-1967
borders and with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital,
remains the only sustainable guarantee of enduring
peace in the region.

At a time when a political settlement of the
Palestinian issue remains elusive, the financial
challenges faced by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) have heightened concerns for the long-term
sustainability of many of its critical activities, including
in the provision of education, health and social services
to over 5 million Palestinian refugees. It is heartening
that the international community has stepped up its
efforts to address the financial shortfall faced by
the Agency. In the wake of unprecedented financial
challenges, those enhanced contributions have not only
allowed the Agency to keep its operations going, but
have also served as an endorsement of UNRWA'S critical
role as a beacon of hope for Palestinian refugees across
the region. In line with our long-standing commitment
to our Palestinian brothers and sisters and to express our
solidarity, my country, Pakistan, has already made an
additional contribution to UNRWA for the current year.

The Middle East stands at a dangerous juncture in
its history. The repudiation of multilateralism and the
abandonment of political processes are systematically
eroding the established norms of international law and
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
worsening an already fragile regional environment. As
the international community intensifies its efforts to
de-escalate tensions in Yemen and advance a political
process in Syria, our focus should also remain on
alleviating the humanitarian situation in the broader
region. Pakistan reaffirms its commitment to support
negotiated political settlements that are based on
agreed frameworks and achieved through inclusive
political engagement.

A just and lasting peace in the Middle East,
especially for the occupied people in Palestine, is
not only critical for regional stability but also a
fundamental prerequisite for global peace and security.
The international community cannot rid itself of its
responsibility to ensure justice and fairness and it
cannot abandon the people of Palestine in their quest
for self-determination. For far too long, they have
looked to the United Nations with expectant eyes. We
must not fail them.
