Mr. Prendergast: The report before you, Sir, is the
fourth report of the Secretary-General on developments in
Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the United Nations
Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNOGBIS).

As members of the Council will recall, the
Representative of the Secretary-General in Guinea-Bissau,
Mr. Samuel Nana-Sinkam, briefed the Council on 23
February 2000 on the results of the second round of the
presidential elections and on the progress of the
democratic process in that country. He also outlined the
daunting post-electoral challenges facing the new
Government of President Kumba Yala.

Members of the Council will also recall that
following Mr. Nana-Sinkam's briefing the President of
the Council issued a press statement, welcoming the
return of constitutional and democratic rule to Guinea-
Bissau and encouraging all parties in that country to work
closely together in a spirit of tolerance, to strengthen
democratic values, to protect the rule of law and to
guarantee the protection of human rights. The statement
also encouraged the new institutions to develop and
implement programmes designed to consolidate peace,
national reconciliation and economic development.

The present report covers developments in Guinea-
Bissau since Mr. Nana-Sinkam's briefing. It provides
further details of the Government's strategy for dealing
with the post-electoral challenges that confront it. The
report also describes the contributions of the United
Nations Office, in collaboration with United Nations
agencies on the ground, to promote peace and national
reconciliation, human rights and the rule of law in
Guinea-Bissau.

As members of the Council will recall, the mandate
of UNOGBIS was adjusted to respond better to the
post-electoral realities and was approved by the Council
on 10 March.

If I might turn to highlights of the report, I am glad
to report that the overall situation in Guinea-Bissau is
peaceful and the humanitarian situation has noticeably
improved. More political detainees have been
provisionally released and the trials of some of them have
already begun, despite the severe logistical and human
constraints facing the judiciary.

 

Regrettably, the economic situation remains worrying.
The Government still does not have resources to pay long-
overdue salaries to civil servants and soldiers.

There are lingering concerns about the difficulties
encountered in redefining the relationship between the new
Government and the military establishment in the
post-electoral period. However, it is encouraging to note
that negotiations between the Government and the former
military junta are continuing. They are led by the Bishop of
Bissau and a group of mediators from civil society. The
Representative of the Secretary-General is providing his
good offices in this area, as required.

In view of the situation described in his report, the
Secretary-General has urged members of the international
community to provide urgent assistance for the
Government's lOO-day transitional programme. This
programme is critical for the credibility of the new
Government as it faces mounting pressures from ordinary
citizens who are demanding basic services in areas such as
water and electricity.

Allow me to take this opportunity to thank, on behalf
of the Secretary-General, those Member States which have
contributed to the trust fund in support of activities of
UNOGBIS. I also appeal for continued support to this trust
fund.

Since the report was completed, there appears to have
been some positive movement on the issue of the role of
the former military. Through the mediation of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Gambia, Mr. Jobe, President
Kumba Yala met on 22 March with members of the former
military junta led by General Mane. Following the meeting,
the President announced that five posts of minister of state
without portfolio had been offered to members of the
former junta. The offer was accepted in principle, and its
details are being finalized. General Mane was quoted as
saying after the meeting that "there was not a single cloud
between the new authorities and the military".

Also on 22 March, the first session of the newly
elected National Assembly was solemnly opened. The
debates will continue until 22 April. In their opening
addresses, the President of the Republic and the President
of the Assembly sought to reaffirm their commitment to
respect for the authority of the State and for human rights.

Before convening a new round-table conference on
Guinea-Bissau, the Government is planning to hold
consultations with development partners on its overall
strategies and priority areas. This will take place on
Tuesday, 11 April, in Bissau. At this forum, the
Government intend to present their major concerns, their
strategies and their priority actions for lasting
development, the effects of which will benefit the
majority of the population.

To conclude, please allow me to highlight three
points made in the observation section of the Secretary-
General' s report.

First, the successful outcome of the legislative and
presidential elections has brought to an end the
transitional institutions put in place under the Abuja
Accord of 1 November 1998.

Secondly, it is crucial that all Guinea-Bissau's
parties, including the former military junta, fully accept
this new democratic reality and work with the
Government to solve the problems that lie ahead in a
spirit of patriotism and national reconciliation.

Finally, I would like to re-state that without the
combined efforts of the Economic Community of West
African States, the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries, the United Nations and Member States, the
transition to democracy in Guinea-Bissau would never
have got under way. It is gratifying that this joint effort
has produced tangible results. This may perhaps serve as
an example of what the international community, with the
full cooperation of national actors, is able to do with
minimal resources. However, the task has not yet been
completed, and there is no room for complacency.

