Mr. Bermudez Alvarez (Uruguay) (Spoke in Spanish): I thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for presenting
the fourth report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/ 1030)
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). I
thank Ms. Joanne Adamson, Charge' d'Affaires ad
interim of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations, and the Permanent Representative of
Italy to the United Nations, Mr. Sebastiano Cardi, in
his capacity as a Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), for their
briefings. As on previous occasions, the information
conveyed in such briefings sheds light on some positive
aspects that deserve to be highlighted, a few challenges
and some causes for concern.

Uruguay is a country that is strongly committed
to non-proliferation and the consolidation of the
disarmament regime, to which those present have borne
witness over the past two years. It is well known but
still worth recalling that Uruguay has never possessed
nuclear weapons and does not intend to so. We are
members of the world's first nuclear-weapon-free zone
under the Treaty of Tlatelolco, which celebrated its
fiftieth anniversary this year, and of the Agency for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and
the Caribbean, which brings together the 33 States ofthe
region signatories of the Treaty. We are also party to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

Uruguay therefore optimistically welcomed the
signing of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
on 14 July 2015 between Iran and the P5+1 group in
relation to the Iranian nuclear programme. In my
country's view, that agreement is a key achievement
for non-proliferation and a significant contribution to
international peace, security and stability, as well as
to the elimination of one of the main points of tension
in the more than tumultuous region of the Middle East.
The agreement demonstrates, perhaps more than any
other signed in recent years, that positive results can
be achieved with political will and through the avenue
of diplomacy and negotiation, even in cases when that
seems like a distant reality.

Uruguay welcomes the progress made in the
implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action, as well as the verification and monitoring
processes of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) in Iran. The nine successive quarterly reports of
the IAEA on that topic confirm that the Islamic Republic
of Iran has to date complied with the provisions of the
agreement. Similarly, it is essential that all parties to
the agreement comply with its provisions, in addition
to those contained in resolution 2231 (2015), including
its annexes A and B.

We are concerned about the claims included
in the report regarding Iran's possible violations of
some provisions of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015).
Any ballistic missile activity pursued by Iran has the
potential to inflame tensions in the region, and we
therefore call on its authorities to exercise caution in
their actions. In accordance with the fourth report of
the Secretary-General, we reiterate that it is in our
interest to include in future reports, in addition to the
detailed analysis of Iran's compliance with annex B of
resolution 2231 (2015), information pertaining to annex
A, which contains no less than the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action itself and the commitments that all
panties to the agreement have assumed, including the
lifting of sanctions imposed on Iran.

To conclude, Uruguay continues to call on
all parties to the agreement to adopt all measures
stipulated in resolution 2231 (2015) and to comply
with its provisions in order to avoid jeopardizing the
historic agreement reached in 2015, which is the fruit
of more than two years of very intense negotiations. In
that regard, we urge the parties to act with the highest
possible degree of restraint and caution and to abstain
from undertaking any action that violates that which
has been agreed and was later endorsed by the Security
Council. The Secretary-General's report is very clear
that no national executive and legislative actions of the
parties to the agreement shall detract from the validity
of the Plan or the commitments incumbent upon
participants as detailed therein.

We regret that those measures are creating
uncertainty about the future of the agreement, which,
given its importance and success to date, must be
protected and championed as an achievement of the
entire international community. The Security Council,
as guarantor of international peace and security,
should ensure in full future compliance with the Joint
Comprehensive Action Plan and resolution 2231 (2015).

