Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for
quickly responding to the request of the Arab Group,
which I am honoured to chair this month, to convene
this meeting. I wish you every success in conducting
the deliberations of the Council through the current
month of June. I would be remiss if I failed to thank
the Permanent Representative of Singapore for the wise
manner in which he conducted the Council's
deliberations throughout the month of May.

The Israeli forces continue to invade areas of the
Palestinian Authority. They continue to occupy cities
and villages and to kill innocent children, elderly
people, young people and women. After committing
these crimes, they withdrew from those cities only to
reoccupy them on the pretext of fighting terrorism. The
occupation of cities and villages has become such a
daily event that the world has grown accustomed to
hearing the news, and the media no longer want to
cover it.

A few days ago, as Council members know, the
Israeli occupation forces reoccupied parts of the
territories of the Palestinian Authority, including the
city of Ramallah, the temporary headquarters of the
Palestinian President. They stormed the headquarters of
Mr. Yasser Arafat, President of the Palestinian
Authority, using tank shells that blew up three
buildings in the presidential compound and damaged
the presidential bedroom, meaning that the Israeli
occupation forces have actually threatened the
Palestinian President's life.

Five days later the occupation forces again swept
through the city of Ramallah, laying siege to President
Arafat's headquarters only hours prior to the meeting
between President George W. Bush and the Israeli
Prime Minister. That showed that the Israeli authorities
hoped to obstruct the internal reforms of the
Palestinian Authority. That act came only a day after
the formation of a new Palestinian Government, whose
Cabinet ministers were to have been sworn in before
the Palestinian President at the presidential
headquarters, which was besieged by the Israeli
occupation authorities that day.

The occupation authorities have destroyed the
infrastructure of the Palestinian Authority. They have
displaced thousands of people, making them homeless.
Nevertheless, the atrocious attacks against Palestinians
civilians and Palestinian cities continue daily. They
have become routine. Israeli forces invade cities only
to withdraw from them on the same or the following
day after causing much damage and destruction.

These acts repeatedly perpetrated by the Israeli
forces within the territories of the Palestinian Authority
continue unchecked. The world witnesses the
demolition of homes sometimes with their inhabitants
inside them and stands idly by. The Security Council is
called upon, today more than ever before, to assume its
responsibility of putting an end to these acts of
aggression against a defenceless people who have been
made refugees in their own land, which has been
occupied.

Acts of aggression and siege imposed by the
Israeli army against President Yasser Arafat and his
headquarters in Ramallah constitute yet another
attempt by the Israeli occupying forces to undermine
and paralyse all efforts aimed at establishing a just and
comprehensive peace in the region. The grave message
being sent by the Israeli Prime Minister to the world is
that no one but Israel is entitled to peace and security.
The Prime Minister wants to erode the Palestinian
Authority, thereby preventing it from putting the
Palestinian house in order and preventing all attempts
to enter into serious negotiations on the establishment
of a Palestinian State, whose features were defined in
resolution 1397 (2002), adopted this year.

The Council bears a special responsibility with
regard to the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including Jerusalem, in the light of the
Israeli Government's defiance of Security Council
resolutions - including the recent resolution 1402
(2002), which stressed, among many issues, the need to
stop the violence and to resume the peace process -
and following the Israeli Government's failure to
implement resolution 1403 (2002), which called for the
implementation of resolution 1402 (2002), and to
implement all other resolutions, including resolution
1405 (2002), which welcomed the initiative of the
Secretary-General to establish a fact-finding team to
shed light on what happened in Jenin - an initiative
which has not materialized and which Israel,
unfortunately, has yet to implement. Since Israel
continues to commit irresponsible acts, including war
crimes and State terror, it has become incumbent upon
the Council to intervene immediately to put an end to
such acts. That could be done by requesting the Israeli
Government to implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions. The international community must
also strongly condemn recent Israeli acts - aimed at
destroying the Palestinian Authority so that no final
settlement between the parties can be found - with a
View to ending the bloodshed that has been allowed to
continue for so long.

