Mr. Moreno Zapata (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Government of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela welcomes this
initiative of the presidency of the Security Council,
held by the Permanent Representative of Jordan, on the
maintenance of internmational peace and security, an
issue of such extreme importance to the international
community.

The Charter of the United Nations is the first
international legal instrument to have enshrined the
absoluteprohibitionoftheuseofwarasameansofsettling
disputes among nations. The current non-compliance
with it is a scourge that threatens peoples the world
over and undermines the independence and sovereignty
of nations.

The unilateral military actions undertaken by the
major Powers and the initiatives of Governments whose
ambitions include extra-territorial expansion represent
a threat to international peace and security. The cases
of Syria, the Middle East and Palestine are emblematic
examples of the catastrophe the world is experiencing.

The notions of preventive war and the responsibility
to protect have been used outside the framework of
international law and with adverse effects on peaceful
coexistence among nations. The Bolivarian Government
has always promoted inclusive, democratic dialogue
and sustainable solidarity in dealing with conflict,
without undermining national capacities, which are key
to a nation's sustainability.

Among the most shameful causes of war seen
throughout world history have been colonialism and
neocolonialism. The frantic search for resources to
maintain empires had led to the plundering of peoples
and their resources. Likewise, poverty resulting from
inequitable political and economic systems has provided
a breeding ground for internal and regional conflicts.

The United Nations has played a role in preserving
international peace and resolving conflicts through
peaceful means. However, in some cases it has been
unable to impose penalties on the use of force, as
evidenced by the Israeli occupying Power's aggression
against the Palestinian people. In that regard, the
Security Council has failed to resolve the situation,
owing to the exercise of the right of veto by one of its
permanent members. Moreover, in more than a few
cases, the Council has precipitously imposed sanctions
without exhausting all diplomatic mechanisms,
thus worsening disputes and generating increased
radicalization in the countries subjected to sanctions.

Civilians are the ones who truly experience the
effects of war. In that respect, nothing is more lethal
to international peace and security than validating the
unspeakable acts of terrorists. Many extremists have
directed attacks against hospitals, schools, religious
sites and diplomatic facilities, attacks that have killed
hundreds of innocent civilians. Such terrorist acts seek
to replace a sovereign Government by imposing a new
one, leading neither to peace or, even less likely, to
lasting stability.

It should be recalled that the Security Council and
the General Assembly decided to treat terrorism as a
major threat to world peace. However, the war against
terrorism has been dealt with through the use of double
standards and attempts to differentiate good terrorism
from bad terrorism, using arguments that go against
nature and the principles of the United Nations.

Today, various methods of waging war exist
worldwide. Some of the general doctrines include third-
wave warfare, fourth-generation warfare, information
warfare and asymmetric warfare, among others.
Clearly, that list is neither exhaustive nor definitive.

Declared wars are well known and are devastating
in their effects on people. But we must not forget covert
wars, which are less visible and can go undetected.
They remain lethal, leading to the destabilization of
legitimate Governments, undermining sovereign power
and threatening populations.

For example, the economic blockade against Cuba
could be considered a covert war. It is an aggressive
extraterritorial act that violates international law. In
addition, economic sabotage, illicit arms trafficking,
the use of drones, the media war and massive espionage
efforts represent, inter alia, new methods of waging
covert warfare.

There are no lessons to be gained from war, only
consequences. That is why the Security Council should
seek to end war in the world, through diplomatic
solutions, mediation and dialogue aimed at resolving
international conflicts, and work to guarantee the right
to life of the world's peoples.

Finally, we note an encouraging event, namely, the
second Summit of the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States, currently taking place in
Havana, where 33 dignitaries have sent a message to
the world declaring Latin America and the Caribbean
region a zone of peace, based on respect for the norms
of international law and the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations.

The proclamation issued at the meeting also
establishes a lifelong commitment to the peaceful
settlement of disputes, forever rejecting the threat or use
of force. It clarifies that States bear the responsibility
of non-intervention, direct or indirect, in the internal
affairs of other States and of observing the principles of
sovereignty and the equal rights and self-determination
of peoples.

Likewise, the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States has committed itself to furthering
nuclear disarmament and promoting a culture of peace
through that proclamation, which will contribute to
coexistence in a world of greater peace and security.

