Mr. Cuello Camilo (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to start by echoing the very
kind words Argentina expressed for the Mission of
Brazil. The Dominican Republic thanks the Brazilian
presidency for convening this debate on security and
development, an issue on which the Brazilian
delegation has shown a sustained and coherent
commitment in all forums.

The Dominican Republic aligns itself with the
statement made by the Permanent Representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-aligned Movement.

The international community has considered
security and development for quite some time.
However, addressing it effectively has continued to
elude our best efforts. Since 1998, we have considered
the issue of creating lasting peace based on the seminal
report of the Secretary-General on sustainable
development in Africa (S/l998/318). And since 2001
we have been aware of the need to create a strategy to
strengthen peace based on the interdependence among
sustainable peace, security and development in all of
its dimensions.

The promotion of development is the common
thread running through the continuum that exists
between the maintenance and strengthening of peace.
While the promotion of development is clearly not part
of the Security Council's mandate, the Council's
consideration of it has become inevitable for the
effective operation of the missions that it authorizes
and oversees. It is, after all, sustainable human
development that creates the conditions for sustainable
peace. It also provides equal opportunity for all in a
legally secure framework within a context of political
stability and harmony with the natural environment,
including generating decent jobs. Equal opportunity
also ensures access to basic health and education
services, as well as to energy, drinking water and
sanitation, all without distinction to race, class or
geographical location. Legally assured security,
anchored in a constitutional framework, guarantees
both political democracy, human rights and equality for
all before the law. But it also provides for economic
democracy and guarantees the right to property and
promotes free market competition for all as both
producers and consumers.

It also provides political stability rooted in a
pluralistic system of representative parties that allows
for a change in power among the various forces and a
new leadership within each of them. It produces
harmony with the natural environment, protected in a
non-polluting energy matrix, a properly rewarded and
distributed use of non-renewable resources and forest
conservation for the enjoyment of future generations. It
provides decent jobs that enable entrepreneurs and
workers to live in dignity during and after their
productive lives.

When we look at the Haitian case in the light of
those considerations, we can understand the absence of
sustainable development or sustainable peace in that
country, in spite of the committed work of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti for more than
seven years. That is because unequal opportunities are
the main source of social injustice in rural areas and
the marginalized neighbourhoods of cities, leading to
discontent, protests and crime.

That is exactly what we find in Haiti, where 90
per cent of classrooms are in private schools and the
existing schools barely have the capacity for 50 per
cent of the school-age population. Legal insecurity,
which is the source of unfair privileges and the cancer
of corruption, gives rise to a lack of trust in the future
and drives away the human and financial capital
needed for development.

In a country without a land registry, as in Haiti,
the right of land ownership is weak, hence the
continuing migration from the country to the city and
the exodus of emigrants abroad. Political instability
discourages the hopes of new generations for a better
tomorrow. That leads to the absence in Haiti of new
leaders supported by sound parties, which makes the
return of former dictators of both extremes of the
political spectrum irrelevant.

Environmental degradation prevents the long-
term survival of human settlements, increasing their
food insecurity and lack of nutrition and putting them
at greater risk in the face of inevitable natural disasters
that increasingly strike the world more intensely. That
has led to the deforestation of 98 per cent of Haitian
territory owing to the use of charcoal as the main
source of energy and ancestral slash-and-burn farming
practices. The lack of decent jobs at all levels of the
production system also prevents an overall increase in
prosperity and exacerbates inequality and social
injustice.

There is thus 70 per cent unemployment in Haiti,
including an uncontrollable mass of refugees from the
tragic earthquake of 12 January 2010. This situation
seems unlikely to change in the short term given the
absence of better conditions for sustainable
development to ensure sustainable peace.

Except for admirable exceptions, in today's
debate most interventions have proposed defining the
responsibilities of the institutional actors that must
necessarily cooperate in building sustainable peace,
security and development. For the Dominican
Republic, defining responsibilities could be endlessly
discussed without reaching a peacebuilding strategy on
the basis of the interdependence among sustainable
peace, security and development in all their
dimensions, as called for by the Security Council for
10 years.

The Dominican Republic therefore believes that
such a strategy must be based on a clear definition of
what the representative of France referred to as the
transition and exit scenario in the Council's
presidential statement of February 2010
(S/PRST/2010/2). That scenario, I wish to reiterate,
must create the legal and institutional conditions for
equal opportunities in a context of legal security,
political stability, harmony with the natural
environment and the creation of decent jobs.

If that scenario is defined in the light of a
sustainable development strategy that enjoys the full
commitment of local actors, it could well make it
possible for us to exit from peacekeeping operations;
for we would have laid the foundations of
peacebuilding in order to leave sustainable peace on
the ground.

