Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Austria voted in
favour of resolution 1929 (2010). A decision of this
kind is never one to be taken lightly. From the time that
Iran's undeclared nuclear materials and activities were
first confirmed by the International Atomic Energy
Agency in June 2003, Austria had hoped that the matter
could be resolved through negotiation. Insufficient
cooperation on the part of Iran led to the transmission
of the issue to the Security Council in March 2006.
Since that time, the Council has adopted a presidential
statement and five resolutions. Regrettably, Iran has
failed to address the core concerns of the international
community and to build confidence in the exclusively
peaceful nature of its nuclear programme.

Indeed, since the adoption of the last Council
resolution in September 2008, the existence of a new
undeclared enrichment facility has come to light and
Iran has begun to enrich uranium to 20 per cent, to
mention but two of the more recent developments. This
is all the more unfortunate as last month the Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) here in
New York demonstrated a new constructive approach
to non-proliferation issues. In the action plans adopted
on that occasion, all NPT member States underscored,
inter alia, the importance of cooperating with the
International Atomic Energy Agency on questions of
compliance.

As I indicated yesterday, Austria, in line with
long-standing European Union policy, remains
committed to the dual-track approach. In that context,
we reiterate our call on Iran to take up the offer of talks
with the High Representative of the European Union
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, in line with
paragraph 33 of the resolution just adopted.

While we believe that the additional measures
adopted today are necessary, we continue to stand
behind the two major incentive packages put forward
in June 2006 and June 2008. We hope that Iran will
take up the offer of China, France, Germany, the
Russian Federation, the United Kingdom and the
United States, as well as the High Representative of the
European Union, to resume dialogue on the nuclear
issue without preconditions, with a view to seeking a
comprehensive solution to this issue. In that context, I
wish to highlight in particular the commitment
contained in paragraph 37 of today's resolution to
suspend the implementation of measures if and for so
long as Iran suspends all enrichment-related and
reprocessing activities, as verified by the International
Atomic Energy Agency, to allow for negotiations in
good faith in order to reach an early and mutually
acceptable outcome.

