Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): It is
my pleasure to thank you, Sir, and to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I also wish to commend your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of China,
who ably conducted the work of the Council last
month.

We wish also to place on record our appreciation
to you, Sir, for promptly convening this meeting,
especially since the Council has recently displayed
great reluctance to act on requests for a meeting to
consider the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories.

Since September 2000 - and more specifically,
since the Sharon Government took power - the
occupying Power, Israel, has continued its multifaceted
military campaign against the Palestinian people, as
well as its policy to impose closures, isolation and
siege against Palestinian towns. It has escalated and
intensified its aggression against the Palestinian people
by using heavy weapons, including artillery, tanks and
air forces, and by carrying out incursions into
Palestinian territory. It has also attacked Lebanon and
bombarded Syrian targets in Lebanon.

More recently, Israeli security forces occupied
Orient House and nine other East Jerusalem offices of
the Palestinian Authority, attacking and arresting
Palestinian guards and confiscating important
documents and archives, including maps and titles of
ownership of Palestinian land. It has forcibly altered the
situation in the village of Abu Dis, near East
Jerusalem.
It is clear that Israel is implementing a carefully
devised plan to destroy the peace process and to shed
all its obligations and responsibilities under
international law, including those deriving from
Security Council resolutions on the Middle East, which
provide a framework for a lasting peace. Events in the
Palestinian territories since September 2000 clearly
reveal the Zionist plan: Israel has escalated its
violence, pursuing a policy of incremental escalation in
both the political and the military spheres. It is
reflected also in Israel's recourse to excessive force
and in the extension of its military operations to
include the assassination of civilians, the destruction of
Palestinian Authority infrastructure and incursions into
Palestinian Authority territory.

But more important, Israel continues to persist in
its settlement activities, which is the core problem in
Palestine. In press interviews, Sharon has claimed that
the Palestinian territories occupied by Israel since 1967
are "contested" land, not occupied land as the
international community has declared them.

The Security Council bears a special
responsibility to put an end to the murder and
displacement of the Palestinian people. It also bears the
responsibility to bring about peace in accordance with
its own long-standing resolutions. It is regrettable that
the Council has failed to adopt a resolution that would
protect the Palestinian people. This only encourages
Israel's intransigence and its aggression against the
Palestinian people.

What seems to call the Security Council's
credibility into question is that the Council has asserted
its authority in other parts of the world, while it is a
mere spectator on issues relating to Israel and to
Israel's violations of international law, including the
Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949.
The prevailing impression among the Arab public is
thus that the Security Council is selective and adopts a
double standard.

The peace process that began in the 19905 was
supposed to promote the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) through
the participation of the major Powers, especially the
United States of America, in the search for an
acceptable formula for the implementation of those
resolutions. Great efforts were made to that effect, but,
sadly, the peace process is at a near standstill. Indeed,
there is a danger that the situation in the Middle East
could deteriorate into all-out war.
All these factors bring the issue back to the
Security Council. The Council must attach due
importance to the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories.

The Republic of Yemen hails the struggle of the
Palestinian people and its steadfastness in confronting
Zionist arrogance and the continued intensification and
escalation. Israeli practices and crimes against the
Palestinians - such as aggression, bloodshed, blockades,
the desecration of holy places, the confiscation of land and
the demolition of property - demand that the Security
Council shoulder its responsibility to provide the
Palestinian people with international protection and to force
Israel to comply with resolutions of international
legitimacy.

Israel's occupation of Orient House and other
Palestinian institutions in holy Jerusalem constitutes
yet another dangerous escalation. It is in flagrant
violation of all international instruments and
agreements to which Israel is party. Here again, this
situation demands that the Security Council take a firm
stand to reverse all the measures taken by Israel to
occupy Orient House and other Palestinian institutions
and to stop the demolition of houses, the confiscation
of land, isolation and starvation, and to make Israel
return to the negotiating table in accordance with
signed agreements that the dispute should be settled on
the basis of Security Council resolutions, the principle
of land for peace, and the recommendations of the
Mitchell report.

All of this should ultimately enable the Palestinian
people to regain its rights and to establish an
independent State of its own on its national territory,
with Jerusalem as its capital.

