Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and
the Chadian mission, on steering the Council through
a busy and compressed month. The two open debates
(see S/PV.7343 and S/PV.7351) and the Sahel briefing
(see S/PV. 7335) brought the African perspective into
sharper focus.

Holding this wrap-up in public provides an
opportunity for reviewing the year and looking ahead to
2015. Looking back, there have been a number ofissues
on which the Council has shown clarity of purpose and
taken decisive action, but there have also been topics
on which it has been divided and therefore unable to
respond effectively. Our work on counter-terrorism, and
in particular in response to the abhorrent threat of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, is an example of an
issue on which the Council has had a shared analysis.
Resolutions adopted this year have sought to address
terrorist financing through kidnaps for ransom and oil
sales. We have also tackled the issue of foreign terrorist
fighters and, just last Friday, the link between terrorism
and transnational organized crime. The Council's many
press statements in response to terrorist outrages, most
recently following the sickening attack in Peshawar,
Pakistan, are quickly agreed on. Council members
share the same determination to combat all forms of
terrorism, considering it one of the most serious threats
to international peace and security.

Another area where we have made progress is on
the issue of Syrian chemical weapons and responding
to the humanitarian crisis in Syria. Both have required
sustained pressure and attention on the part of the
Council in order to ensure follow-up action, and we
will need to maintain that focus following the adoption
of resolution 2191 (2014). There has also been progress
on peacekeeping. In the Central African Republic, the
transition from an African Union mission to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic was
considerably smoother than the equivalent transition
last year in Mali.
More generally, we have held a number of debates
and retreats on peacekeeping this year that have
revealed the shared analysis that peacekeeping needs
a close re-examination. The use of new technology,
the size, configuration and capabilities of missions,
the ever more complex operational environments,
the speed of deployment, exit strategies and effective
planning - all these are challenges that United Nations
peacekeeping will have to address in order to develop
a model of peacekeeping for the twenty-first century.
The Secretary-General's peace operations review is
looking at all those issues and more. I look forward to
the Council's consideration of the review next year, and
hope that we can maintain a shared analysis as we do it.

On the debit side of the ledger, the Council has
still not been able to make progress on the political
aspects of the Syrian conflict. We all agree that the
only sustainable solution is a political one, built on the
Geneva communique (resolution 2118 (2013), annex II),
but so far we have failed to take the sort of action that
creates conditions conducive to that end. Meanwhile,
President Al-Assad continues to wage an indiscriminate
and brutal war on his own people.

Despite the international outcry at Russia's
illegal intervention in Ukraine, the situation remains
unresolved. Everybody has lost as a result, and States
with big neighbours will be the warier for it. Nor
have Russian actions been limited to Ukraine. The
signature of an agreement between Russia and the
Georgian region of Abkhazia on 24 November reminds
us that what we have seen over the past year is part
of a pattern by Russia of systematic interference in its
neighbours' domestic affairs and undermining of their
sovereignty and territorial integrity. The world has to
respond when countries so blatantly disregard respect
for international borders and norms, and the Council
should be the guardian of those norms when it comes to
maintaining international peace and security, as set out
in the Charter of the United Nations.

To conclude, I would like to add a third category, in
which the Council shares the same analysis of an issue
but the action it takes does not have the desired effect.
That has been true in Darfur and South Sudan, and so
far, at least, in Libya and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The reasons are different in each case, but
we will need to address each of them in the early part
of 2015.

As this is almost the last meeting in the Chamber
of your presidency and of 2014, Mr. President, I
would like to take the opportunity to note and thank
the five outgoing members - Argentina, Australia,
Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea and Rwanda - for
their extraordinary and valuable contributions over
the past two years. There is not time to enumerate
all the achievements. Suffice it to say that while it
is sometimes alleged that the permanent members
dominate all Security Council business, these members
have all shown that that is far from the case. Let me
also welcome our five new colleagues, joining us on
1 January. We look forward to working with all of them.
I wish the Chilean presidency the best of luck in the
month of January.

