Mr. Mammadyarov (Azerbaijan): First of all, I
should like to welcome the Minister of International
Relations and Cooperation of South Africa, Her
Excellency Ms. Maite Nkoana-Mashabane. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe; the
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, Ambassador Lamamra; and the representatives
of the countries contributing troops to the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) for their very
intensive and deep briefings.

I would like to express our support for the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia in its
efforts to overcome difficulties, achieve reconciliation
and build a secure, stable, united, democratic and
prosperous nation. Let me also express our full support
for AMISOM, commend the efforts of the Somali
National Security Forces, and pay tribute to the troop-
contributing countries. I would also like to commend
the efforts of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and its member States in contributing to achieving
peace and national reconciliation in Somalia and
mobilizing assistance to meet the urgent needs of the
peoples affected by the humanitarian crisis in that
country.
We must continue to approach the complex
situation in Somalia with care and sensitivity and on
the basis of a comprehensive strategy aimed at
addressing the political, humanitarian and security
problems in that country through the collaborative
efforts of all stakeholders. As Somalia moves towards
the end of the transition in August, special efforts
should be made to protect security and the political
gains of the past few years, and to ensure that all steps
ultimately contribute to the delivery of the road map.

It is obvious that security gains on the ground
cannot be consolidated without adequate assistance
from the international community, including in
providing AMISOM. with all necessary resources to
strengthen its capabilities and to contribute to the
implementation of its mandate. As the Secretary-
General makes clear in his recent report on Somalia,
"the resources available to the United Nations and
AMISOM. for Somalia are not commensurate with the
challenges or the mandates given" (S/20H/759, para. 94). We fully support the Secretary-General's
view that Somalia needs sustained help in order to
implement the road map. The decisions taken on
5 January by the African Union Peace and Security
Council and its call on the Security Council in that
regard should also be taken into careful consideration.

We also stress the importance of continued
international assistance for the building of Somalia's
security institutions. We take note of the need for
adequate military assistance to fight asymmetric
terrorist attacks.

We are gravely concerned that the humanitarian
situation in Somalia continues to deteriorate.
Azerbaijan has responded to the appeals of respective
Governments and international organizations to
provide urgent aid aimed at addressing the
humanitarian crisis in the Horn of Africa, including
Somalia - the worst-affected country in the region. It
is important that the international community continue
to support Somalia, including by contributing to the
United Nations consolidated appeal for that country. At
the same time, all parties must allow unimpeded
humanitarian access and refrain from actions that
threaten the safety of the local population and those
assisting them. There is also a need to redouble efforts
to find long-term solutions for refugees and internally
displaced persons in Somalia. Azerbaijan is ready to
continue its support.
