The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity in my national capacity.

I would like first to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Pronk, for
his comprehensive statement on the implementation of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), as well as
on the situation in Darfur. The conclusion that one
draws from the Secretary-General's recent report is that
the implementation of the CPA has slowed, and that
although there is notable progress with regard to
security arrangements, the same cannot be said about
the provisions for sharing power and wealth.

We welcome the fact that the Government has
deployed its forces from southern Sudan and that
accordingly the Sudan People's Liberation Army
(SPLA) has completed its redeployment from eastern
Sudan. We encourage both sides to show the same
resolve in the formation of joint integrated units. It is
also encouraging that the economy of the country is
booming and that finally the economy of the south is
starting to reap the rewards of peace, after years of war
and deprivation. Of course, there is still a lot that has
to be done, and the funds promised by the international
community must arrive sooner rather than later.

On the negative side, the issue of Abyei, the
proper functioning of the National Petroleum
Commission, the non-establishment of human rights
commissions, the insecurity in the south because of the
presence of other armed groups, and the non-existent
preparations for national elections are just some of the
obvious examples of the slow implementation of the
CPA.

Notwithstanding these issues, we believe that the
key element that will ultimately define the future of the
CPA is the gradual consolidation of a spirit of
cooperation and trust between the two parties. In that
regard, there is still much ground to be covered.

With regard to Darfur, we agree with the
Secretary-General's assessment that peace in Sudan is
indivisible. The crisis in Darfur, if not resolved soon,
may have a spillover effect in the rest of the country.
We once again call for the full implementation of
resolution 1706 (2006) by all sides and for the
upholding of the Darfur Peace Agreement (DPA). In
addition, allowing humanitarian access to the people in
need is of pivotal importance. I wish to emphasize that
we all must work collectively to address the present
crisis for the benefit of all the people in Sudan and the
region as a whole.

I also wish to ask Mr. Pronk what is the best
action the Council could take to have all the parties
involved sign the DPA in order to bring peace to the
country. At the same time, I would like to thank
Denmark and the United States for their initiative
regarding a meeting next Friday.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Pronk to comment on
questions that have been raised.

