Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
Thank you, Madam President, for proposing the
present debate on the protection of civilians during
United Nations peacekeeping operations. I also wish to
thank High Commissioner Pillay, Under-Secretaries-
General Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General Amos, and
Director-General Daccord for their briefings and, in
particular, for singling out the impact of the horrific
conflicts that confront us and the challenge we face
to protect civilians. I also thank them for their tireless
efforts for international peace, security and human
rights.

We are all aware that armed conflicts today
are rarely fought between opposing military forces
lined up against each other on an isolated battlefield.
Instead, they tend to involve on one side, or perhaps
both, irregular forces that live in close proximity to
civilian populations. The result is that, when fighting
takes place, civilians are often at grave risk, either
because they are intentionally targeted or because they
otherwise find themselves in the line of fire. Even when
civilians do survive, the conflict may quickly drive
them from their homes, exposing them to a new set of
risks.

The responsibility for protecting civilians in conflict
therefore is both an important and highly complicated
one - ajob we are still learning how to do effectively.
In recent years, the Council has regularly directed

United Nations peace missions to protect civilians under
imminent threat. Establishing a mandate, however, is a
profoundly simple task as compared to fulfilling one.
The challenge we face goes beyond establishing goals
to actually saving the securing the lives of civilians in
conflict. That challenge can be broken down into three
core elements, namely, prioritization, planning and
prevention.

The first of those elements is straightforward.
The protection of civilians must be identified as a key
priority in any peacekeeping mission from the very
earliest stages. No one is helped, and the credibility of
the United Nations is seriously damaged, when United
Nations troops stand by while civilians are wounded or
killed.

The second imperative is planning - a process
that should begin as soon as the evidence of a potential
crisis comes to the Council's attention. The best way
to protect civilians is to act in time to keep conflicts
from breaking out. With effective and early planning,
peacekeeping missions can be designed with civilian
protection uppermost in mind - with the right
equipment and the best mix of military, police and
civilian personnel prepositioned to respond to potential
crises.

Part of planning is to learn from the past, while
acknowledging that no two situations are exactly alike.
In Haiti, civilian protection has centred on efforts to
return displaced families to their homes and train an
effective national police. In the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, we are finally seeing the benefits of a
Mission that has emphasized civilian protection and that
is backed by a strong political and diplomatic strategy.
It is worth noting in this context that the United Nations
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has developed a comprehensive plan for protecting
civilians, which includes mapping specific threats
and integrating that information into overall planning.
Making such data available to mission commanders can
spell the difference between success and failure.

All elements of the United Nations hierarchy have
a role to play in planning for civilian protection. The
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) can
facilitate the sharing of knowledge and best practices
across missions, thereby helping to disseminate
lessons learned. But mission-specific planning remains
critical, and DPKO has a duty to assist each mission in
developing a plan that fits the unique circumstances it
will face. Meanwhile, the members of the Council have
a responsibility, through the questions we ask and the
wording of the resolutions we adopt, to make clear the
importance we attach to this issue.

That brings me to the third element in our discussion
today: prevention. While we can make civilian
protection a priority and devote ample resources to
planning, we can still find ourselves trying to save lives
in ways that were not foreseen. In Cote d'Ivoire in 2010,
the political crisis required rapid adjustments to enable
a democratic transition and contain civilian violence.
Just recently in South Sudan, United Nations Mission
outposts served as emergency gathering points for
more than 80,000 internally displaced persons. Inside
those overcrowded compounds, desperate families
received security, food, water and health care. Babies
were born, children studied and the sick and wounded
were treated.

Nothing is more predictable in international
peacekeeping that the likelihood that unpredictable
events will occur. The greater the flexibility we build
into our preparations and deployments, the better off we
will be. We have made progress but we can do more - to
preposition equipment and to consider in advance how
we might transport peacekeepers to remote locations
with relatively little notice and shift resources from
one area to another. And we must do the best job we
can in integrating information about changing political
dynamics into our peacekeeping strategies. We cannot
do everything, but we can at least act with wisdom and
determination in response to what we have learned.

We should also continue to explore the promise
of new technology. The deployment of unmanned
aerial vehicles in the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has been useful in identifying hostile troop
movements and locating civilian populations in need,
helping better protect civilians and peacekeepers.
Early-warning networks should be part of any plan for
protecting civilians, and the United Nations should
strive to be connected where appropriate to all such
networks.

The protection of civilians is an integral part of
the United Nations peacekeeping mission and must
therefore be made a top priority in the planning we
do, the preparations we make and the operations we
implement on the ground. We must keep learning and
continually review our efforts to identify what we should
be doing better. Within the United Nations, the DPKO
Best Practices Unit is driving that effort. We all have a
responsibility to do our part, as United Nations officials,
Security Council members, troop-contributing nations
and members of the world community. Our credibility
is at stake, but, far more important, so are the lives of
our neighbours.

