Mr. Hamdi (spoke in French): I am honoured to
brief the Security Council on the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (8/2015/732).
Today I would like to give the Council an overview on
developments in the political, security and humanitarian
situation and summarize the actions being taken and
efforts made to implement the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali.

The signing of the Agreement by the Coordination
des mouvements de l'Azawad (CMA), which I noted in
my most recent briefing (see S/PV.7468), marked the
beginning of its implementation phase. Immediately
after 20 June, Algeria, as leader of the international
mediation efforts, officially launched the Comite de
suivi de l'accord. Since then, the Comite de suivi de
l'accord has held five meetings and established its
rules of procedure. At its third meeting, it set up four
subcommittees, and at the fourth, the Government of
Mali presented an action plan for implementation of
the Agreement, including a contingency plan for the
interim period.

In that regard, in line with its mandate from
the Council, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
is currently developing a reconfiguration plan for
supporting implementation of the Agreement. In
addition, it is creating a structure, based on existing
resources, that will provide technical, administrative
and logistical support to the Comite de suivi de l'accord
and its subcommittees. Those efforts will be closely
coordinated and synergized with every component of
the Mission and the United Nations system.

At my last briefing, I said that the path to peace and
implementation of the Agreement would be strewn with
obstacles, and that is indeed the case. The difficulties we
have encountered have been more significant and have
appeared sooner than we foresaw. In the three months
since the final signing of the Agreement on 20 June,
there have been serious setbacks to the implementation
schedule. These were caused mainly by frequent
violations of the ceasefire, in a context characterized
by the actions of terrorist groups and activities related
to the illicit transnational trafficking. Violations of the
ceasefire have limited progress in the implementation
of the Agreement. Valuable time was lost, as discussed
at the ministerial meeting on 1 October on the Malian
peace process, held in the margins of the General
Assembly.

The takeover ofAnefis by the Platform on 17 August
was a clear violation of the peace Agreement and led
the CMA to suspend its participation in the Comite'
de suivi de l'accord. Any progress on crucial issues,
especially related to the cantonment, was halted. While
the Platform was present in Ane'fis, CMA has expanded
its presence in areas of the Timbuktu region, also in
violation of the Agreement. After the withdrawal of the
Platform from Anefis in mid-September, its forces took
positions further to the north. These movements have
exacerbated tensions with CMA and led to clashes in
the area of In-Khalil, near the Algerian border.

(spoke in English)

Throughout this period, MINUSMA directed
political and military efforts to overcome these
challenges. First, military resources were directed to the
protection of civilians in Kidal and Anefis. Secondly, an
enhanced effort was undertaken to survey the movement
of armed groups. Thirdly and most importantly, in order
to address violations of the ceasefire, which often lead
to serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, I used my good offices to persuade
the parties to abide by their commitments and avoid an
escalation of tensions.

It bears particular mention that, on 28 August,
President Ke'ita called for the Platform's unconditional
withdrawal from Anefis. His determined efforts, added
to those of MINUSMA and the rest of the international
community, succeeded in persuading the Platform to
eventually withdraw. The return of CMA to Anefis on
18 September was not coordinated in the context of the
Commission technique mixte de securite, as sought by
the international mediation. CMA's return to Anefis,
although justified according to the provisions of the
disengagement plan, raised tensions unnecessarily at a
time during which the paramount goal was to ensure
that the parties returned to "the logic of the peace
Agreement".

When confrontation broke out near In-Khalil at
the beginning of September, MINUSMA was deeply
concerned that it could lead to the end of the peace
process. In response, I called on the leadership of
CMA and the Platform and met with them separately
to address the situation. On 23 September, I facilitated
a joint meeting in Bamako of the Platform and CMA
leadership to break the political stalemate. This
involved MINUSMA bringing together for the first
time the top military leadership of both movements. At
that meeting, the parties agreed on the following.

First, that they would cease hostilities, including
provocative troop deployments. Secondly, they would
return in principle to their initial positions prior to the
20 June signature of the peace Agreement. Thirdly,
they would return to the peace process, including
participation in the Comite de suivi de l'accord and
its subsidiary bodies. Fourthly, the would agree on the
circulation of people without arms. Lastly, there was
a general agreement to continue dialogue among the
communities and to resolve problems peacefully.

I am pleased to report that the ceasefire and the
terms of these agreements are now holding. CMA and
Platform have continued discussions and participated
in a joint visit, together with Government ministers, to
Anefis on 27 and 28 September.

The difficulties of these past two months show the
importance of determined international engagement
to prevent escalation and bring the peace process
back on track. They also show the urgent need to
make decided progress in the work of the institutions
established by the peace Agreement. The international
community, with MINUSMA playing a key role, must
remain engaged in political efforts to defuse tensions.
There is a particularly urgent need to advance in the
cantonment process, and that is in fact happening now.
Reconnaissance missions of cantonment sites proposed
by the Platform are ongoing. As soon as CMA turns in
its proposed sites, similar reconnaissance missions will
take place.

Over the past few months, criminals, along with
opportunistic elements, have been resorting to looting
and banditry. This fosters insecurity and fear among
the population, while reducing faith in the peace
process. In some cases, there have been calls for the
formation of self-defence groups - a move that could
create added security challenges further down the line.
The priority at present is to rebuild trust among the
Malian parties and to promote national reconciliation
and fight against impunity. To this end, MINUSMA is
supporting a conference of national understanding, to
be organized by the Government of Mali.

Redress for victims of human rights and
humanitarian law violations is key to the consolidation
of peace and national reconciliation. Those responsible
for serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law must be held accountable. I welcome
the commitment of the Malian authorities to establishing
transitional justice mechanisms, and call for a more
transparent and inclusive process that places victims at
the centre of discussions.

To contribute to a more secure environment,
MINUSMA is seeking to deploy longer-range unmanned
aerial vehicles. It also hopes to free up troops previously
dedicated to the protection of supply lines through the
deployment of a combat convoy battalion. These moves
would help the Mission to expand its presence in key
areas of the north and to take timely, dissuasive action
within the framework of its mandate.

I also appeal to troop- and police-contributing
countries to provide elements with appropriate
equipment to allow MINUSMA to reach its mandated
force and police levels. In order to ensure gender
mainstreaming within the Mission, troop- and
police-contributing countries are encouraged to include
women in the contingents. The deployment of military
observers, most of whom are expected to be operational
by the middle of this month, will help in the task of
observing and reporting on ceasefire violations. In
light of recent experience, such reports could form the
basis for discussions on implementing sanctions against
spoilers of the peace Agreement.

I would like to stress the importance of statements
coming from the Council on its support for MINUSMA
and its role in the implementation of the peace process.
I welcome the conclusions of the aforementioned
ministerial consultative meeting on the Malian peace
process, which took note of the Security Council's
readiness to consider targeted sanctions against those
obstructing or threatening the implementation of the
Agreement.

There is a strong need to ensure the delivery
of peace dividends, especially to the population
of conflict-affected areas. MINUSMA has been
seeking to provide improved water access, supporting
expanded electricity supply, ensuring the return to
school of children whose education has been thwarted
by the conflict, and encouraging the voluntary return
of internally displaced persons or refugees to their
communities of origin. In that regard, I am pleased to
note the efforts of the Government, in cooperation with
MINUSMA, to help children from Timbuktu and Gao
to return to school, while kids from Kidal are expected
to go back to school by the middle of this month.

In addition, it is imperative to involve civil society
closely in this phase of implementation, including
women, youth, and traditional leaders, ensuring broad
ownership of the peace Agreement. MINUSMA
is strongly committed to raising awareness and
disseminating the peace Agreement, in partnership
with civil society.

While we regret the delays in the implementation
of some provisions of the Agreement, it is important
to stress that the concerted action of MINUSMA, the
Government of Mali and the international mediation
was successful in bringing the parties back to the logic
of the peace Agreement. I also take note of the recent
decision of the Malian authorities to postpone local
elections. The postponement offers an opportunity
to bring the electoral calendar in line with the terms
outlined in the peace Agreement.

In closing, the peace process is back on track.
Nonetheless, vigilance will be required, since the peace
process remains fragile. It is my strong conviction that
promoting the implementation agreement through
close support to the Government provides the best
opportunity for Mali to address its multiple challenges.

