The Secretary-General: It is a pleasure to join
the members of the Security Council today for this
open debate on conflict prevention and resolution,
particularly in Africa. Thank you, Mr. President, for
your initiative.

I should like to officially welcome Ambassador
Ripert of France and Ambassador Sawers of the United
Kingdom, who have joined the Council and the United
Nations as new Permanent Representatives. I am
confident that their wide experience will make very
valuable contributions to all the work of the United
Nations, including that of the Council.

Since the time I assumed office as Secretary-
General, I have made it clear that the resolution of
Africa's most difficult conflicts is a top priority of my
agenda. At the same time, a greater investment in
prevention could save us considerable pain and
expense - in Darfur, in Somalia, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in northern Uganda, in Western
Sahara and elsewhere.

We must devote more resources to conflict
prevention. We must also strengthen our capacity for
mediation. It is only through political settlements that
conflicts can be resolved.

Conflicts have grown ever more complex.
Sustainable solutions, therefore, require increasingly
complex, multifaceted approaches. The United Nations
system already contributes significantly to the
prevention and resolution of armed conflict. Yet the
07-49195
increasing complexity of the demands placed upon us
has stretched the capacity of the Organization.

We need to develop new approaches. We need to
address the underlying causes of conflicts. If we do not
deal with the root causes of conflict - and offer
sustainable solutions - we will be left with
peacekeeping missions without end.

In 1998, my predecessor developed a plan to deal
with these issues. He sought to identify the causes of
conflict and to provide recommendations for the
promotion of peace and development in Africa. But
much has changed since then. Shortly, I will submit to
the sixty-second session of the General Assembly my
report on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa.
In it, I will recommend a comprehensive review of the
1998 recommendations. The review will cover the
commitments made, the actions taken, the progress
achieved and the lessons learned.

In the next few months, I will also present
proposals for strengthening the capabilities of the
Department of Political Affairs, with the goal of
making more effective use of my good offices. I
believe in engagement and dialogue, not confrontation.
It is better to respond proactively, before a crisis fully
develops. I count on the Council's support as we move
forward in this endeavour.

Already, the Department has moved to create a
standing team of mediation experts. It is establishing a
comprehensive data bank of peace agreements and
lessons learned on peacekeeping. It is undertaking
proactive mediation efforts in such places as the Sudan
and northern Uganda.

Regional organizations can contribute. Again, I
point to the Sudan, where the United Nations is
working with the African Union. The goal is to
strengthen our collective capacities to address Africa's
peace and security challenges. With the Council's
adoption of resolution 1769 (2007) on Darfur, we have
entered a new era in United Nations-African Union
cooperation. The African Union-United Nations hybrid
operation is an unprecedented undertaking and it
reflects the international community's commitment to
end the suffering in Darfur. The United Nations and the
African Union are also collaborating closely in pushing
forward the political process in Darfur. Again,
peacekeeping is only a start; there must be a political
solution, but that has taken too long. The tragedy of
07-49195

Darfur reminds us how much more needs to be done
before we complete our transformation from a culture
of reaction to one of effective prevention.

In that regard, I would like to inform you that I
am going to visit the Sudan in early September, from
3 to 6 September. I want to go and see for myself the
very difficult conditions under which the forces will
operate. I also want to know first-hand the plight of
those they seek to help.

Let me emphasize from the outset that this is not
a trip about breakthroughs; rather the visit is about
consolidating the progress to lay the groundwork for
forward movement. In Juba, I plan to underscore the
commitment of the United Nations to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement between the North
and the South, the cornerstone of peace in the Sudan. I
also wish to show solidarity with colleagues who are
working under very difficult conditions in the field.

In today's world, prevention must go beyond
mere diplomacy. The most difficult conflicts occur
when a variety of factors come together; for example,
when tensions over issues of identity within a
community are combined with unequal access to
political and economic resources. Africa is particularly
affected by those problems, perhaps because of the
manner in which its colonial borders were drawn up.

In order to prevent or resolve such conflicts, we
must promote tolerance of diversity within societies.
The solutions should be as inclusive and representative
as possible. That means providing advice on
constitutional frameworks. It means promoting human
rights and the rule of law, helping to organize elections
and building democratic institutions. It means training
police and pursuing efforts to stop weapons smuggling.
The United Nations is assisting in all those areas,
through its own programmes and through support to
regional organizations like the African Union.

Conflict prevention and sustainable development
reinforce each other. That is why it is crucial that we
make progress in our race to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals. That means reinforcing and
accelerating our efforts to reduce extreme poverty,
combat disease, promote universal primary education,
ensure environmental sustainability and advance
gender equality. Empowering women is not only a
means to achieving lasting development, it is also
critical to the promotion of peace and security, as
3
underlined in resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace
and security.

It is important to note that we are on track to
realize the Millennium Development Goals in most
developing countries - but not in Africa. Why? We
need fresh thinking and new approaches to lifting our
poorest nations out of poverty. Part of that means
dealing with the conflicts and problems of governance
that affect so many African countries.

Equally crucial is the need to build peace in
countries emerging from conflict - Burundi, Sierra
Leone, Guinea Bissau, Liberia. In those and other
fragile post-conflict countries, peacebuilding is in fact
prevention, since it is designed to prevent a relapse
into war. We are working with the United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission and the Human Rights
Commission to support reconciliation and confidence-
building, end impunity and consolidate the peace.

By some estimates, there has been a 40 per cent
decline in armed conflict around the world since the
19905. Recent research credits expanded United
Nations peacemaking, peacekeeping and conflict
prevention activities as a major factor behind this
decline. That is encouraging. But, it is not good
enough. Violent conflicts continue to inflict immense
suffering on countless people, mostly civilians around
the world. For those victims and for the sake of future
generations, we have an obligation to take more
seriously the challenge of prevention. There must be
sustained international political will to reinforce
preventive action in its broadest sense. And there must
be adequate resources invested for the diverse and
complex tasks that prevention entails.

I trust you will have a fruitful debate on this most
crucial issue, in which the Council has an essential role
to play.

