The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Australia, Ethiopia, Finland,
Kenya, Portugal, South Africa and the Sudan, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
aforementioned representatives took the seats

reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 19 October
2010 from the Permanent Representative of Gabon to
the United Nations, in which he requests that the
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, His Excellency Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item in
accordance with rule 39 of the Council's provisional
rules of procedure. If I hear no objection, I shall take it
that the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
His Excellency Mr. Ramtane Lamamra.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Lamamra to take a seat at the Council
table.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
also received a letter from His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, acting head of the delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item in
2

accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

On behalf of the Council, I wish to extend a
warm welcome to His Excellency, Mr. Henry Odein
Ajumogobia, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Nigeria.
On behalf of the Council, I also wish to recognize the
presence of His Excellency Mr. Yusuf Hasan Ibrahim,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia, at this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document S/2010/514, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on support to African
Union peacekeeping operations authorized by the
United Nations.

There is no doubt that peacekeeping is
increasingly becoming a shared responsibility in which
the United Nations, regional and subregional
organizations and the wider international community
have critical roles to play. Uganda therefore welcomes
the progress being made towards strengthening the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union (AU).

The report of the Secretary-General on support to
African Union peacekeeping operations authorized by
the United Nations highlights areas of progress. This
includes increased consultation and collaboration on
matters of peace and security, support for the AU's
10-year capacity-building programme, and assistance
in building the capacity of the AU and subregional
organizations in Africa to plan, deploy and sustain
peacekeeping operations.

The African Union, recognizing the detrimental
impact of previous conflicts in terms of retarding
socio-economic development and causing untold
suffering to populations, has shown its resolve and
commitment to preventing, managing and resolving
conflicts on the continent. It is working on the
implementation of a comprehensive peace and security
10-59826
architecture and has underscored the need for its
member States to adhere to constitutionalism,
democratic governance and the rule of law.

As the Secretary-General points out in his report,
the African Union is taking critical measures to
strengthen its capacity to undertake peacekeeping
operations. The AU and subregional organizations -
including the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the Economic Community of West
African States, the East African Community and the
Southern Africa Development Community - continue
to develop their capacities and have invested the
resources necessary, within their capability, to respond
to conflict situations in various countries. They are
making an important contribution through their
knowledge of situations on the ground and their ability
to respond quickly.

It is important to ensure that peacekeeping, which
is an indispensable tool available to the United Nations
and regional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security, is done effectively.
The Security Council, under resolution 1809 (2008),
recognized the need to enhance the predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of funding to regional
organizations when they undertake peacekeeping
operations under a United Nations mandate. However,
the efforts of the African Union to effectively deploy
peacekeeping operations continue to be hampered by
the lack of sustainable, predictable and flexible
financing.

The African Union Mission in Somalia is a case
in point, the provision of the United Nations logistical
support package notwithstanding. While we appreciate
the support rendered by the bilateral partners, the fact
remains that such voluntary contributions are not only
unpredictable, but also unsustainable. When the AU
deploys peacekeeping operations authorized by the
Security Council, it is doing so on behalf of the United
Nations and the international community.

In our view, extensive deliberations and debates
have been held on the need for sustainable and
predictable financing of African Union peacekeeping
operations authorized by the United Nations. It is now
critical that decisive action be taken on practical ways
of actualizing that support, including through assessed
contributions, as recommended almost two years by the
AU-United Nations panel chaired by former Italian
Prime Minister Romano Prodi (see 8/2008/813). The
10-59826

benefits that would accrue from supporting effective
peacekeeping, coupled with conflict prevention and
peacebuilding, are immense in terms of promoting
peace, security and development.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and invite him to
take the floor.


