Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We are
honoured, Sir, by your presence here today as you
preside over the work of the Security Council. My
delegation welcomes you once again.

Like other delegations, we wish to thank
Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his detailed briefing. We
take this opportunity to acknowledge his work at the
helm of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI). We are convinced that he will be equally
successful in his future responsibilities. We wish him
all the best.

We also wish to thank Ambassador Hamid
AlBayati for his detailed statement, which clearly
reflected the progress that has recently been made in
his country.

Following the latest review of United Nations
activities in February, the Iraqi Government has
pursued its efforts to strengthen democracy, exert
effective control over the national territory, and
improve security and the living conditions of the Iraqi
people. We must not only praise those efforts, but also
encourage the Government of Iraq to continue along
the same line, with the support of the international
community, in particular as it faces important electoral
deadlines in late 2009 and early 2010. That will
certainly strengthen the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Iraq and ensure the right of its
people freely to determine their economic and political
future. It will also allow them effectively to control
their natural resources.

In that respect, we note with satisfaction that
significant progress has been made in recent months in
various sectors of Iraq's national life. In the electoral
field, the successful and peaceful holding of provincial
elections on 31 January confirmed the commitment of
the Government and the people of Iraq to democracy
and strengthened local institutions, which will improve
the people's standards of living. The work of the
Independent High Electoral Commission is deserving
of special recognition. With the support of the Iraq
authorities, UNAMI and the international community,
it ensured that the elections were held in optimal
conditions, thus guaranteeing the legitimacy and
impartiality of the results. The fruitful cooperation
between the High Commission, the Government and
UNAMI should continue throughout the preparation for
the regional elections in July and the parliamentary
elections in January 2010.
On the political scene, the election in April of the
new Speaker of Parliament will promote progress on
outstanding legislative and constitutional matters. It
will also help to strengthen the foundations of national
reconciliation, which is of high priority for Iraq, as
Ambassador Al Bayati noted.

With respect to security, in February we
welcomed the entry into force of the bilateral security
agreement between the Governments of Iraq and the
United States. The agreement is the basis for the
transfer of responsibilities to the Iraqi Security Forces.

On the issue of sovereignty, we note with
pleasure that United States troops have begun to
withdraw from their former bases, while Iraqi forces
are increasing their participation in and responsibility
for ensuring domestic security, pursuant to the bilateral
security agreement. The process is of great importance
to Mexico, which has always favoured the
strengthening of Iraq's sovereignty and spoken up on
behalf of its autonomy.

At the regional level, the Government has
demonstrated its ability to consolidate and strengthen
relations with its neighbours and laid the groundwork
for bilateral relations with the countries of the region.
We therefore welcome the decision to incorporate the
strengthening of regional relations into the priorities of
the International Compact with Iraq, with the support
of UNAMI. Moreover, thanks to UNAMI's
interlocutory role, dialogue has begun on the disputed
internal borders and the status of Kirkuk. Such
dialogue is critical to establishing lasting peace in the
country and has recently borne fruit, as Mr. De Mistura
indicated.

Iraq's current situation is the complete antithesis
of that which prevailed in previous years. However, as
in all reconstruction processes, important pending
challenges hinder national reconciliation and the
country's economic development. We are particularly
concerned about the frequent and massive
indiscriminate attacks that have claimed numerous
civilian casualties. We firmly condemn such
unacceptable practices of intimidation and join the
Secretary-General in urging Iraqis not to succumb to
them. We trust in the Iraqi Security Forces to confront
the armed groups inciting sectarian violence and to
exert gradually increasing control throughout Iraqi
territory while safeguarding human rights.

In this respect, my delegation shares the concern
expressed in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2009/284) with regard to the decision to reinstate
the death penalty, which Mexico is opposed to. We
invite the Iraqi authorities to suspend this practice. We
also call for particular attention to be paid to respect
for the rights of women.

In addition, we welcome the establishment of the
Independent High Commission for Human Rights,
which will make it possible to progressively address
these challenges. We also welcome the proposal for
United Nations support to contribute to the
consolidation of that Commission. We hope that the
necessary funds for the financing of the Commission
will be provided soon. This would contribute to
strengthening the capacity of Iraqi institutions in the
area of human rights protection and would establish
better practices for the treatment of detainees and
judicial processes, including fair trials and due process.

The persistent lack of security in the country has
generated a constant flow of internally displaced
persons and refugees, undermining the long-term
development of the country. For this reason, we are
pleased to note the fact that, since the beginning of
2008, nearly 50,000 families have returned to their
places of origin. We invite the Iraqi authorities to
continue to cooperate with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in order to
ensure the return of refugees and internally displaced
persons in the best possible conditions while ensuring
respect for their dignity.

Reconstruction and the economic development of
the country are essential for a solution to all of the
remaining problems and are intimately bound to an
improvement in security conditions and the
strengthening of institutions and of the rule of law. The
support of UNAMI and the international community
should be channelled towards these aspects in order to
consolidate future development in Iraq. We welcome
recent initiatives by the Government of Iraq to
strengthen its economic and social development.

In this respect, Mexico has contributed, through
the Central Emergency Response Fund, to addressing
the health epidemics that have affected more than
10,000 people in the country. Mexico is one of the
biggest supporters of this programme.

I would like to conclude by recognizing the work
of UNAMI personnel and the important role that this
Mission has played in substantially improving the
living conditions of Iraqis. Its presence has allowed for
the consolidation of an independent and sovereign
Government and has facilitated assistance to the
humanitarian and reconstruction work to be done.

In the future, UNAMI will have the opportunity
to continue to support Iraq in crucial initiatives such as
the International Compact for Iraq, the holding of
regional and national elections, the national assistance
strategy and the issue of human rights. The future of
Iraq and the well-being of Iraqis depend on the
determination of its Government and the support of the
international community in facing these remaining
challenges.

For all of these reasons, we thank the presidency
of the Council for having prepared the draft
presidential statement, to which my delegation fully
adheres.

