Mr. Simonovie (Croatia): It is my pleasure to
thank the Kingdom of the Netherlands for organizing
this open debate on United Nations missions' so-called
exit strategy. We cannot agree more with the statement
that the term "exit strategy" is unclear and may be
misleading. We therefore wish to commend you, Mr.
President, for your initiative to explore the uncharted
territory that lies between the formal end of a United
Nations mission and the fulfilment of the mission's
objectives.

We appreciate the approach the Dutch delegation
has taken in preparing and distributing in advance a
reference paper on the theme "No exit without
strategy" for today's debate. Its conceptual part and its
three case studies contain probing questions, as well as
a compilation of lessons learned regarding the creation,
modification and, especially, termination of operational
mandates. So far, a number of these lessons have not
been necessarily recommended for implementation, let
alone implemented.

In this regard, we, too, consider today's exercise
an important contribution to filling in a missing link in
the Brahimi report on the reform of United Nations
peace operations, a link that cannot be provided by the
report's call for "clear, credible and achievable
mandates". (S/2000/809, annex 11], para. 4) In our
view, as derived from our experience of having hosted
five peace operations in our country, we are convinced
that the Security Council's mandates must also favour
and advance the end objectives of achieving self-
sustainable peace. This goal, of course, requires a well-
thought-out strategy and unwavering commitment by
all the parties involved.

In this regard, Croatia takes pride, together with
the United Nations, for having persevered in carrying
out a comprehensive strategy for a successful
termination of the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium (UNTAES). To recall, at the time
when UNTAES was launched, the mandated area of its
operation in Croatia was still under occupation.

From the outset, the Security Council set a clear,
credible and realistic mandate, based on and
corresponding to the 1995 agreement of the parties
involved. Thus, in its resolution of 15 November 1996
the Council confirmed the two-year deadline for the
termination of the Mission. In this case, the finality of
the mandate provided both focus and discipline to
anticipate and then carry out a number of mandated
tasks, most notably the disarmament programme. This
initiative was not only launched early in the operation
but also was completed swiftly and in parallel with the
innovative manner of the weapons buy-back scheme.

Of equal importance were the other two elements
of the three-prong UNTAES success strategy: follow-
on security assistance and political missions that
ensued upon the termination of the United Nations
operation, and national strategy and policy measures
regarding the rehabilitation and reintegration of the
former combatants. The follow-on mission of 180
civilian police monitors, for a single period of nine
months, was authorized by a Security Council
resolution of 19 December 1997, at Croatia's own
request.

Another element, both welcomed and encouraged
by the Security Council and later monitored by a
regional security organization, was the development
and implementation of the Republic of Croatia's
national strategy of peaceful reintegration of the
region.

From today's perspective, one can claim that
UNTAES had all the right prerequisites in place, most
importantly the cooperation of the host country.
Therefore, the argument goes, UNTAES was both a
unique and not particularly challenging operation. We
respectfully disagree. We feel that the United Nations
should be given credit for its part in the job well done.
We are also convinced that credit is due to the Security
Council. The proper initial formulation of the United
Nations mandate and its subsequent modifications to fit
the evolving realities on the ground were part of a well-
defined strategy to usher in the final objectives:
peaceful reintegration and sustainable peace in Eastern
Slavonia.

Because the Security Council has neither lost
sight of nor appeared hesitant regarding this objective,
it was able to act in an anticipatory and flexible fashion
in the evolving process of the implementation of the
desired objectives. In such a manner, the Council did
not waver from its course and did not send confusing
signals or block the process of normalization in its
tracks, but it was able to recognize the encouraging
steps on the ground and thus strengthen the process so
that it could run its course to successful completion.

Croatia is currently hosting the United Nations
Mission of Observers in Prevlaka (UNMOP), the last
remaining United Nations operation on its soil. Since
1992 the Prevlaka area has been under the United
Nations monitoring mandate. Over the years, the
attempts by the parties, even at the local level between
the Croatian and Montenegrin authorities, to resolve
the security issue of Prevlaka have been frustrated by
the unrelenting refusal of the former Milosevic regime
to let go of its expansionist policies.

As we have witnessed elsewhere, such policies
failed disastrously but were finally defeated just a few
months ago. Nevertheless, Croatia has never given up
the goal of re-establishing normality and bringing
prosperity to the entire area under the United Nations
monitoring mandate. Together with our Montenegrin
neighbours, we have jointly committed ourselves to a
peaceful resolution of the security issue of Prevlaka at
the highest level.

Moreover, we have drawn concrete and
actionable plans to attract investors to this pristine part
of the Croatian and Montenegrin coastal area to build
complementary tourist resorts on both sides of the
international border. We have also agreed to jointly
fund the construction of the customs and other border-
crossing facilities at Prevlaka. Part of this project
should be carried out under the auspices of the Stability
Pact for South-Eastern Europe. We have faith that the
new democratic authorities in Belgrade will continue
with their constructive approach towards their
neighbours, including in this matter as well.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
having recognized, despite the crudeness of the
UNMOP mandate, other acts of normalization on the
ground. We feel that the time is ripe for the Security
Council to advance a comprehensive "exit strategy" for
this United Nations operation. It is time for the Council
to assist the process of normalization further by
recognizing the repeatedly certified fact that the
security situation in Prevlaka has been stable for years
now and by imposing a clear deadline for the
termination of the mission. Such a decision will be
based on an enabling strategy to reinforce sustainable
peace and thus focus energies on returning prosperity
to a once thriving tourist industry of the Dubrovnik
area and the Bay of Kotor.

I thank you again, Mr. President, for bringing a
much needed spotlight to the often missing link
between the end of the mission and the mission's
objectives.

