Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Council for this month and thank you
for convening this important meeting.

We have listened with interest to the briefings
by the three Chairs of the Committees on the
implementation of the Security Council resolutions on
counter-terrorism. They discussed the activities of the
three Committees since the most recent briefing to the
Council (see S/PV.6964).

Despite the many threats posed by terrorism, the
United Nations remains the main forum for coordinating
international efforts to achieve a world free from that
scourge. The Security Council has been committed that
idea and has adopted a number of resolutions on fighting
terrorism. In addition, the General Assembly has
adopted the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy (General Assembly resolution 60/288). All of
those efforts are aimed at coordinating the efforts ofthe
Member States to combat terrorism.

The United Nations counter-terrorism entities must
step up their efforts and improve their effectiveness.
They must refrain from politicizing the issue of
combating terrorism so as not to give in to the
temptation to justify terrorism or the temptation on the
part of some to classify terrorism as either benign or
not benign.

Despite all of this, and despite the many efforts
and the many resolutions on combating terrorism, the
fact remains that terrorism continues to increase and is
starting to employ new methods. As that has been noted
by many of our colleagues who have taken the floor
before me, I will not repeat what was said.

We are now witnessing a new surge in extremism
and radicalization that is producing unprecedented acts
of violence, contrary to the belief held by some that
terrorist organizations, led by Al-Qaida, have become
weaker and that the world has become a safer place after
the death of Osama bin Laden. Sadly, the fact is that
terrorism poses a serious threat to international peace
and security, and certain entities and their branches
affiliated with that organization are trying to find
bases from which they can relaunch their activities in
new places, taking advantages of conditions in certain
countries and exploiting the support and unlimited
sponsorship offered to them by certain States Members
of the United Nations who have found in terrorism a
tool to benefit their own foreign policy and narrow
interests.

Since the crisis in Syria began, my country's

delegation has unremittingly tried to shed light on
the increasing terrorist danger that is targeting my
country, Syria. In addition to our statements at the
United Nations, in which we have sought to explain
the various aspects and types of terrorism that we are
being subject to, on behalf of my Government, I have
sent 259 official letters to the Secretary-General and
successive Presidents of the Security Council on all
issues related to the fight against terrorism. I have in my
hand the entire file - 259 official letters, 76 of which
refer to terrorist activities by Al-Qaida, in addition to
nine addressed to the Chair ofthe Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-
terrorism, and four addressed to Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We
have been waiting for an official response on practical
measures undertaken by the Council through the three
Counter-Terrorism Committees with respect to the
terrorism that is targeting my country. In other words,
we are still awaiting a response to 259 letters addressed
to the Security Council on the struggle against terrorism
in Syria.

In those letters, we have drawn the Council's and
the Committees' attention to barbaric terrorism acts
committed by armed terrorist groups, some of which
are affiliated with Al-Qaida, the majority of which are
cross-border extremists and foreign mercenaries who are
pursuing a proxy war on Syrian territory. Those acts have
targeted institutions of the State, infrastructure, basic
public services, hospitals, educational establishments,
religious shrines, monuments, museums, holy places,
national civil service administrations, clerics and
peacekeepers of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force.

Those attacks have taken a different turn recently
by focusing on civil targets, arbitrarily firing mortars
against residents and Islamic and Christian shrines.
They have also targeted children in schools, school
buses, in an effort to deprive children of their education
and maintain the ignorance that fuels extremist views
and attitudes. Yesterday, 40 Saudi mercenaries were
killed by the Syrian Armed Forces. One of them was
the son of the head of the Saudi Arabian Royal Guard
Regiment. Mortars were also fired on a school yesterday
in Damascus, killing dozens of children. Yesterday, in
the city of Deir Atiyah, terrorists and mercenaries who
had crossed the Syrian-Lebanese border killed eight
doctors and 10 nurses and many patients in the hospital
there.

Despite the fact that the Al-Nusra Front and its
head, Abu Mohammed al-Golani, are listed in the list
established and maintained by the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) with respect
to individuals, groups, undertakings and other entities
associated with Al-Qaida, despite the sanctions imposed
against that entity, despite the Council's October 2013
condemnation of the increased terrorist attacks carried
out by Al-Qaida in Syria (S/PRST/2013/15), despite the
Council's call on all parties to commit to putting an
end to terrorist acts perpetrated by such organizations
and individuals, despite the Council's reaffirmation in
resolution 2118 (2013) that all Member States refrain
from providing any form of support to non-State actors
that attempt to develop, acquire, manufacture, possess,

transport, transfer or use nuclear, chemical or biological
weapons and their means of delivery - despite all ofthe
foregoing, those efforts have not been commensurate
with the challenge posed by international terrorism
targeting Syrian and the entire Syrian people.

That is why we think that we all need to take
additional steps to bolster those measures in order to
achieve results, namely, addressing the concerns that
we have conveyed to the Council and which are closely
aligned with the authorities and competencies of those
Committees; preventing the funding and arming of
terrorist groups and refraining from sponsoring them;
combating extremist radical thought and fanaticism,
regardless of its sources; calling on States to control
their borders and stop the transit of extremists and
terrorists who are seeking to travel to Syria.

In that regard, I want to cite the article from The
Independent that came out yesterday, which said that a
British extremist, Anjem Choudary, organized anetwork
to send terrorist mercenaries to Syria. According to
Choudary himself, he sent over 300 people. The article
in The Independent states that there are mercenaries
coming from France and elsewhere, and it is the same
problem.

In accordance with resolution 1624 (2005),
Member States need to be engaged in stopping the
incitement to terrorism and hatred in the media or in
official statements, the procurement of weapons for
terrorists and the political, financial and media support
for terrorist groups. We need to combat the exploitation
of the Internet and information and communication
technologies that are being used to incite terrorists
and target young people in different parts of the world.
We need to thwart the attempts by terrorist groups to
access to and use of weapons of mass destruction in
my country, such as what happened in Khan al-Assal
in March and in Ghouta in August. We have submitted
documents to the 1540 Committee which prove that
terrorist organizations active in Syria are trying to obtain
chemical weapons through neighbouring countries. We
have also drawn the Committee's attention to reports
about these attempts, as well as shipments which were
seized in Turkey and Lebanon, and given it the names
of individuals who have been arrested red-handed.

The Governments that are financing, training
and facilitating terrorist elements need to be held
accountable. Those terrorists are moving throughout
Syria and being sponsored by States, and those States
need to be treated as participants in terrorist activities
because they are killing Syrians. Those States must be
made to stop those destructive practices, which violate
Security Council resolutions, including resolutions
2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012) and 2118 (2013). They
are also in contravention of the Geneva Declaration.
Therefore, we need to reach a settlement on the Syrian
crisis through a Syrian-led political process based on
national dialogue among the Syrians themselves.

My country has for many decades constantly
called for an end to hegemonic colonization. We have
incessantly called for the sanctity of the commitment to
the non-interference in the internal affairs of States. On
many ocassions, my country has affirmed its conviction
regarding the role of the United Nations in combatting
terrorism. The struggle can only be carried out on
an individual basis. Therefore, we want to draw the
Council's attention to another form of interference and
to more attenpts to dominate other countries. In other
words, that is what is being done by certain Member
States who openly fund terrorist acts and terrorists, in
order to impose their own political agenda and to take a
stand against systems of power.

All this falls within the comptenence ofthe Council
and the counter-terrorism committees. Combatting
the terrorism from which Syria is suffering is vital to
reach a peaceful solution to the Syrian crisis and for
the political process in Syria to gain credibility. Our
statement is an appeal to the Security Council to show
solidarity with the Syrian Government in the face of
the terrorism that has claimed the lives of thousands
of people. Much like in 2003, when we were members
of the Council and called on the Council to make the
Middle East a zone free of all kinds of weapons of mass
destruction, we now call on the Council to make the
Middle East a zone free of all kinds of terrorism as a
step towards eliminating terrorism at the global level.

One last comment. I told the Council what had
happened yesterday. I forgot to mention how missiles
yesterday struck the Social Education Institute in
Damascus, where disabled patients were being treated,
as well as an orphanage. That led to the death of many
disabled people in those two institutions, many of them
children.

