Mrs. Telalian (Greece): At the outset, we would
like to thank Judges Fausto Pocar and Erik Mose, as
well Prosecutors Carla Del Ponte and Hassan Jallow,
for the oral presentations of their respective reports to
the Security Council. We commend them for their
tireless efforts to end impunity, re-establish the rule of
law and promote national reconciliation and peace in
the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. Both Tribunals
have done the maximum possible to keep up with the
time frame established in the completion strategies
according to resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004).

Judge Fausto Pocar, President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) - whom we congratulate on his appointment
to the presidency of the Tribunal - indicated earlier
that, since the last report to the Council, there has been
an increase in the number of indictees that have been
apprehended, as a result of which the number of
remaining fugitives has been reduced. That is a
positive sign of cooperation with the Tribunal by the
States of the region. In addition, the transfer of Ante
Gotovina to The Hague, following his arrest by
Spanish authorities in the Canary Islands, is an
important development in establishing accountability
for serious violations of international humanitarian
law. With regard to the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR), a more aggressive programme has
been formulated by the ICTR Prosecutor's Office to
track and arrest fugitives.

However, the continuing failure of the States
concerned to apprehend and surrender the remaining
fugitives is a serious impediment to the implementation
of the completion strategy of the two ad hoc Tribunals.
As has been emphasized on many occasions, the
Tribunals will not have fulfilled their historic mission
unless all fugitives are apprehended and brought to
justice. We hope that, at this critical stage of the
completion strategy, the States concerned will fully
cooperate with the Tribunals in order to assist them in
their efforts to deal with past abuses.

A key component of that strategy is the referral of
cases concerning intermediate- and lower-rank accused
to competent national jurisdictions. So far, the
Prosecutor of the ICTY has filed 12 referral motions
involving 20 accused. Likewise, the Prosecutor of the
ICTR has already commenced the process of
requesting the transfer of cases involving persons
indicted and files involving individuals to national
jurisdictions for trial. We note with satisfaction that
both Tribunals have been careful to ensure compliance
with international fair trial standards in the
aforementioned cases transferred. The obligation on
the Prosecutor of the ICTY to provide follow-up
reports on the progress made by national courts on
those cases is, in our view, an effective safeguard.

Another important measure in that regard is the
building of the local capacity of national courts, and
particularly the training of local judiciary and
prosecutors. We therefore welcome the working visits
organized by the Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
with national prosecutors and judges, as well as the
various capacity-building initiatives taken within the
region.

The successful implementation of the completion
strategy of the Tribunals is of paramount importance.
The President of the Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia has given us a clear picture of the ongoing
efforts of the two working groups of judges that have
been formed to examine how to improve the
procedures and practices of the trial and appeals
chambers to achieve maximum judicial output. In that
respect, the proposal to build a fourth courtroom to
increase the court's capacity is a most interesting one.
Furthermore, the two resolutions adopted by the
Security Council this year concerning ad litem judges
is also an important measure facilitating the
implementation of the completion strategy.

The President of the Rwanda Tribunal, Judge
Mose, has underlined in his report that he estimates
that the Tribunal could complete trials and judgments
involving 65 to 70 individuals by 2008. In that
connection, it has been noted that the completion
strategy of that Tribunal is linked to that of the
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. Indeed, the
increasing workload of the Appeals Chamber, which is
common to both Tribunals, makes it difficult to
estimate when all the appeals will be completed. The
suggestion of President Mose that, at some stage, there
will be a need to increase the number of judges at the
Appeals Chamber is a most interesting one. Likewise,
we agree that the Tribunals can achieve their tasks only
if the necessary resources are made available.

Over the past years, the two ad hoc Tribunals
have played a crucial role in advancing the cause of
justice and the rule of law in the former Yugoslavia and
in Rwanda. They have now entered the most difficult
and critical phase of their existence and they have to
implement their completion strategy successfully in
order to accomplish their mission. That, however, will
depend on a number of factors. Among those factors,
we believe that the cooperation of the States
concerned, as well as the support of the international
community and, most specifically, of the Security
Council are the most important.

