Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe
for his briefing on developments in the situation in the
Middle East.

The situation in the region remains tense and of
particular concern to us is the lack of progress towards
the resumption of direct Palestinian and Israeli
dialogue. The current visit to the Middle East by the
President of Russia, Dmitry Medvedev, is focused first
and foremost on finding ways to renew the regional
peace process. During his visit, the President of Russia
has laid out our View of how to achieve lasting peace in
the region. First, both sides should refrain from
unilateral moves that may predetermine the outcome of
a settlement, respect their international obligations,
display political will and a willingness to adopt
confidence-building measures, and promote sustainable
dialogue that would facilitate the effective settlement
of the whole range of final status issues.

Israel should freeze its settlement activities in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem, which violate
international law. It should honour the requirements of
the relevant Security Council resolutions and the
decisions of the Quartet of international mediators.
Acts such as demolishing the Palestinian Shepherd's
Hotel in order to build more settlement units only
further complicate the situation. We trust that the
Israeli leadership will finally heed the unwavering
requirements of the international community. At the
same time, the legitimate security interests of Israel
must be ensured and rocket attacks on Israeli territory
must end.

Of equal relevance is the objective of restoring
intra-Palestinian unity on the Palestine Liberation
Organization platform. Russia continues to actively
facilitate this by supporting the relevant mediation
efforts, primarily those of Egypt.

Along with these efforts, there is a need for
further measures to lift the blockade of the Gaza Strip
in order to improve the humanitarian and socio-
economic situation there. Among the efforts needed to
ensure progress in a Palestinian and Israeli settlement
is to focus on generally recognized international legal
bases, including Security Council resolutions, the
decisions of the Quartet and the Arab Peace Initiative.

The forthcoming ministerial meeting of the
Quartet on 5 February in Munich, convened on
Russia's initiative, should determine practical steps for
a swift resumption of the Palestinian and Israeli
negotiation process. The ultimate aim of this process is
to implement the two-State solution of Palestine and
Israel coexisting in peace and security within
internationally recognized borders.

Russia consistently supports the right of
Palestinians to establish their own independent,
contiguous and viable State, with its capital in East
Jerusalem. Everyone - Palestinians, Israelis and the
entire Middle East region - will gain from that.

In speaking at the joint press conference with
Palestinian President Abbas in Jericho, President
Medvedev confirmed that the Russian initiative to
convene an international conference on the Middle
East in Moscow remains on the table. The aim is not
just to meet, but to achieve significant progress
towards achieving a comprehensive Middle East
settlement. If we manage to move the negotiating
process forward, including during consultations with
the Quartet, the prospects for the Moscow conference
will become clearer.

Recent events in Lebanon concerning the
resignation of the Government are of serious concern
to us. Of principal importance now is that the situation
remains in the constitutional sphere. To that end, the
Lebanese parties need to display calm and restraint and
avoid making moves that would exacerbate the
situation and harm both the Lebanese and the entire
region. Despite existing political disagreements, the
search for dialogue-based solutions to contentious
issues on the national agenda is in the interest of all
Lebanese and must be maintained.

The work of the Special Tribunal has moved into
a new phase. We trust that the decision of the Tribunal
will be considered extremely carefully and based on
evidence. This will not only directly determine the
triumph of justice and the fair prosecution of
perpetrators, but will also maintain peace and stability
in the country and in the region as a whole.

