Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the delegation of Mexico for convening this
timely debate on civilians in armed conflict. Uruguay
is pleased that the issue of children affected by armed
conflict has been enjoying increasing priority on the
international agenda, and will continue to support all
efforts in that regard.

We welcome the presence of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. Uruguay fully supports her work
and mandate. Her substantive briefings, developed in a
framework of broad consultations, allow us to assess
progress to date and reaffirm our conviction that much
work remains to be done.

Despite the achievements of recent years, the
figures contained in the Secretary-General's latest
report (S/2009/ 15 8) on the impact of armed conflict on
children are of particular concern. The issue is
inscribed on the agenda of the General Assembly,
where my country has played an extremely active role
year after year in strengthening and expanding the
involvement and responsibility of that organ of
universal membership with respect to an issue that falls
within its mandate and is of concern to all.

Nevertheless, Uruguay recognizes the role that
the Security Council has played, particularly through
the adoption of numerous resolutions, the most recent
of which - resolution 1612 (2005) - established a
monitoring and reporting mechanism in order to
receive reliable information and take specific action to
put a halt to the illegal recruitment and use of children
in conflict zones. With respect to resolution 1612
(2005), we believe that it is necessary to assess not
only the implementation, but also the format of the
mechanism. We remain concerned by the fact that,
even when reports continue to highlight six types of
grave violations against children, the mechanism is
triggered only by the illegal recruitment and use of
child soldiers.

In that regard, we reiterate our support for the
recommendation that the mechanism's scope be
extended, as we do not believe that certain violations
are more serious than others. All must be accorded the
same priority. We understand that extending the trigger
would call for the careful discussion of each category
within existing legal frameworks. We feel that a focus
on step-by-step, progressive inclusion would be more
practical and operative.

In that respect, we recognize the contribution of
the International Criminal Court, which designates as
war crimes sexual violence and the recruitment or
enlisting of children under the age of 15 or their active
use in armed conflict. We also appreciate the
contributions of other international courts that have
included the protection of children in their respective
jurisdictions. We understand that it is critical to fight
tirelessly against the impunity of those responsible for
grave violations of children's rights, in clear
contravention of relevant international norms. In that
regard, we encourage the Security Council to refer
such cases to the International Criminal Court.

My delegation believes that greater attention
should be given to the reintegration into society of
children who are linked to armed groups or victims of
other grave violations of their rights, in particular
sexual abuse or exploitation. We agree with the Special
Representative on the critical importance of effective
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes to the well-being of all children affected
by armed conflict. Such efforts should enjoy adequate
human and financial resources and be community-
based in order to facilitate the sustainable and
successful reintegration of these children.

The social reintegration of children also requires
the careful consideration of cases of minors accused of
crimes committed during their association with armed
forces or groups. We agree that, in such cases, children
must be seen, first and foremost, as victims and dealt
with in accordance with international legislation within
the framework of a legal system for children that leads
to their social rehabilitation.

We appreciate the work of civil society in
conjunction with the entire United Nations system,
including the Office of the Special Representative,
UNICEF child-protection advisers and the peace
mission personnel, in building sustainable mechanisms
for child protection.

Uruguay, one of the 10 largest troop contributors,
has demonstrated on the ground its unwavering
commitment to the protection of the civilian population
in general and of children in particular. In this sense,
we support the recommendation to include specific
provisions for the protection of children in all
peacekeeping operations.

Our country has witnessed the successes and the
difficulties of this project. Our troops have participated
in successful programmes in coordination with the
child protection advisers, but have also endured the
difficulties in implementing mandates that, while
sound on paper, do not have enough human and
material resources in practice.

It is thus indispensable that Security Council
mandates, when incorporating specific provisions to
protect children, include the strategic and logistical
measures needed to best fulfil these tasks. Uruguay
once again stands ready to contribute to responding to
this challenge through its experience on the ground.

