Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): As the
Security Council is aware, France has been struck
several times by murderous attacks, including on 14 July,
our national holiday. We will not forget the exceptional
groundswell of solidarity from the entire world, the
popular gatherings, the monuments illuminated in the
colours of the French flag and the numerous leaders
who expressed their solidarity.

But France is certainly not the only country to
have been attacked. Again just this weekend, Egypt,
Turkey, Nigeria and Somalia were once again affected
by terrorist attacks. On behalf of France, I wish to again
convey to them our most sincere condolences.

Faced with this global threat that knows no borders,
our response can be nothing less than collective. It must
cover all fronts: military action, where necessary, and
certainly political and diplomatic efforts to resolve the
crises that fuel terrorism. Apart from those obvious
initiatives, however, a whole series of areas, which
are sometimes perceived as more technical, remain
absolutely essential to an effective and sustainable
fight against terrorism. International legal and police
cooperation is one of them.

I would therefore first like to extend my heartfelt
thanks to Spain for this initiative. Today's debate
provides us with an opportunity to send a strong and
united message from the Security Council on the
importance of international cooperation in fight against
terrorism - much as we have done previously on the
financing of terrorism or combating propaganda. Step
by step and under the auspices of the Council, the
United Nations is increasingly at the vanguard in the
fight against terrorism. It is increasingly able to act
and ensure the convergence of States' efforts to counter
that scourge. I also thank the speakers for their very
informative briefings.

France welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2322 (2016), aimed at strengthening judicial
and police cooperation in the fight against terrorism, the
first such resolution to deal specifically with the issue.
I should like to focus on three especially important
messages sent by the resolution.

First ofall, it asserts that strengthening international
judicial and police cooperation is not only essential
to preventing foreign terrorist fighters from entering
conflict zones but also to preparing for and managing
their return to their respective territories, which is a
crucial task.

Secondly, it stresses the importance of rapid
coordination between the States involved in a
terrorist investigation. Unfortunately, France has
had considerable experience in that field. Through
the attacks of 13 November 2015, we saw that the
networks in question crossed Europe. Rapid and
effective coordination can therefore be a major asset to
successful investigations.

Thirdly, it highlights the need to use all available
legal tools for cooperation in mutual legal assistance
and extradition. The development of a directory
of focal points and the use of electronic means of
communication as support for requests for mutual
assistance are especially desirable.

France also welcomes the fact that the resolution
echoes the major initiatives of the European Union with
regard to judicial and police cooperation in the areas of
counter-terrorism.

France does notundere stimate the current challenges
of international judicial and police cooperation in the
fight against terrorism. There are technical challenges,
particularly those posed by the use of new information
and communication technologies by terrorist groups,
especially encrypted messaging systems. Differences
in legal systems as well as the complexity of judicial
organizations can also sometimes hinder cooperation.
But those challenges are not insurmountable, and the
United Nations has an essential role to play in that area.

First, the Organization must raise awareness and
build capacity in States that need it, as a particularly
important measure in helping States to better
understand and respond to these challenges. In that
regard, the technical assistance provided by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, particularly in
the development of databases and the establishment of
regional cooperation networks, is particularly valuable.

Moreover, given its universality and its legitimacy,
the United Nations is in a position to encourage
international cooperation among States, particularly
with regard to the exchange of information and the
gathering of evidence. Country visits by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate are
excellent opportunities for conveying those messages.

Finally, the United Nations has the unique capacity
to bring together Member States, international
organizations, the private sector and civil society in one
place to discuss common problems, which is a real asset
for strengthening public-private cooperation. In that
regard, the Organization has a particular responsibility
and it is an irreplaceable asset because of its legitimacy
in the fight against terrorism, which affects us all.

I once again thank the Spanish presidency for this
very thorough and important debate. Rest assured that
France will continue to play its full part in efforts to
strengthen international judicial and police cooperation
in the fight against terrorism.

