Mr. Barry (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
Following the appeal and statement by my brother
Abdoulaye Diop, who just described the ongoing
situation in our region to the Security Council, I would
like, in my national capacity, to tell members that, at
this very moment, in one of the provinces of Burkina
Faso on the border with Mali, more than 2,000 school
children are unable to go to school They were not able
to return to school in early October, unlike children
in other regions, because of the terrorist attacks and
threats of attacks on their schools and villages. Some of
them have fled their villages with their parents to seek
refuge elsewhere. Others have stayed, but they no longer
have teachers, because the latter have also abandoned
their jobs. Like other Government employees, those
teachers live in a state of paranoia caused by the fear
of seeing terrorists arrive, as occurred last March in
one such village, where one of their colleagues was
gunned down in front of schoolchildren during recess.
Unfortunately, yet another was killed a few days ago by
unidentified assailants.

The threats are real. Schools, prefectures and
town halls are being set on fire. Mayors and municipal
officials are being kidnapped and killed. The entire
administration in the strip bordering our neighbour, the
brotherly country of Mali, has been affected. Symbols
of the State are under attack by people whose aim is to
wipe out the public administration and take control of
the area, which would give those terrorist groups free
reign to traffick as they please in whatever can pay for
their activities, including weapons, drugs, cigarettes,
human beings or even cattle. Accordingly, they attack
everything, including military camps, convoys of all
kinds, and gendarme, police and customs installations.
They have also carried out kidnappings and placed
anti-personnel mines.

Over the past 18 months, Burkina Faso has suffered
more than 80 terrorist attacks, including two attacks
in the capital of Ouagadougou, namely, an attack on
the Cappuccino restaurant in January 2016 and another
on the Aziz Istanbul cafe in August. I would like to
take this opportunity once again to thank the members
of the Security Council who gathered at the scene
of the attack of 13 August and showed their support
for the staff of the Cappuccino restaurant. In total,
those attacks led to the deaths of 133 people, many
of whom were foreigners who were fellow citizens of
member countries of the Council, thereby confirming
that the security challenge facing us is a shared and
international one.

Eradicating the terrorist threat in Burkina and in
every one of our countries also means safeguarding
other countries, including the countries of members
of the Council, and protecting our citizens and theirs.
During their mission, Council members were able to see
for themselves on the ground the determination of our
Governments and the increased capacities of the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5). It is not
yellow, orange or red alerts that will effectively protect
their or our fellow citizens against such barbarians,
but rather true cooperation among us and real support
from the Security Council for our actions, such as
those provided within the framework of the G-5 Sahel.
Protecting Burkina Faso is synonymous with protecting
the other countries of West Africa - those in the north
and those in the south of the region, including Cote
d'Ivoire, Ghana, Togo and Benin, to name only those
sharing a border with Burkina.

Terrorist groups seeking territories to control must
not be allowed to gain the least bit of ground on any
of our borders or in any of our territories, because the
countries that I mentioned that are further south are on
average situated 500 kilometres away and consequently
not that far from the northern front. The threat is
therefore hardly remote for every one of those countries,
and for every one of the countries represented here.

Investigators have found evidence linking the
attacks on Grand-Bassam in Cote d'Ivoire and those on
Ouagadougou with terrorist groups based in Burkina,
Mali and in the Niger, as those attacking our borders
flee towards Mali and the Niger - or conversely they
attack in Mali and flee towards Burkina. All of us
must accept that the Malian crisis is spilling over that
country's borders. Burkina therefore firmly calls for a
regional solution to the crisis. That is the raison d'etre
of G-5 Sahel in its current phase with regard to the
burgeoning deployment of the Joint Force.

As my brother Abdoulaye Diop recalled earlier,
the Force positively complements the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali. While the United Nations Force takes care of
the interior of Mali, the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel
can assume responsibility for the border regions and
neighbouring countries. We accordingly welcome
the report of Secretary-General Antonio Guterres
(S/2017/869), in particular the options proposed to
support the G-5 Sahel. That report is a great step
forward for the G-5 Sahel because it considers the
regional dimension ofthe Malian crisis and the security
challenges of the area.
For its part, Burkina is not only participating to
the best of its ability with the means at its disposal, but
is also acting in cooperation with some of the States
represented here - and I take this opportunity to thank
them - to protect our borders and our territory. Our
defence and security forces are engaged in a fierce
combat with the few means at their disposal. They are
operating while respecting human rights, the rights of
the people and the rights of the 32,000 Malians who
have sought refuge on our soil.

In the same vein, the Government has launched
an emergency programme for the Sahel involving the
region bordering Mali and the Niger, because combating
terrorism must be accompanied by development
activities in the region. With a total of $750 million
for four years, including $135 million for 2017, that
programme is aimed at improving the living conditions
of the people of the area and at redressing inequalities
with regard to the rest of the country's population.
The emergency programme, which is currently funded
from our own resources, covers basic social services,
infrastructure, and income-generating production and
processing activities for the people, almost exclusively
farmers and breeders. The goal of the Government is
to ensure that those people do not feel abandoned by
the State, that they do not resort to trafficking, and that
they do not become easy prey for the terrorists, who
dream of enlisting all the young people of the region.
To that end we must act quickly so as not to fall straight
into a vicious cycle that could be summed up in one
sentence: without security, there is no development;
without development, there is no security.

We call for the mobilization and support of the
Council in the form of multilateral support, bilateral
support or both during the G-5 Sahel donor conference
scheduled for 14 December in Brussels. More than
ever, Burkina Faso is counting on the Council. More
than ever, the G-5 Sahel is counting on the Council. As
I have said, we must act quickly. Since the Council's
visit last week there has been another attack. There
has been another death. That is why I will repeat once
more: we must act quickly.

