Mrs. Rodriguez Camejo (spoke in Spanish):
Seventy years after the General Assembly decided
to partition Palestine and laid the foundations for the
creation of the State of Israel, the State of Palestine
has yet to attain independence and the rights of the
Palestinian people continue to be violated. Until the
Palestine question is resolved in every aspect, the United
Nations and its organs, including the Security Council,
will have a historical and permanent responsibility to
assist the Palestinian people in achieving peace and a
dignified life through the exercise of their inalienable
rights, including the right to self-determination and
national independence, as well as the rights ofrefugees.

The members of the Security Council have
repeatedly stressed that the current status quo is
unsustainable. After his visit to Israel and Palestine,
the Secretary-General warned that we should not allow
today's stagnating peace process to lead to tomorrow's
escalation. At a time when the 50-year-long occupation is
gradually, if not immediately, becoming an annexation,
it is increasingly evident that the status quo is far from
static. Rather, we are witnessing a steadily deteriorating
situation on the ground along with the systematic
dispossession of the Palestinian people, crushing any
hope for them of achieving freedom, equal rights and
ajust peace. The ongoing Israeli settlement campaign,
which the Council has denounced as illegal, is proof of
the growing trend towards displacement. Last month,
Israel announced plans to evacuate Susiya and Khan
Al-Ahmar in Area C of the West Bank, communities
living on lands that are supposedly intended for
settlement expansion. In addition, in August the Israeli
authorities issued a military order creating a public
administration in Hebron that strengthens the situation
of settlers there. The Israeli group Peace Now has
warned that the order formalizes the apartheid system
in that city.

At its September conference the Israeli National
Union faction announced a bold plan providing for the
annexation ofoccupiedterritory, displacing Palestinians
and stripping them of their inalienable rights if they
are not willing to give them up. Such extremist plans
are continuously compounded by the provocative and
inflammatory rhetoric of the Israeli Government and
military officials, including the Prime Minister himself.
The Committee reiterates the Council's repeated calls
on both parties to refrain from provocative actions,
incitement and inflammatory rhetoric.

The Council cannot ignore these dangerous
developments. Moreover, we are not doomed to collective
failure; there is a way out of the conundrum. There is
a consensus that Israeli settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, not only
violate international law, but also dangerously imperil
the viability of the two-State solution. Resolution 2334
(2016) provides Member States with the tools to reverse
the negative trends on the ground, salvage the two-State
solution and, in accordance with the mandate entrusted

to the Council in the Charter of the United Nations,
advance the cause of peace and security.

The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights ofthe Palestinian People stands ready to support
the Council in its efforts to consider practical ways and
means to secure full compliance with the resolution.
In addition, with regard to the recommendations
contained in its 2017 annual report to the General
Assembly (A/72/35), the Committee reiterates its
request to the Secretary-General to present reports on its
implementation in written format, including proposals
on measures to ensure accountability for settlement
activities and other violations of international law.

The Committee welcomes the necessary political
will demonstrated by all parties to facilitate Palestinian
reconciliation and create conditions favourable for
the effective functioning of a Palestinian Government
of national consensus. Let me acknowledge the
constructive role played by Egypt toward this end. The
Committee offers its support to all efforts to advance
intra-Palestinian unity and reiterates its demand for
ending the unlawful lO-year Israeli blockade on the
Gaza Strip. It also welcomes ongoing diplomatic efforts
towards the achievement of the two-State solution,
including by China, the Russian Federation, the United
States and Arab countries, among others.

To support the Palestinian State-building process,
the Committee will continue to expand its capacity-
building programme by, inter alia, sponsoring a
Palestinian official in a training course on multilateral
environmental negotiations, to be held in France,
and three other officials on United Nations catalytic
support to South-South and triangular cooperation in
implementing the 2030 Agenda, to be held in Germany.

Last month, the gathering of world leaders in New
York for the annual general debate testified to faith in
multilateralism and a rules-based international order as
the only path to address threats to international peace
and security.

If we wish to restore hope and make a difference in
the lives of ordinary people; if we want to put conflict
prevention and resolution at the centre of United
Nations reform and if we seek to build sustainable
peace in the Middle East, urgent action is required
from the Council. In this spirit, the Committee calls on
everyone to redouble efforts towards the achievement
of the two-State solution based on the 1967 borders
and in accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Quartet road map.

