Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank the High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ambassador Valentin
Inzko, for his briefing and his detailed report
(S/2015/300, annex) for the period 21 October
2014 to 21 April 2015. I also welcome the presence ofthe
Permanent Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina
in the Council today.

Spain is a friend and partner of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Not only do we have strong links at
the political level, but we have also enjoyed a steady
closeness between our citizens during the difficult
years of the conflict. We have seen a deepening of
those relations since then. For that reason, this meeting
is particularly important for Spain, because this is
our first opportunity to take part in a debate on this
issue since our country has been seated in the Security
Council.

I would like to reiterate Spain's support for the
work of the Office of the High Representative. Along
with the countries and international bodies on the
Peace Implementation Council for the Dayton Peace
Accords, my country hopes that the 5+2 agenda can be
carried out as soon as possible. We therefore call upon
the various stakeholders to work together to that end.
Until that happens, however, the High Representative's
work will continue to be necessary.

In a few months we will commemorate the
twentieth anniversary of the Dayton Peace Accords,
which established the basis for peace and stability
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and for making progress
at the political and socioeconomic levels in the
country - and, by extension, the entire region. I would
like to emphasize the importance of that, as well to
reiterate the the call upon all political actors in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to use the Accords to create greater
stability in the country, to ensure its full functionality
and to move towards the prosperity that we all desire.

In that context, I also wish to reiterate Spain's
support for the sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina as enshrined
in the Dayton Accords. Along with cooperation and
constructive relations with its neighbours, as well as
fulfilling the conditions and respecting communal
heritage, those principles are the only way to make
progress in the country's European integration process.

Spain fully aligns itself with the statement to be
made later by the observer of the European Union.
Along with other European Union partners, we welcome
the pending entry into force of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement. With that momentum, the
European Union is once again resolutely demonstrating
its readiness to help Bosnia and Herzegovina and ensure
its European future.

In parallel, the written commitment adopted by the
tripartite Presidency, which was subsequently signed
on to by the leaders of the political parties and endorsed
by the Parliament, is a formal basis for the way ahead
for all of the institutions and representatives of the
citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is our hope
that they will continue making progress on the path of
reforms, including those set out in the plan for growth
and employment as well those of a constitutional nature
having to do with the functioning of State institutions.
We are on the right path, but there is still a way to go.

Spain once again joins others in calling on the
political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to continue
their steady progress along the path of reform in
accordance with the commitments made. In that regard,
it is very important to establish an effective coordination
mechanism. As seen today, the circumstances call
for that, and they should be taken advantage of. In
particular, the recent establishment of the various
levels of Government following the October elections is
good news. We must now take advantage ofthe existing
momentum to deliver on the legitimate responsibilities
incumbent upon them following the elections.

I conclude by stating that the elections now
call for not only legitimacy, but above all rigour and
responsibility. The people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
have made clear their desire for progress. They have
made their voices heard. It is now necessary to listen
and to act accordingly without delay.

