Mr. Koenders (spoke in French): It is a great
pleasure and an honour for me to address the Security
Council today. The third report of the Secretary-General
on the situation in Mali, which is before the Council
(S/2014/1), follows up on resolution 2100 (2013), of
25 April 2013, which established the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). Today, I wish to give members an
overview of the political and security situation in Mali,
the progress made since my briefing last October (see S/PV.7043) and the challenges that lie ahead.

At the outset, allow me to convey to you,
Mr. President, and to members of the Council my best
wishes for the new year. I also take this opportunity to
welcome the new members of the Security Council and
to wish them every success in their deliberations.

The year that has just ended was decisive for
the Malian people. Despite the challenges, they
demonstrated their will and determination to move
forward after the serious and multifaceted crisis that
the country experienced in 2012. In that way, it was
possible to organize free and transparent presidential
and legislative elections throughout the country,
enabling Mali to reaffirm its territorial integrity and a
return to constitutional order. The country's President,
His Excellency Mr. Boubacar Keita, clearly set out the
priorities for the stabilization and economic rebuilding
of the country. In that regard, he gave priority to
national reconciliation, the fight against impunity and
corruption, security sector reform and the strengthening
of institutional capacities and development, in particular
in the northern regions.

In the coming months, therefore, Mali will have
to take advantate of this unique opportunity, with the
support of the international community, in order to
tackle the complex root causes of the multiple crises
that the country has experienced. It must lay down a
lasting basis for peace and reconciliation and again
become a stable partner for guaranteed regional
security. That requires that the inclusive talks with
the communities of the north and the signatories to
the preliminary agreement begin without further
delay; that the road map and a framework agreement
that includes the United Nations and the international
community be established; that the State re-establish
itself and that basic services operate again across the
country; and that security sector reform and the process
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration take
place. All those aspects are very closely linked and
require the sustained attention of the Security Council.
Progress on each of those elements is necessary in
order to succeed in a regional context that remains, I
have to say, fragile and perilous. The time has come
to make headway on that composite agenda, given that
delays could jeopardize the achievements that have
been realized.

With respect to the implementation of the
preliminary agreement of 18 June 2013, some
confidence-building measures have already been
initiated to bring about reconciliation. On the one
hand, the Government organized a series of inclusive
consultations, such as the States-General on the
decentralization and the national conferences on the
north. Regional conferences were also conducted
in Gao. Key steps on the reinstatement of national
sovereignty were taken, in particular the exchange of
prisoners and the vacating of the governorate building
and the radio station in Kidal, which was accepted by
the signatory parties of the preliminary agreement.

We would also welcome the progress made by the
Monitoring and Evaluation Committee and the Mixed
Technical Commission on Security in implementing
the provisions of the preliminary agreement. However,
with the elapse of the 60-day time frame before the
start of inclusive talks, it is important that signatory
parties to the agreement come to terms as quickly as
possible on the principles, the conditions and the format
of a process of inclusive talks that would allow for all
the political and security aspects to be addressed, as
provided for by article 21 of the preliminary agreement
and paragraph 4 of resolution 2100 (2013). In the
same context, the cantonment process should be sped
up in order to get a genuine process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) and security
sector reform (SSR) under way.

MINUSMA is currently establishing a coordination
group to support all those processes and their planning
and to guarantee the consistency and coordination
of the contributions of international partners in the
framework of supporting the processes of cantonment,
DDR and SSR in Mali. In more general terms, we would
urge the Government to set up as quickly as possible a
cooperation framework in line with the provisions of
resolution 2100 (2013) and the preliminary agreement in
order to support dialogue and negotiations. MINUSMA,
together with the international community, will help
the Government along those lines.

Despite the considerable efforts undertaken by
Mali and MINUSMA in the areas of defence and
security, which have allowed for a gradual return
of the Administration and certain populations in
the north, I would nevertheless underscore that the
security situation remains volatile. The difficulty of
the situation should not be underestimated. We firmly
condemn the resurgence of terrorist attacks. We would
recall that such attacks, perpetrated mainly in the Kidal
region, led to several deaths and injuries among the
civilian population and the Malian army. In addition,
four peacekeepers and two French journalists lost
their lives there. We reiterate our condolences to the
bereaved families, and in particular to the Governments
of Senegal and Chad, which are the troop-contributing
countries concerned.

The terrorist threat has always been at the core of
our concerns. An upsurge in terrorist activities confirms
those concerns, which we have consistently shared with
the Security Council. An effective stabilization of the
northern regions requires cooperation both politically
and on the security front, with the contribution of
MINUSMA and the national and international partners
involved.

(spoke in English)

MINUSMA presently counts with 5,488 military
personnel out of the projected 11,200, 71 individual
police officers out of the projected 320, and 883
formed police unit elements out of the projected
1,120. The security challenges and the expectations of
the population are enormous. It is therefore essential
that the international community continue to back
without delay efforts to accelerate the generation and
deployment of the remaining MINUSMA units in the
north of the country. The Security Council's support
and that of the Member States to secure the necessary
enablers and force multipliers in a timely fashion is
promising and remains essential as we carry out the
strong mandate the Council has entrusted us with to
contribute to a secure environment for the people of
Mali.

Considerable progress has been made on the
humanitarian front, and we would like to commend
the leadership and efforts of the Government of Mali
in strengthening its capacity to support humanitarian
operations. More than 145,000 children have been able
to return to reopened schools in Gao and Timbuktu.
Many local health-care centres in the northern regions
have been rehabilitated, more than 1 million people
have benefitted from access to drinking water and
more than 217,000 acutely malnourished children have
benefitted from life-saving care programmes provided
by the Malian Government and humanitarian actors.

Yet it is important to underline that very significant
and daunting challenges remain for 2014. Almost half
a million people remain displaced within Mali and in
neighbouring countries, and at least 800,000 people
are in need of immediate food assistance. Another
2.4 million people remain moderately food insecure,
and their situation is at risk of worsening during the
upcoming lean season. To date, the 2013 consolidated
appeal for Mali has received only 55 per cent of the
amount required. I mention that because we simply
must do better in 2014, as the severe situation also has a
direct impact on the chances for peace in Mali.

Let us not forget that during the crisis, families
in the south provided shelter to countless relatives
from the north who were fleeing the conflict. While
we focus our efforts on supporting the Government
in addressing immediate challenges in the north, it is
important to bear in mind that the crisis has affected all
Malians, including those living in the southern part of
the country, and they should be supported accordingly.

As the country gradually moves towards
greater institutional stability and in spite of the
security challenges, the Government should quickly
implement the priorities defined by President Keita.
The international community stands ready to lend its
support. For its part, MINUSMA will continue to carry
out important work in the areas of human rights and
other protection activities, including combating sexual
violence. Those tasks constitute a centrepiece of the
overall mandate to protect civilians that the Security
Council has given us.

Meanwhile, it is imperative for the Malian authorities
and the international community to fulfil the mutual
commitments undertaken during the high-level donors
conference for the development of Mali held in Brussels
on 15 May 2013, which were reiterated in Bamako
on 7 November. The follow-up donors conference
planned to take place next month in Brussels will be
an important milestone for Mali. We must ensure that
the international community fulfils its pledges. At the
same time, it is obviously not about providing a blank
check. The crisis that Mali encountered in 2012 was too
serious for us all to continue to do business as usual.

We need greater alignment of foreign aid with
Malian priorities in the context of even stronger Malian
leadership, and it should be relatedto the start of inclusive
talks. That could be done by defining a framework of
mutual accountability, mutual responsibility, enhanced
transparency and collective commitment to results.
People in both the south and north of the country
need to feel that things are changing and see a peace
dividend and visible improvements in their daily lives,
such as education for their children, greater access to
health care, water and electricity.

To date, MINUSMA has approved 13 quick-impact
projects in Kidal, Gao and Timbuktu, for a total amount
of more than half a million dollars. We have also
initiated a number of projects with the Trust Fund for
Peace and Security in Mali, including the electrification
of Kidal and the cantonment of armed group elements.
The needs are great and the resources limited. I am
extremely thankful for the continuing support of the
international community in that respect.

The challenges facing the Sahel region are
numerous and cannot be tackled in isolation. The joint
regional visit by the Secretary-General, the African
Union Chairperson, the European Union Commissioner
for Development and Presidents of the World Bank
Group and the African Development Bank in early
November was a positive step in that direction. The
5 November 2013 meeting hosted by the Government
of Mali provided an opportunity to hear the concerns
and priorities of the countries of the region themselves
and enhance coordination, which is also necessary,
among regional and international partners, including
the international financial institutions.

The journey to stability is long and at times
difficult. I have been in Mali now for six months and,
everywhere I turn, I am reminded of the rich cultural
history of its people. I can confidently say that there
are no obstacles that the Malians cannot overcome.
However, it requires patience and strong determination.

Mali is at a crossroads, and the international
community should continue to actively support
ongoing national efforts to steer the country in the right
direction and avoid relapsing into the old habits that
gave rise to the unprecedented crisis over a year ago.
In that sense, the real work in Mali is only just starting.
That work remains fraught with risks and takes place in
a volatile regional setting.

I would like to thank the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States, the
European Union and other international partners for
their commitment to addressing the Malian situation
and for their support to MINUSMA. Our common
efforts can make an important difference.

