Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Let me
begin by thanking the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2013/l33) and for his comprehensive presentation
to the Council this morning. I also wish to thank his
Special Representative, Mr. Jan Kubis, for his work
as Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). We welcome the commitment
and dedication of UNAMA's staff, who, in demanding
conditions, perform crucial work competently. Lastly,
I would like to thank Ambassador Tanin for his very
illuminating presentation on the priorities of his
country.

Luxembourg associates itself with the statement to
be made on behalf of the European Union by its Special
Representative for Afghanistan.

I shall address three points, namely, the commitment
of the international community, the key role of the
Afghan authorities and, finally, the protection of human
rights in Afghanistan.

In renewing UNAMA's mandate today, we rightly
acknowledge the long-term support of the international
community for Afghanistan. The planned withdrawal of
international troops by the end of2014 should not lead to
a withdrawal of the international community. Instead,
we must move towards a renewal of our commitment
to help Afghanistan achieve its transformation into
a stable and democratic society. The international
community must stand with Afghanistan during that
critical period. Luxembourg has chosen to do just that
by adopting a holistic approach that combines the tools
of diplomacy, development and defence.

In the area of development cooperation, we
particularly support the work of the World Food
Programme in Afghanistan. Based on a multi-year
commitment, we also contribute to the Afghanistan
reconstruction funds administered by the World Bank.
We also contribute in the European context. The
European Union and its member States annually grant
Afghanistan more than €1 billion in development aid.

Luxembourg has participated in the International
Security Assistance Force since 2003. We committed
ourselves at the NATO Chicago Summit to continue our
substantial contribution to the financing of the Afghan
National Security Forces, with an annual contribution
of up to $5 million. Lastly, through the European
Union, my country also participates in the training of
the Afghan police.

The substantial assistance from the international
community will bear fruit only if there is a shared
commitment to implement the commitments made
at the successive international conferences of recent
years. In parallel, Afghanistan must continue its efforts
in the areas of the rule oflaw, democratic elections, the
fight against corruption, combating drug trafficking,
and respect for human rights.

That brings me to the second point. Whatever

may be the extent of the support of the international

community, the genuine key to success is ultimately in
the hands of the Afghans themselves. Their political
will will be crucial. That is why we fully support the
goal of transition so as to enable the Afghan people to
take charge of their own destiny gradually by assuming
responsibility for security and reconstruction. Pride of
place in that ownership effort must go to the electoral
process and the process of reconciliation, both led by
Afghans.

With regard to the preparations for the elections,
we join the Secretary-General's call in his report urging
the parties concerned to adopt a constructive attitude in
order to avoid a deadlock, whose consequences would be
severe. More generally, as noted by several speakers this
morning, it is important to ensure broad participation
and to put in place a credible and transparent electoral
mechanism, so as to ensure that the outcome of the
elections is widely acknowledged and accepted by the
population. In that regard, it is essential that women can
safely participate as voters and candidates alike in the
upcoming elecctions.

In terms of national reconciliation, we support the
initiatives of the High Peace Council, and we welcome
the regional dimension that efforts at reconciliation
have taken on in recent months.

Human rights is the third, and final, point I would
like to address. Let us not forget that Afghanistan is
first and foremost a country of more than 30 million
people who yearn for a normal life for themselves and
their families, including respect of their fundamental
rights. In that context, we welcome the important place
that is made in the mandate of UNAMA for human
rights in general, and for the rights of women and
children in particular.

With regard to the rights of children, we are very
concerned about the continued recruitment and use of
children by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremist
groups, inter alia, to commit suicide attacks. We are
also concerned by the violations and other serious
abuses against children, in particular the continuation
of attacks against schools.

In contrast, we would like to acknowledge the efforts
of the Afghan Government in the implementation of the
action plan against the recruitment and use of children
in the Afghan National Security Forces, signed on
30 January 2011. It is important that UNAMA continue
to effectively support the Afghan authorities in the
implementation of that plan, and that it devote the
capabilities and expertise required by the Council to
that end. Along the same lines, we welcome the appeal
to the Secretary-General that he continue to give special
treatment to the matter of children in armed conflict in
his reports to the Council, in line with the pertinent
resolutions. Indeed, that is an essential element in the
Council's ability to support and follow up the activities
in the area of protecting children.

In conclusion, Luxembourg would like to reiterate
its full support for the mandate of UNAMA, which we
have just renewed today. It is an ambitious mandate,
one that will serve the Afghan people and testify to the
will of the international community to stand beside the
Afghan people.

