Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We express our heartfelt condolences to
Ambassador Vassily Nebenzia for the loss of life of
Russian servicemen yesterday. We also extend those
condolences to his Government and the families of
the victims.

We must be aware that the situation in Idlib, and in
Syria in general, requires strong diplomatic capacity at
the highest level to stop the massacre and objectively
manage the flow of displaced persons. That is why,
despite the very confrontational positions expressed
at the Tehran summit, the Government of Equatorial
Guinea welcomes the signing of the memorandum
on the stabilization of the Idlib de-escalation zone,
which was agreed yesterday in Sochi by President
Putin and President Erdogan. That memorandum is
aimed at rejecting a large-scale military offensive,
which we have been anticipating since the beginning
of September owing to the intensification of air and
land attacks, which have led to dozens of deaths,
injuries and displacements, as well as the destruction
of civilian infrastructure. As the signatories pointed
out, that Russian-Turkish agreement seeks to create a
demilitarized zone in Idlib patrolled by soldiers of both
countries by 15 October and should make it possible
to separate the Government forces from the opposition
forces, to withdraw heavy weapons starting on
10 October and to re-establish road transport between
Aleppo and the towns of Latakia and Hama before the
end of 2018. All that means that the Russian-Turkish
talks must prevent the Syrian army from carrying out a
major military offensive, which would lead to the loss
of many civilian lives in Idlib.

We congratulate the Governments of the Russian
Federation and Turkey for that noble diplomatic effort,
and the Syrian Government for having supported that
agreement and stated that it is prepared to implement
its provisions.

That decision, which should be aimed at strengthening
the ceasefire, improving the humanitarian situation
and seeking a long-term political solution to the
conflict, is perfectly in line with the mandate and
work of the international mediator for Syria, Special
Envoy De Mistura. We would like to thank him for
his tireless work, which hled to the Sochi agreement.
My Government hopes that the meetings held by
Mr. De Mistura with representatives of 10 countries
of the International Syria Contact Group on 10, 11 and
14 September in Geneva will finally lead to the creation
of an intra-Syrian constitutional committee and that the
guarantors of Astana will not present any impediment
to the constitutional proposal put forward by Mr. De
Mistura. That proposal is essential for the holding
of elections in the post-war period with a view to
legitimizing a political process in which all the political
actors of the country must participate.

The fact that the Syrian conflict will not end with
this battle justifies the need to prioritize a political
solution in Idlib. The Islamic State continues to
maintain a small redoubt on the border with Iraq, and
a large part of the country's territory remains beyond
the Government's reach, especially in the north and
east, areas which are in the hands of Kurdish militia.
Moreover, armed groups that manage to escape Idlib
could still find refuge north of Aleppo. Therefore, as
we have said before, civilians must not be made to
suffer from a scorched earth policy.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, as has
been stressed, 2 million people in Idlib are in a vulnerable
situation and require humanitarian assistance. In
that context, a major attack could be more lethal and
destructive than any other that has been launched
during this conflict, which has already claimed the
lives of more than 500,000 people since 2011.

Despite that difficult operational environment, my
delegation is pleased that the United Nations and its
partners are continuing to deliver regular humanitarian
assistance to Idlib from across the border in Turkey.
Furthermore, under such challenging circumstances,
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners must
not lose sight of the need for cross-border assistance to
be prioritized so that humanitarian assistance can be
delivered efficiently and effectively.

I would like to conclude by reiterating once again
the need for all parties to the conflict to exercise
restraint and respect their obligations under human
rights law and humanitarian law to safeguard civilian
lives and protect civilian infrastructure, as well as
United Nations personnel and humanitarian actors, in
accordance with resolution 2139 (2014).

