Mr. Salgueiro (Portugal): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
candidate countries Croatia, Turkey and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Serbia, as well as the Republic of Moldova, align
themselves with this declaration.

I will base my statement on the conclusions
drawn from the meeting of the Council of Ministers of
the European Union held on 10 December of this year.

The EU is deeply concerned with the situation in
Somalia. We believe that it poses a significant threat to
peace and security in the Horn of Africa and beyond. It
also causes immense suffering to the people of
Somalia. The EU therefore calls for urgent efforts by
all parties towards an inclusive political process and
reiterates its commitment to a comprehensive approach
to the Somali crisis, covering the political, security and
humanitarian facets.

The European Union welcomes the appointment
of the new Prime Minister, Mr. Nur Hassan Hussein,
and encourages him to invite all political forces, inside
and outside Somalia, that renounce violence and accept
the Transitional Federal Charter as the framework for
restoring peace and stability in the country, to an
inclusive political process.

The EU is willing to consider a significant
contribution for the transitional period, on the basis of

a mutual understanding between the EU and the
Transitional Federal Government on progress to be
made in the political process. Indeed, the Transitional
Federal Institutions have the primary responsibility to
implement the outcome of the National Reconciliation
Congress, as endorsed by the Transitional Federal
Parliament, and to establish a road map for actions
until the end of the transitional period. This includes
the preparation for a constitutional referendum and
elections by 2009 as set out in the Transitional Federal
Charter.

The European Union condemns all acts of
violence and calls on all parties to cease hostilities and
engage in a ceasefire, confidence-building and security
arrangements in the search for sustainable peace. The
EU urges the Transitional Federal Institutions, Ethiopia
and all other actors in Somalia to ensure humanitarian
access, to respect human rights and international
humanitarian law, to protect the civilian population and
to facilitate the secure and early return of displaced
persons to Mogadishu and other areas of origin.

The European Community Humanitarian Aid
Department has provided some €18 million to Somalia
this year, plus support to refugees in Kenya and
Yemen. The EU remains committed to enhancing
humanitarian assistance, provided there is unimpeded
humanitarian access and respect for the integrity of
humanitarian assistance.

Peace cannot be built on impunity. The EU
therefore calls on the Transitional Federal Government
to investigate all human rights abuses committed in
Somalia and bring those responsible to justice. In this
regard, we encourage the United Nations to use all
available instruments to improve monitoring of the
human rights situation in the country.

The African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) is at present the only available option to
facilitate the withdrawal of foreign and regional forces
from Somalia. The European Union expresses its
support for AMISOM, particularly recognizing the
contribution that Uganda has made, and reiterates the
need to strengthen AMISOM, including through
identifying substantial new financial support. The
European Commission, through the African Peace
Facility and the Instrument for Stability is channelling
€15 million for direct financing of AMISOM. and €5
million for African Union planning capacities for that
Mission. Some EU member States have also provided
financial contributions for AMISOM. The EU is
committed to make further contributions to the African
Union, on the basis of a comprehensive political and
needs assessment, as well as to provide bilateral
contributions to African Union member States
deploying to AMISOM, and we call on other donors to
contribute as well.

The EU also encourages the United Nations to
provide more support to AMISOM. in accordance with
resolution 1772 (2007) of the Security Council and to
move forward with contingency planning for a possible
peacekeeping operation in Somalia.

The European Union expresses its full support for
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ould Abdallah, and to his leadership role in
coordinating efforts of the international community.
His readiness to draw up an international action plan,
and in particular to frame international support to the
transitional process and establish a strategic framework
for security sector support to Somalia, has been greatly
appreciated. The EU is ready to support deliberation
and implementation of this plan.

The EU recognizes the increasing danger posed
by acts of piracy off the Somali coast and will study
possible ways to respond to the problem, together with
the Somali authorities and the international community.
We welcome the French initiative to provide military
accompaniment to vessels chartered by the World Food
Programme (WFP) delivering aid to Somalia, while
stressing the need for international initiatives that can
continue to provide protection to the WFP beyond
January 2008.

Finally, we believe that a successful European
Union delivery and responsiveness in the Somali peace
process remains essential to support a comprehensive
political solution, which would bring long-term
stability to Somalia.

