The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.

First of all, we thank the Presidents, Judge Pocar
and Judge Mose, and the Prosecutors, Carla Del Ponte
and Hassan Jallow, for their reports and presentations
this morning. In particular, we congratulate President
Pocar on his election as the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), and I am sure that we will continue
the excellent cooperation that we have enjoyed with his
predecessor, Judge Meron.

Turning first of all to the ICTY and the question
of indictees and cooperation, it is, of course, excellent
news that Ante Gotovina has now been arrested, and
we welcome the participation of the Croatian
authorities and the swift action of the Spanish
authorities to transfer him to The Hague. As Prosecutor
Del Ponte noted this morning, this clearly illustrates
that a policy of robust conditionality works and that
where the fugitive indictees are located, the full
engagement of national authorities in the western
Balkans is critical for their arrest.

Full cooperation remains an ongoing obligation
for all States in the region, and we call on Serbia and
Montenegro and on Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
particular Republika Srpska, to follow Croatia's
example and to fulfil their responsibilities to the
international community, in accordance with
resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004).

In that respect, the swift arrest and transfer to The
Hague of all remaining outstanding fugitive indictees,
notably Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadzic, is
absolutely key. It is high time that this take place, as
this year is the tenth anniversary of the Srebrenica
massacre and the Dayton-Paris Accords.

Turning, secondly, to the progress of trials and
the functioning of the Tribunal, we are pleased to see
the increasing productivity of the ICTY, including its
caseload, judgements rendered and cases transferred to
Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. We welcome the
numerous capacity-building initiatives that ICTY
personnel have put in place to strengthen the local
judiciaries of the former Yugoslav countries.

We are grateful for the extensive efforts made by
all court organs to implement significant new practical
and legal measures to expedite proceedings. It is
important that the court achieve its mandate within the
time-frame and budget agreed. However, we have real
concerns regarding slippage in the 2008 deadline for
completion of trials and the risk of backlog on appeals
developing.

Turning, secondly, to the ICTR, we welcome the
news, confirmed this morning by Prosecutor Jallow,
that the court is still on course to complete all trials by
the end of 2008. The continued increase in throughput
of trials is encouraging. It underlines to the
international community that the ICTR is making good
progress. That the Tribunal is operating at full trial
capacity is testament to the hard work and dedication
of its staff.

It is encouraging that the completion strategy is at
the heart of the Tribunal's overall management.
Prudent steps, such as the use of redeployment to cover
projected staff increases in growth areas, will give
confidence to the donors.

Turning next to residuary issues, we note that the
workload of the Appeals Chamber is set to increase
dramatically in the near future. That will have a
significant impact on the Tribunal's closing date, and
we encourage the secretariats of ICTY and ICTR to
take steps now in order to plan for this and the other
residuary issues that will be faced by the Tribunals. We
are pleased that the Registrars and the United Nations
Office of Legal Affairs are taking the initiative in this
regard now.

Turning, finally, to cooperation by Member States
with respect to at-large indictees, Member States must
continue to support the ICTR in practical as well as
financial terms. In particular, States must meet their
obligations in arresting indictees at large, including
Felicien Kabuga, and transferring them to the court's
jurisdiction.

Finally, we recognize the efforts made to transfer
cases from the Tribunal to domestic jurisdictions and
steps taken in the area of national capacity-building.
Capacity-building is vital to ensure that the necessary
standards of fair trial, independence and full respect for
human rights are complied with in national trials.

1 now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I call first on those States invited under rule 37 to
take a seat at the Council table.

