The Secretary-General: I wish to thank the
Council for the opportunity to brief it this afternoon.
On our agenda is the issue of peace and security in
Africa. Before we discuss the deeply disturbing
situation in Libya, allow me to quickly update the
Council on developments elsewhere in Africa.

We are all gravely concerned about the
deteriorating security situation in Cote d'Ivoire, as the
Council has perhaps seen in my statement earlier today.
Clashes between security forces loyal to Mr. Gbagbo
and armed groups opposing them have resulted in
significant civilian fatalities in several areas of
Abidjan.

We are also receiving reports of renewed fighting
in the west of the country. Once again, I urge the
security forces loyal to Mr. Gbagbo to stop the
violence. The Government has a clear responsibility to
protect the civilian population. Its armed forces must
carry out those responsibilities professionally and
impartially. I repeat my call in my statement of Friday,
18 February, to Mr. Gbagbo's camp to end the ongoing
military mobilization, the attacks against the civilian
population and the obstruction of our peacekeeping
operation, the United Nations Operation in cote
d'Ivoire (UNOCI). I am very concerned that C6te
d'Ivoire is on the brink of sliding back into civil war.
Time is slipping away. If the African Union High-level
Panel does not move decisively to find a solution, all
of its work could be overtaken by events.

I note with special concern that Mr. Gbagbo's
forces continue to attack civilians and violate human
2

rights even as the Panel made its recent visit. I
understand that the Panel will meet again in
Nouakchott, Mauritania, in the coming days. The
Ivorian people and the international community are
counting on them to find a peaceful way out of the
CI'ISlS.

At the same time, UNOCI is striving to keep open
channels of communication with President Outtara's
Government and Mr. Gbagbo's camp alike. UNOCI
also continues to monitor and investigate human rights
violations and to conduct patrols to protect civilians.

As I have said before, Cote d'Ivoire is an
important test for democracy throughout Africa. More
than 20 elections are scheduled to be held throughout
the continent this year. As elsewhere, the region's
leaders must listen to their people. They must respect
fundamental human rights. When it comes to
democracy and free elections, the will of the people
must prevail.

We meet at a critical moment - potentially a
defining moment - for the Arab world. Fundamental
issues of peace and stability are at stake, most
immediately at this moment in Libya.

Since my Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Lynn Pascoe, briefed the Council earlier this
week (see S/PV.6486), there have been continuing
reports of violence and the indiscriminate use of force.
Estimates indicate that more than 1,000 people have
been killed. The eastern part of the country is reported
to be under the control of opposition elements, who
have taken over arms and ammunition from weapon
depots. There are daily clashes in at least three cities
near Tripoli. The streets of the capital are largely
deserted. People cannot leave their houses for fear of
being shot by Government forces or militias. Colonel
Al-Qadhafi's supporters are reportedly conducting
house-by-house searches and arrests. According to
some reports, they have even gone into hospitals to kill
wounded opponents.

Today, clashes broke out again, with high
casualties reported. In their public statements, Colonel
Al-Qadhafi and members of his family have continued
to threaten citizens with a civil war and the possibility
of mass killing if the protests continue. There are other
allegations of the killing of soldiers who refused to fire
upon their countrymen.
11-24388
Let us speak frankly: these accounts from the
press, human rights groups and civilians on the ground
raise grave concerns about the nature and scale of the
conflict. They include allegations of indiscriminate
killings, arbitrary arrests, the shooting of peaceful
demonstrators and the detention and torture of the
opposition and the use of foreign mercenaries. We are
also hearing reports of women and children being
among the victims, as well as reports of indiscriminate
attacks on foreigners believed to be mercenaries. We
know from the Red Crescent and the International
Committee of the Red Cross that there are dangerous
impediments to medical treatment and access for
humanitarian workers. We do not have conclusive
proof, but the reports appear to be credible and
consistent.

I strongly believe that the first obligation of the
international community is to do everything possible to
ensure the immediate protection of civilians at
demonstrable risk. Indeed, if further proof is required,
it should be sought simultaneously with measures to
afford protection.

Today, the Human Rights Council convened a
special session that was requested by nearly 50
Member States, both members and non-members of the
Council. It is the first time that a member of the
Human Rights Council is the subject of a special
session. I welcome the strong stand taken by the
Human Rights Council today to establish an
independent international committee of inquiry, and I
pledge my full support. I also note that the Human
Rights Council recommended that the General
Assembly consider suspending Libya from the Human
Rights Council.

In that regard, I would like to underscore the
statement of Ms. Pillay, High Commissioner for
Human Rights, to the Human Rights Council. She
reminded member States that, when a State manifestly
fails to protect its population from serious international
crimes, the international community has the
responsibility to step in and take protective action in a
collective, timely and decisive manner.

Let me also point out that there are also serious
indications of a growing crisis of refugees and
displaced persons. Staff of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
along the Tunisia-Libya border have reported a steady
flow of people fleeing the country since 22 February.
11-24388
Some 22,000 have fled through Tunisia, and a reported
15,000 through Egypt. However, they fear that much
larger numbers of residents and migrant workers are in
fact trapped and unable to leave for safety.

Many of those crossing the border have reported
to UNHCR officials that the journey was terrifying.
There are widespread reports of refugees being
harassed and threatened with guns and knives. It is
crucial for humanitarian agencies to have access to the
border regions. It is also important for the
neighbouring States, including Europe, to keep their
borders open to people fleeing Libya. We anticipate the
situation to worsen, as the World Food Programme is
concerned about Libya's food supplies.

We have seen strong statements from many
international leaders and international organizations,
among them the League of Arab States, the European
Union and the African Union. They have called for an
immediate end to the violence and condemned what
appeared to be gross violations of human rights. In my
conversations with the leaders of the region and the
world, and in my public and private statements, I have
spoken out bluntly and repeatedly. The violence must
stop. Those responsible for so brutally shedding the
blood of innocents must be punished. Fundamental
human rights must be respected.

My Special Advisers on the Prevention of
Genocide and the Responsibility to Protect have
reminded the national authorities in Libya, as well as in
other countries facing large-scale popular protests, that
the heads of State and Government at the 2005 World
Summit pledged to protect populations by preventing
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity, as well as their incitement. The
challenge for us now is how to provide real protection
and do all we can to halt the ongoing violence.

As the Council looks to its next steps, I urge it to
consider a wide range of options for action. Some of
the proposals being considered by the Council include
the imposition of trade and financial sanctions,
including targeted measures against the leadership,
such as a ban on travel and the freezing of financial
assets. Some Member States call for a comprehensive
arms embargo. Others draw our attention to the clear
and egregious violations of human rights taking place
in Libya and urge the Security Council to take effective
action to ensure real accountability.
3

It is time for the Security Council to consider
concrete action. The hours and days ahead will be
decisive for Libyans and their country, with equally
important implications for the wider region. The
statements and actions of the Security Council are
eagerly awaited and will be closely followed
throughout the region. Whatever its course, let us be
mindful of the urgency of the moment. In these
circumstances the loss of time means more loss of
lives. On Monday, I will travel to Washington to
discuss these and other matters with President Obama.

Allow me to touch on two other developments
regarding peace and security on the continent.

First, with respect to the situation in Darfur, the
African Union-United Nations Joint Chief Mediator
continues to engage the Government of the Sudan and
the two leading rebel factions - the Justice and
Equality Movement and the Liberation and Justice
Movement - in Doha. The parties are currently
reviewing a draft agreement. It is essential for the
international community to step up its engagement and
help the parties reach an inclusive and comprehensive
peace.

I am also concerned about continued hostilities
between the Government and the tactical alliance of
rebel groups in Northern Darfur, which has reportedly
displaced large numbers of civilians. The African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur is
dispatching patrols to verify those reports and has
increased its presence to protect civilians in the area, as
well as to provide water and food to those who have
been displaced.

Finally, I have been meeting today with President
Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea and President Ali Bongo Ondimba
of the Gabonese Republic. At our invitation, the two
leaders have come together at the United Nations in an
effort to resolve the long-standing border dispute
between the two countries. I am pleased to report that
the two leaders have reiterated their commitment to
submit the dispute to the International Court of Justice
and to make every effort to conclude the mediation as
soon as possible.

I want to underscore that they will have the full
support of the United Nations as they work together to
find a solution. This is an important demonstration of
statesmanship on both sides.

