Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank Ambassador Heraldo Munoz for
his enlightening briefing on the activities of the Al
Qaeda and Taliban sanctions Committee during the last
four months. As this is the Council's last meeting
devoted to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) before year's end, I would like
to express my sincere gratitude for the excellent work
done by Ambassador Mufioz at the head of the
Committee. His dedication deserves our warmest
congratulations, and I am pleased that the members of
the Council have unanimously acknowledged as much.
I would like to say that the skill with which
Ambassador Mufioz has guided the Committee does
not surprise us in the least, given what we know about
his tenure as Chile's ambassador to Brazil. My
delegation would also like to congratulate Mrs. Carla
Serrazi for her excellent work in support of the
Committee's activities. Lastly, I would like to thank the
Secretariat for its decisive contribution.

(spoke in English)

The Committee has gathered a considerable
amount of important information, mainly from sources
other than the direct processing of Member States'
reports. I am specifically referring to the reports and
recommendations submitted by the Monitoring Team,
the two illustrative briefings by Professor Rohan
Gunaratna and by INTERPOL Secretary General
Ronald Noble and the visits by the Chairman and the
Monitoring Team to several countries, covering every
region of the world. The adequate processing of all
those inputs should allow for a more thorough
understanding of the ongoing fight against Al Qaeda-
related terrorism and for the identification of the most
adequate mechanisms to proceed in that fight,
including the fine-tuning of sanctions when applicable.

The Monitoring Team is highly instrumental in
that regard. The increased capacity for analysis
provided by its assistance is an important contribution
to the work of the Committee. In general, the Team has
generated valuable recommendations focused on
specific issues and on detailed analysis of information.
Direct benefits from that able work are already evident,
namely, in the recently approved technical revision of
the list of entities and individuals under sanctions. We
commend the work that has been done.

I would like to focus my remarks on two main
points: the importance of the list of sanctioned entities
and individuals and the need for a comprehensive
approach to handling the question of combating
terrorism.

As pointed out by the Chairman in his
presentation, the list remains the Committee's most
important instrument of work. For that very reason, the
need to keep it updated and relevant cannot be
sufficiently stressed. As I have emphasized on previous
occasions when we have received briefings by the
Chairman, more clear and direct procedures for
handling alterations to the list are necessary, as is the
establishment of improved listing and delisting
procedures, both of which should be linked to the
assurance of due process for listed persons and entities.

We must react to the large amount of information
and recommendations amassed by the Chairman and by
the members of the Monitoring Team in their visits, so
as to assure Member States of the usefulness of
establishing direct contact with the Committee.

The Team's recommendations regarding the
improvement of the list should be heeded by the
Committee, and the presentation of further proposals in
this regard should be encouraged. By ensuring the
credibility of the list and the applicability of the
sanctions imposed, the Committee will be in a stronger
position to counter perceptions that the combating of
terrorism seems to be guided by "double standards".

The need for a multidimensional approach in
combating terrorism is my second topic. I will focus on
the need to better use existing mechanisms of
international cooperation in combating Al Qaeda-
related terrorism. As pointed out by many, the threat of
terrorism is often connected to other criminal
activities, such as money-laundering, the smuggling of
weapons and international drug trafficking. Existing
mechanisms for international cooperation in all of
these areas could further contribute to our common
effort. The presentation made by the Secretary General
of INTERPOL to the Committee was very illustrative
in this regard. Given the similarities between the travel
controls applied by INTERPOL on the basis of the lists
under their control and those sought by the Committee
as regards the travel ban, there seems to be ample
space for making use of the very efficient information-
sharing mechanisms of INTERPOL as regards the
application of sanctions.

If certain requirements are met, the incorporation
of the Committee's list into INTERPOL's database
would be feasible and could have the added benefit of
incorporating the element of due process in the list.
Besides INTERPOL, enhanced cooperation with other
effective international mechanisms could offer broad
possibilities of synergy and greatly improve the
efficiency and institutionalization of applying
sanctions. Cooperation with other terrorist issues-
related committees of the Security Council is another
promising area of interaction. We note here not only
the efforts already undertaken to promote greater
coordination with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and its Executive Directorate, as well as with the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), but also the fact that a further increase in such
cooperation is foreseen for the future work of the
Committee.

The importance of the contribution of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) in combating the terrorist threat is directly
related to the international community's perceptions of
its work. A genuine effort to incorporate the
recommendations put forward by States, by those
invited to brief the Committee and by the Monitoring
Team in the day-to-day work of the Committee is the
best way to ensure the greater effectiveness of
sanctions.

