Mr. Skinner-Klee (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): Mr. President, first of all I would like to
thank you for having organized this open debate, which
allows those countries that are not Council members to

put forward our views with regard to the dramatic
deterioration of the situation in the Middle East, which
is extremely dangerous for the security of the whole
region.

As have the majority of delegations that have
participated in this debate, the delegation of Guatemala
wishes to express its concern and regret at the
deepening crisis in the Middle East. My delegation
joins the statement made by the representative of
Malaysia on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.

Guatemala deplores the tragic death of innocent
civilians in the last few days due to the crisis between
Israel and Lebanon, and what has been happening in
the Gaza Strip since 25 June. We are concerned at the
grave situation and call on all parties to exercise
utmost moderation. We also stress the importance of
diplomatic and political measures and urge all parties
to carry out all possible efforts to solve the present
situation through peaceful means in order to put an end
to hostilities.

We urge the parties to respect international law at
all times, including international humanitarian law. We
remind them of their responsibility to protect the lives
of civilians and to refrain from attacking essential
civilian infrastructure. It is absolutely necessary to
re-establish electricity and water supplies and to ensure
unrestricted and continuous access to humanitarian
organizations, guaranteeing the safety of their staff, in
order to avoid a humanitarian crisis in the region,
especially in the Gaza Strip and in the south of
Lebanon.

My delegation condemns the arrest by Israel of
democratically elected authorities and other officials of
Palestine. At the same time, we condemn the
kidnapping and detention of an Israeli soldier by
Palestinian militants. The quick freeing of all of them
is an essential step to avoid a worsening of the
situation in the region. It is also essential for the
Government of the Palestinian Authority to adopt
effective and immediate measures to improve the
security and prevent terrorist attacks on Israel,
including the launching of missiles against its territory.

We reiterate our commitment to cooperate with
all the parties in seeking a broad, just and lasting peace
for the Middle East, based on compliance with
pertinent Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and
1515 (2003), as well as the agreements of the Madrid
Conference and the principle of land for peace. In
effect, Israel has the right to live in peace within secure
borders, as does Palestine.

Guatemala deplores and vehemently condemns
the confrontations provoked by Hizbollah in the border
area between Lebanon and Israel since 12 July, and the
launching of missiles against the Israeli civilian
population in that area. We are extremely alarmed at
the increase in tensions in that area, and so my
Government once again urges all parties to stop the
escalation of hostilities that would mark a new and
dangerous deterioration in the regional situation.

In that context, Guatemala urges the Government
of Lebanon to spare no effort to ensure that the two
Israeli soldiers captured by the Hizbollah militia are
unconditionally released as soon as possible. It also
urges the Government of Israel to withdraw as soon as
possible from Lebanese territory and to respect the
Blue Line in order to re-establish stability in the region
and guarantee the security of the civilian population.

Israel has every right to act in self-defence.
However, it should act with moderation and ensure that
its actions are proportionate and reasonable. Our
country is extremely concerned at the Israeli military
actions, in particular at the excessive use of force; the
destruction of civilian infrastructure, especially
airports, power grids, bridges and roads; attacks
against densely populated areas that endanger the lives
of innocent civilians; and the imposition of a sea, air
and land blockade against Lebanon. We urge that an
immediate end be put to such practices.

On the other hand, we demand also that
Hizbollah stop launching rockets into Israeli territory.
My delegation calls for an immediate end to the
hostilities and for the beginning of peace talks under
the auspices of the United Nations.

In that respect, we call once again for the
implementation, without further delay, of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolutions
425 (1978), 1559 (2004) and other, subsequent ones.

Guatemala welcomes and supports the Secretary-
General's initiative to send a high-level delegation to
contribute to defusing tension. It calls for respect for
international humanitarian law and for the protection of
civilians and civilian infrastructure, as well as for the
deployment of a multinational force in the area.

For all those reasons, we reiterate the call made
by the Non-Aligned Movement, as we believe that the
Security Council has the responsibility to prevent an
even greater polarization among all the parties
involved and to help them find alternatives to the
escalating violence. We view the work of the Council
as a complementary effort, in a spirit of convergence,
to those of other actors in the international community,
including the Secretary-General's measures. The
Council cannot abdicate its responsibility to protect
civilians or its competence in the area of the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Guatemala, as a nation that has suffered from
conflict and the resulting violence, calls for reason to
prevail, for the protection of human life and for the
safeguarding of human rights, with a view to putting an
end to all violence and intolerance, so as not to
condemn the region to a future of even greater violence
and suffering.

