Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President, I appreciate the active
initiatives you have been undertaking since your
election as President of the French Republic, as well as
your interest in discussing the issue of challenges to
peace and security in Africa, which is of interest to my
country for many reasons.

Among these reasons is the fact that 10 Arab
countries are located in Africa. Some of them, such as
the Sudan and Somalia, are facing daunting challenges
at the moment. Moreover, Islam is wide spread
throughout Africa. Furthermore, the predecessor of the
African Union, the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), whose charter was formulated in Addis Ababa
in 1964, was launched as an Arab-African initiative in
Casablanca in 1961.

Fifty years ago, in 1957, Mr. Harold Macmillan,
then Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, made a
famous remark about contemporary history when he
said, "The wind of change is blowing through this
continent". The wind of change was indeed blowing
through Africa when its countries began to gain their
independence. But the wind of change could become a
wind of destruction, when the continent's States
experienced the labour pains and difficulties of
independence, the challenges and ordeals of moving
forward with development, and the many other
problems that have afflicted the continent with
conflicts and disputes.

If we do not want to be unfair or harsh towards
Africa, we must seriously and frankly address the
problems that have hindered its progress and
development and have led to the current violence. The
civil wars and armed conflicts that have erupted have
sometimes attracted armies of mercenaries, which are a
source of great concern. That situation has caused one
of the world's richest continents to lag behind all
others, which itself is one of the real human tragedies
of our era.

Donor countries and the United Nations have not
hesitated to provide assistance to Africa. If such
assistance is to be effective, it must be given under two
conditions: the present of enlightened governance and
the existence of effective international will, guaranteed
by collective United Nations action. We do not believe

that we are being high-handed when we say that, in
order to effect real change, we must establish new
mechanisms for providing assistance to Africa so that it
will truly benefit Africa's peoples.

