Mr. Laurin (Canada): Canada is pleased to have
the opportunity to address the Security Council on
Afghanistan. We express our thanks to you,
Mr. President, for having convened this open debate.

Let me begin by congratulating Mr. Tom
Koenigs, the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and assuring him of our fullest
cooperation. We also take this opportunity to thank his
predecessor, Mr. Jean Arnault, and to congratulate him
on his singular achievements in Afghanistan.

Canada has made a clear commitment to the
emergence of a stable, secure, democratic and
prosperous Afghanistan. We are among the largest
contributors to Afghanistan's recovery and have been
since 11 September 2001. Our contributions have been
both human and financial, our support consistent and
steadfast. Our strong commitment to the future of
Afghanistan was highlighted by the visit by Prime
Minister Harper to Afghanistan earlier this week.
Indeed, Prime Minister Harper left Afghanistan only
this morning, after having spent two days there, during
which he met with President Karzai and senior
officials, as well as with Canadian troops, diplomats
and reconstruction workers. Prime Minister Harper's
meeting with President Karzai was his first meeting
with a head of State since taking office in January.

In the years since 2001, over 14,000 Canadian
forces personnel have been deployed in support of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and
Operation Enduring Freedom missions. With the most
recent deployment of 2,200 Canadian forces personnel,
Canada assumed command of coalition forces in
Kandahar and five surrounding southern provinces.
This is our second tour in Kandahar. We have always
deployed our soldiers where they were most needed.
Our engagement has not been without cost. Some
Canadians have lost their lives, and others have been
injured. We understand what is at stake and are
prepared to do our part, including in the more difficult
regions of Afghanistan.

At the same time, we recognize that success
cannot be ensured by military means alone, but rather
requires the concomitant support to Afghan governance
and development. For this reason, Afghanistan is
Canada's largest recipient of development assistance.
On 9 March, Canada announced an additional $40
million in development funding for Afghanistan,
bringing Canada's total contributions to over $650
million. We also have a track record for disbursing our
pledges. Canada took command of a provincial
reconstruction team in Kandahar in August 2005 and
recently almost doubled the size of its embassy, all of
which are indications of the degree of our commitment.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
on the situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
peace and security. The report rightly emphasizes the
need for a comprehensive approach to engagement in
Afghanistan, an approach that is enshrined in the
documents recently adopted in London at the
Afghanistan Conference. Canada welcomes the
formation of a Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board, an indispensable body that Canada championed
and helped to design. The Board will ensure greater
coherence of efforts by the Afghan Government with
the international community in the implementation of
the Afghanistan Compact. We will look to the Board to
focus on practical problem-solving issues, drawing
lessons from those most heavily engaged, identifying
any gaps as they emerge and ensuring coherence across
the three independent pillars of the Compact. We will
thus make sure that the Board is supported by an
effective secretariat.

In supporting the Compact, Canada will focus on
three main areas: security, governance and poverty
reduction. If we are to succeed, it will take both
military and civilian engagement. With their
international and Afghan partners, the Canadian forces
have helped to create a secure environment in which
nascent Afghan governance institutions can begin to
grow. That support has also allowed Canadian and
other civilians deployed to Afghanistan to actively
support the complex task of institution-building. It is
only by building effective and accountable institutions
in Kabul and across Afghanistan that we can ensure
that our investment lasts long beyond our engagement.

(spoke in French)

The acts of violence perpetrated recently in
certain regions of Afghanistan show that now is not the
time to let down our guard. Al-Qaida and the Taliban
remain active, challenging the Afghan and
international security forces. The resort to suicide
bomb attacks is a worrisome development that requires
an immediate response, including on the part of
Afghanistan's neighbours.

At the same time, the narcotics trade is
jeopardizing governmental institutions. Corruption is
eroding the people's trust. The foundations for an
effective, transparent and accessible system have still
not been laid. These threats are closely linked to drug
money, contributing to corruption and subverting the
rule of law.

The response must be robust and multiform. The
establishment of a responsible and democratic
Government that respects the rights of individuals,
gives its citizens a voice in that area and undertakes
measures to fulfil their aspirations is essential to any
comprehensive solution to these problems.

As noted by the Secretary-General in his report,
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) has a crucial role to play in strengthening
all the new governance institutions of the Afghan State,
including through capacity-building. To that end,
UNAMA must increase its own capacities to intervene
on the ground in the areas of individual rights, respect
for the rule of law, the police and justice. Canada
continues to support UNAMA by aiding the efforts of
police and corrections advisers, and we hope that other
countries will do likewise.

Inspired by the resolve of the Afghan people to
build a better future for themselves, Canada remains
prepared to help Afghanistan carry out the
commitments set out in the Compact.

