Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank Ambassador
Sacha Llorentty Soliz, Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), for his very informative briefing.

In the face of the rapidly increasing threat of
weapons of mass destruction, the implementation
of resolutions 1540 (2004) and 2325 (2016) is vital.
Especially considering the present threats besetting us,
the work ofthe 1540 (2004) Committee is more relevant
than ever. Kazakhstan, with its principled position
against the threats of weapons of mass destruction,
has always supported, and will continue to support the
activities of the 1540 Committee.

First, Kazakhstan will continue its tradition of
allocating voluntary contributions to the Trust Fund
for Global and Regional Disarmament Activities in
order to assist the Committee in ensuring States'
implementation of their obligations under resolution
1540 (2004).

Secondly, we congratulate the Committee on the
new composition of the Group of Experts. We wish
the representatives of Peru and cote d'Ivoire success
in their new appointments as Coordinators of Working
Groups I and 111.

We should always keep in mind that the risk of
weapons of mass destruction falling into the hands of
non-State actors, together with the rapid growth of new
technologies, can evolve and increase. The Committee
is being proactive and doing a lot to respond to such
threats in a timely manner. In the report, in accordance
with the requests made at our previous meeting, we see
that a great deal of work has been done on outreach
activities, which has increased the number of countries
providing national reports and has increased the
monitoring and technical assistance provided to States
to strengthen their ability to confront the modern threat
of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

Thirdly, we must not lose sight of nuclear security.
My President, Nursultan Nazarbayev, during the
opening ceremony of the International Atomic Energy
Agency Low-Enriched Uranium Bank in Kazakhstan
last August, noted the importance of the resumption of
the Nuclear Security Summits, which were conducted
by the United States from 2010 to 2016. We are in
favour of resuming such regular high-level meetings to
discuss topical issues related to the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.

Taking into account the evolving nature of the risks
of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
including the use by non-State actors of rapid advances
in science and technology, we reiterate our initiative
to establish a United Nations register on scientific
developments leading to the creation and advancement
of weapons of mass destruction, which would track
such dangerous discoveries.

As the Council is aware, Kazakhstan has developed
and promotes, with the support of the United Nations
community, the code of conduct for the achievement
of a world free of terrorism. Its implementation
will contribute not only to the goals and work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, but also to the activities
of the 1540 Committee, reflecting the importance and
necessity of protecting critical facilities from the threat
of terrorism. We express our support for the programme
of work of the 1540 Committee for a new period and
hope for its effective implementation. In its work, the
Committee should help ensure that Member States'
national policies and practices are consistent with the
goal of completely eliminating the threat of weapons of
mass destruction.

Finally, I would like to reaffirm Kazakhstan's firm
commitment to consolidating the world community's
efforts to rid the world of WMDs. This aim must be
achieved through the consistent strengthening and
expansion of the non-proliferation regime, primarily
within the framework of resolution 1540 (2004).

I wish to express the gratitude of my delegation for
the Committee's excellent work and solid action plan
and to note in particular the able leadership of its Chair,
our colleague Sacha Llorenty Soliz. Our delegation
wishes once again to assure the Committee of our full
support for its work and readiness to actively engage in
its undertakings.

