Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Secretary- General Antonio
Guterres for his briefing, and we take this opportunity
to reaffirm our greatest support for his important
work. We also appreciate the briefing delivered by
the Associate Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme, Mr. Tegegnework Gettu,
and thank the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees Goodwill Ambassador, Ms. Cate Blanchett.

One year after the acts of violence that occurred in
Rakhine state, my delegation reiterates its condemnation
of and deep concern for the aftermath that those
events continue to generate, which has resulted in
the displacement of nearly 900,000 Rohingya people
to Bangladesh. Without doubt, those acts of violence
cannot go unpunished; my delegation therefore
reiterates that they must be duly investigated, and those
responsible identified and brought to justice to answer
for their actions before the appropriate courts. Impunity
is unacceptable and runs counter to the main objective
and work of achieving reconciliation in the country and
in Rakhine state.

We highlight the creation of an independent
commission of inquiry in late July to investigate all
human rights violations committed since August 2017.
We also highlight the efforts of the Government of
Myanmar towards the commission's establishment,
particularly the definition of its programme of work
and the formation of a specialized secretariat to
assist the commission therein. In that regard, we call
on all agencies and institutions of the Government
of Myanmar to collaborate with the commission's
investigations, particularly in the collection of data and
information and in obtaining testimonies. We hope that
the work of the commission will be conducted under the
principles of independence, impartiality, objectivity,
transparency, integrity and professionalism.

Moreover, in order to prevent similar events from
happening again, it is imperative that the Government of
Myanmar focus on preventing hate speech, segregation
and persecution from spreading; it must instead promote
dialogue, mediation and negotiation to guarantee the
security and physical integrity of all its inhabitants,
without any racial, ethnic or religious distinction.

It is also important that the Government of Myanmar
analyse the root causes of the crisis and fully comply
with the recommendations made by the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State, which provides a clear
road map for the peaceful resolution of this sensitive
situation, especially regarding the issue of citizenship,
sustainable development of the Rohingya population
and respect for the rights of that population. In the same
vein, we must continue to work diligently and show
greater progress in our efforts towards the dignified,
informed and voluntary return of the refugees and
internally displaced persons of Rakhine state. With that
in mind, we highlight the establishment ofa ministerial
committee for that purpose and an advisory board to
follow up on the activities carried out by the committee.

We welcome the coordination and technical work
carried out by the Government of Myanmar, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the United Nations Development Programme
to implement the memorandum of understanding
signed on 6 June. We also note that the agreed plan
of work includes initiatives for promoting sustainable
socioeconomic development, improving health services
and education and creating conditions to strengthen
peaceful coexistence among the communities of
northern Rakhine state. We hope that the implementation
of the memorandum of understanding will constitute an
effective tool for resolving the situation of refugees and
internally displaced persons.

We welcome the increased coordination and
cooperation among humanitarian agencies and bodies
for the deployment and provision of humanitarian
assistance. In particular, we highlight the increase in
activity from the International Committee of the Red
Cross, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, the World Food Programme and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations Coordinating
Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on Disaster
Management. We note the willingness and openness
shown by the Government of Myanmar to work with
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to find the
best ways to deal with the problems and challenges
the country is facing. In that regard, we highlight the
agreement to open an office of the Special Envoy in the
city of Naypyidaw.

We are also concerned that, according to the
operational update of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees of 19 July, more than
11,000 people have continued to enter Bangladesh
since the beginning of this year, escaping persecution
and a lack of security. That is an issue that must be
urgently addressed by the Government of Myanmar.
However, urgent needs must also be addressed in
Bangladesh, including assistance to mothers who have
given birth in refugee camps; the need to improve
food distribution and humanitarian assistance, while
ensuring the receiving communities are impacted as
little as possible; and access to water and sanitation to
avoid an outbreak of diseases such as diphtheria, from
which 8,000 people are suffering, according to the
World Health Organization.

My delegation recognizes and commends the
efforts that the Government of Bangladesh has been
making over the past year regarding the refugees in
its country. With that in mind, it is imperative that
the international community and the United Nations
do everything in their power to support the host
communities in Bangladesh, particularly in the short
term, taking into account that the monsoon season may
have a devastating impact on the Rohingya population
in the Cox's Bazar camps.

Finally, it is important to point out and reiterate
that Bangladesh is not responsible for what happened
in Myanmar. It has welcomed the Rohingya refugees
selflessly and therefore needs the full support of
the international community and incentives for its
development in the short, medium and long term, since
the unexpected influx of more than 900,000 refugees
is significantly affecting Bangladesh's economy,
politics and society. The Government and the people
of Bangladesh should receive the full support of the
United Nations, international funding bodies and
subregional and regional actors and mechanisms to be
able to continue its collaboration until the safe return
of refugees and displaced persons can be guaranteed.

