Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the outset,
I thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting and all
briefers for their valuable input.

Regional cooperation in countering terrorism is
imperative, particularly in such regions as Central
and West Asia, where the threat of terrorist groups is
pervasive. We value the role of the Collective Security
Treaty Organization, the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and the Commonwealth of Independent
States, and underline the importance of cooperation
between the United Nations and these organizations in
countering terrorist threats.

Regional cooperation is also long overdue in the
Persian Gulf. In this regard, we note with appreciation
and support the constructive proposal of the Russian
Federation for security in that region. This morning,
in his remarks before the General Assembly, President
Rouhani of the Islamic Republic of Iran presented an
important initiative on a new coalition, the Hormuz
Peace Endeavour (HOPE), a coalition for hope, and
invited all States of the Hormuz Strait community to
join this endeavour (see A/74/PV.5). HOPE is based on
the fact that all regional States have the responsibility to
ensure peace, stability and prosperity in the region, and,
together with the global community, share a common
vital interest in maintaining freedom of navigation and
energy security for all. Likewise, regional endeavours
are imperative to prevent war, conflict, violence,
extremism, terrorism and sectarian tension.

The objectives of HOPE include promoting
solidarity, mutual understanding and peaceful and
friendly relations and cooperation among States of
the region, ensuring the territorial integrity, political
independence and international boundaries of all
regional States, cooperating in eradicating terrorism,
extremism and sectarian tensions, peacefully resolving
all regional tensions and conflicts, preventing tensions
through enhanced communication and early warning,
and ensuring energy security, the freedom of navigation
and the free flow of oil and other resources to and from
the Hormuz Strait community and beyond.

Those objectives can be promoted only through
adherence to such common principles as dialogue and
mutual respect; respect for sovereignty, territorial
integrity and the inviolability of international borders;
peaceful settlement ofall disputes; rejection ofthe threat
and use of force; non-aggression and non-intervention
in the internal or external affairs of other States; and
rejection of and non-participation in coalitions and
alliances against fellow States. Energy security and the
free flow of natural resources are further principles to
which we must all subscribe.

We have presented a plan of action that includes,
first, preparatory arrangements for a Hormuz Straight
community summit to commence deliberations
on a broad spectrum of security and cooperation
issues, including energy security, arms control and
confidence-building measures, military contacts,
the possible establishment of a zone free of weapons
of mass destruction, and the conclusion of a Hormuz
Strait community non-aggression pact. Secondly,
the plan also includes, secondly, the establishment
of joint task forces on various issues in relation to
practical measures to gradually expand cooperation,
including on early warning, prevention and resolution
of conflicts; combatting drugs and human trafficking;
joint investments and ventures in energy, transit and
transportation; and cooperation in cybersecurity.
Thirdly, the States of the Hormuz Strait community
will have periodic meetings at various levels, including
at the summit level. Such meetings may also have a
private-sector and academic components.

At the same time, on the basis of resolution 598
(1987), the United Nations will be invited to furnish
the necessary international umbrella and ensure the
legitimate interests of the international community. The
Islamic Republic of Iran stands ready to fully engage in
dialogue with countries of the region and the United
Nations to discuss all aspects of the HOPE initiative.

