Mr. Spindelegger (Austria): I would like to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and President
Mbeki for all their efforts and for briefing us today. I
also listened with keen interest to the statements by the
Foreign Minister of the Sudan and the Secretary
General of the Sudan People's Liberation Movement.
And, of course, I thank Foreign Secretary William
Hague for his initiative, which has given the Security
Council an opportunity to issue a strong message of
support for sustainable peace in the Sudan and in
particular the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA).

In the past few months, we have witnessed some
important positive developments. Let me mention two:
the elections held in the Sudan and the marked
improvement of relations between the Sudan and Chad.
Although the implementation of the CPA has been
laborious, much has been accomplished. We trust that
both parties will fulfil their commitments to
implementing the CPA, and in particular to undertaking
credible referendums and to abiding by their outcome.
A European Union observer team is deployed in the
Sudan this week.

Last week, at a conference that took place in
Vienna, high-level participants from Northern and
Southern Sudan demonstrated their consensus on one
core point: Whatever the outcome of the referendums,
both will have to strive for a mutually beneficial
coexistence.

We all know what is at stake and what
arrangements still have to be agreed upon. We
welcome the progress that has been achieved in the
preparations for the referendums. Still, further progress
is needed, in particular in the preparations for the
referendum in Abyei. Preparations also have to take
place for the popular consultations in Blue Nile and
Southern Kordofan states. The parties also need to
prepare in a timely manner for the post-referendum
phase. In that sense, we welcome the signing of a
framework agreement in Khartoum.

Strengthening the rule of law, ending impunity
and ensuring human rights for all will be important in
this process in order to guarantee lasting peace and
stability. The full inclusion of women in these
processes is also of utmost importance. Austria has
offered technical expertise in the area of citizenship
and, upon the invitation of the parties, discussed this
offer with interlocutors in the North and the South in
October. We are ready to continue working with both
sides in a transparent and open manner.

We must work to avert conflict, to ensure
regional stability and to protect civilians. Therefore,
contingency planning by the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan (UNMIS) is important. We welcome the
implementation of the comprehensive strategy on the
protection of civilians. Increased patrolling, especially
long-range patrols, and an extended UNMIS presence
in remote areas and potential hotspots are very
important.

Freedom of movement is crucial if UNMIS is to
fulfil its tasks. We also believe that the participation of
UNMIS in the regional strategy for the protection of
civilians from attacks by the Lord's Resistance Army is
essential.

We are deeply concerned about continued
insecurity in Darfur, and we condemn the abduction of
peacekeepers and humanitarian workers and demand
their immediate release. We also condemn the violence
against civilians in and around camps for internally
displaced persons (IDPs). We urge all parties to allow
free access to everyone in need of humanitarian
assistance. We are also concerned about the recent
arrest and detention of human rights activists and
journalists.

The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Dafur (UNAMID) has an important role
to play in protecting civilians and needs the full
support of the Government of the Sudan and all other
parties involved. The safe and voluntary return of the
high number of IDPs in Darfur must be ensured. We
need all parties to engage fully and constructively in
the peace process without preconditions. Also in this
context, I would like to highlight the importance of the
full participation of women in the peace negotiations
on Darfur, in line with resolution 1325 (2000), as well
as their adequate participation of civil society.

Austria strongly supports the work of the Joint
African Union-United Nations Chief Mediator for
Darfur, Djibril Bassole, and the facilitation of the
African Union High-Level Panel under the leadership
of President Mbeki. We strongly support all efforts to
strengthen mechanisms to promote justice,
accountability and reconciliation, in particular the
International Criminal Court. Peace and justice must
go hand in hand.

The primary responsibility to act lies with both
partners of the Government of National Unity of the
Sudan. Enduring cooperation between the parties will
be essential for the benefit of all Sudanese people. Let
me also assure the Council that Austria and the
European Union stand ready to support every effort
towards a peaceful future for the Sudan. It is the goal
of the international community to create a win-win
situation for the North and the South.

