Mr. Dah (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote
d'Ivoire would like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for
his briefing on the humanitarian situation in Yemen.
My delegation would also like to take the opportunity
of the first briefing delivered by Mr. Martin Griffiths,
the new Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, to congratulate him on his appointment and
wish him every success in the discharge of his duties.

Three years after the outbreak of the conflict in
Yemen, my delegation remains particularly concerned
about the ongoing deterioration of the humanitarian
situation, which has been described by the United
Nations as the worst humanitarian crisis in the world.
Indeed, the statistics are particularly alarming, with
nearly 10,000 human lives lost, 3 million displaced
and more than 24 million people suffering from
malnutrition, including 2.4 million children, not to
mention the threat of famine and the devastation caused
by the cholera epidemic affecting the population.

In view of the gravity of the situation, Cote d'Ivoire
appeals for international solidarity. In that regard,
it welcomes the donors' conference held in Geneva
on 3 April, which resulted in more than $2 billion in
pledges under Yemen's humanitarian response p1an.
My country thanks all donors for that outpouring of
solidarity, and especially welcomes the commitment by
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates to raise an
additional $500 million from donors in the region.

Despite our joint efforts, the humanitarian situation
in Yemen will continue to deteriorate in the absence
of a viable political prospect. My delegation deplores
the current political impasse and calls for a peaceful
settlement of the conflict through an inclusive political
process involving all Yemeni stakeholders. It urges the
international community, faced with the confirmed risk
of destabilizing the entire region, to invest more in the
pursuit of a peaceful solution to the crisis, which has
gone on too long.

My country believes that the international community's
political efforts to find a peaceful solution to the
Yemeni crisis will be completely futile if they are not
accompanied by significant progress on the ground.
The implementation of a comprehensive ceasefire and
the resumption of political negotiations for lasting
peace, under the auspices of the United Nations, are
today the only way out of the crisis to which the entire
international community must commit. In that regard,
Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the efforts of the United Nations
to give new impetus to the peace talks and political
dialogue. It especially welcomes the recent visits of
the new Special Envoy to Riyadh and Sana'a, as part
of the consultations with the Yemeni parties, which are
encouraging signs of a renewed political process.

In conclusion, my delegation reaffirms its
commitment to the unity, sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Yemen. It calls on the parties
to the conflict to return to the negotiating table with a
view to achieving a peaceful settlement to the crisis.

