Mr. Mullings (Jamaica): My delegation joins with
others in expressing our appreciation to you, Sir, and the
members of the Council for holding this open debate on
Africa. For Jamaica, the continent of Africa holds a
special significance, given our close historical and cultural

 

ties. Indeed, over 80 per cent of the Jamaican population is
of African descent. Jamaica has been in solidarity with the
cause of Africa in its struggle for freedom and now in its
search for a lasting peace.

The report of the Secretary-General on the work of the
Organization has emphasized that the general security
situation in Africa continues to cause the gravest concern
and we are all well aware that African issues dominate the
work of the Security Council. The questions which are now
being raised relate to the effectiveness of the Council's
efforts in dealing with the pressing concerns and how
creative the approaches have been in dealing with the
different arenas of conflict.

Africa needs more than just words of sympathy and
concern from the international community, particularly the
Security Council. We clearly need a programme to be
implemented on a sustained basis to help end the cycle of
conflict. We have to begin by tackling the fundamental
causes in order to achieve long-term results.

The Secretary-General's report on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace in Africa
(8/1998/318) and its follow-up progress report
(S/ 1999/ 1008) give sound analysis of the causes of conflict
in Africa and make practical recommendations on how to
address the problems which persist. We appreciate the
Secretary-General's efforts over the past year to act on the
recommendations contained in the report (8/1998/318),
which include support for regional and subregional
initiatives in the area of conflict prevention; establishment
of an international mechanism to assist host governments in
maintaining the security and neutrality of refugee camps;
and strengthening the effectiveness of arms sanctions
regimes imposed by the Security Council.

We remain concerned, however, that more concrete
action needs to be taken by the Security Council in relation
to conflict situations in Africa. The Council should be
aware that there is a growing perception of foot-dragging in
the way it authorizes peacekeeping forces for conflict areas
in Africa - more attention is given and resources are
diverted to other parts of the world.

The report also highlights efforts made by the United
Nations in supporting African peacekeeping. While one
welcomes the convening of seminars and the conduct of
training courses, we believe that further provision could be
made to provide logistic and financial support for enhancing
African peacekeeping capacity. We call upon the
international community not to turn a blind eye to
Africa's present crisis, but to rally to its assistance.

Jamaica remains fully committed to the belief that
collective action is the best approach to addressing the
complex situation which now obtains and wishes to place
on record its appreciation of the efforts of regional
organizations, such as the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), which have made significant
contributions to the restoration of peace and democracy in
Africa.

We note with appreciation also the efforts of the
Organization of African Unity in the situation in the Great
Lakes region and hope that the Lusaka Agreement will
form the basis for reconciliation and peace. Nevertheless,
the Security Council should not abdicate its role in the
maintenance of international peace and security but
should continue to work in close cooperation with
regional organizations, in a coordinated manner, to
promote mediation and negotiations between contending
parties.

The proliferation of small arms in Africa is a
troubling issue. As was reflected by most speakers during
last week's Security Council debate on small arms, there
is an urgent need to halt the illicit manufacture, transfer,
trade and use of small arms.

The economic and social development of Africa
remains an area of priority. We note that despite Africa's
rich endowments, economic growth has continued to
elude most countries. This has manifested itself in soaring
levels of unemployment, in debt and in deteriorating
standards of living.

Jamaica welcomes the heavily indebted poor
countries debt initiative at the G-8 meeting in Cologne
this year aimed at alleviating the debt of 11 sub-Saharan
African countries. It is our hope that this will be the start
of a more concerted move to eliminate Africa's debt. We
are pleased to note that the current meetings of the World
Bank in Washington are considering this.

Jamaica is fully convinced that there is no place for
"Africa fatigue" or "Africa pessimism". We owe it to
Africa to ensure that it realizes its full potential. As we
enter the twenty-first century, let us redouble our
commitment to the rebirth of Africa, where peace,
security and development will be a reality. Africa's

 

survival is the concern of the entire international
community and affects us all.

