Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
wish to begin by conveying our condolences to the
people and the Government of the United States on the
sad passing of former President George H.W. Bush. We
wish to honour his memory and legacy.

We welcome the convening of this debate and the
important briefing delivered by Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres. We wish also to welcome your
presence, Mr. Ouattara, and to thank you for your
important message. We are also grateful for the presence
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
and of other high-level officials.

Peru agrees with other speakers that have
underscored the importance of sustained, inclusive
economic growth and post-conflict reconstruction to
building and sustaining peace. We would in particular
underscore the good practices of Cote d'Ivoire.
Achieving lasting peace requires broad national
consensus around the issue of the reconstruction of
affected areas as well as economic revitalization.
Opportunities should be created and tangible benefits
ensured for the population, in a spirit of equity and
transparency, promoting the return of displaced persons
and ensuring that priority attention is accorded victims.
It is therefore necessary to consolidate inclusive and
accountable institutions that are capable of reducing
inequality and ensuring access to justice and the rule
of law, in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development.

The international community must support efforts
to achieve these goals, on the understanding that there
can be no development without peace or peace without
sustainable development. In that connection, we would
underscore the important role of the United Nations,
particularly its Peacebuilding Commission.

In that context, we would stress three points.
First, we would underline the need to foster
social cohesion and political consensus. Rebuilding a
conflict-affected country must have as a foundation the
reweaving of its social fabric. There can be no lasting
peace if we do not at the same time make progress
in the area of national reconciliation, guaranteeing
access to justice and promoting human rights. It is
therefore vital to foster the emergence of new political
stakeholders that are committed to rebuilding a shared
future. The participation of women and young people in
this process is key.

Our second point is that we must make transparent
investments in inclusive and resilient infrastructure.
Post-conflict reconstruction requires major investments
in infrastructure, which creates jobs and relaunches the
economy. However, in order to attract the necessary
investments and safeguard the legitimacy of the national
institutions charged with promoting them, preserving
the rule of law is crucial. Citizens must be able to see
that infrastructure is being rebuilt with transparency,
without corruption or discrimination, for the benefit of
all sectors of society. Moreover, given the increasing
frequency of natural disasters related to climate
change, it is vital to ensure that any new infrastructure
is resilient, in keeping with the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030.

My third point is the responsibility of the
international community. The proliferation of conflicts
in today's world is linked to growing inequality within
and among countries, as well as to vulnerability to global
phenomena such as climate change, violent extremism
and transnational organized crime. Modern conflicts
are also characterized by their cross-border impact.
Refugee crises have serious political consequences for
many countries. Fluctuations in natural-resource prices
affect all economies. In an irreversibly interdependent
world, it is vital to bolster multilateralism and
international cooperation and develop partnerships
with regional and subregional organizations, financial
institutions, the private sector and civil society in order
to effectively respond to the challenges that we all face.

In that light, and to conclude, we wish to emphasize
that supporting the reconstruction of conflict-affected
countries and in general promoting sustainable
development is not only an end in itself but also an
effective and efficient means of preventing conflicts
and maintaining international peace and security.

