I take the floor today on behalf of Belgian youth. Exceptionally, our intervention has been drafted by the Belgian United Nations youth delegates. This programme not only helps to raise young people's voices within the United Nations but also serves as a channel to get them involved in our national decision-making. We can only recommend it. As youth delegates, we welcome the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/167), especially its call for continuous and meaningful youth participation. The fact that we have the opportunity to address the Security Council shows what shape participation can take. Young people are faced with multiple challenges. For our contribution, we have opted to focus on climate change and hate speech. To start, we would like to echo our Government's commitment to putting the topic of climate and security on the Security Council's agenda. The climate crisis, just like the coronavirus disease pandemic, is not only a direct threat to the livelihoods of billions of people; it also aggravates factors that contribute to conflict. Given that fragile States frequently have younger demographics, young people are particularly vulnerable and, sadly, often the first victims of conflict. United Nations Member States need to address this issue, especially since the youth population across the world is set to increase drastically. Our generation will be the first to be heavily impacted by global warming. As such, should we not be the first group to be consulted? It is only natural for the younger population, especially those most affected, to have a seat at the table when far-reaching adaptation and mitigation policies are being detailed. Our worldwide actions of 2019 have proved that we are a considerable and positive force for change. Young people stand ready to be structurally involved through frequent invitations to relevant thematic and country-specific Security Council briefings. Secondly, social exclusion, intolerance and racism all contribute to hate speech, which often addresses the young as victims or as the subjects of indoctrination. Extremism and violent acts following from such discourse could be prevented by more inclusive societies. Young people should be offered opportunities to fulfil their aspirations. In addition, we point to the effectiveness of campaigns such as the Council of Europe's project "No hate speech movement" and its dedicated national activities. To us, the Internet is a double-edged sword. Wisely used, it allows free access to information and serves as a tool of empowerment. However, without adequate governance, it allows fake news to spread, contributes to radicalization and heightens the risk of the misuse of personal data. We appeal to Governments, at all levels, to cherish individual freedom while ensuring the safety of young users. That requires a coalition among Governments, private businesses and civil society. Platforms gathering relevant material for young people and the attribution of labels that testify to the quality of information are potential tools. The Internet's global nature requires a global approach. We think that the United Nations constitutes the right forum. Allow us to conclude by repeating our call for continuous and meaningful youth participation. The vital role of young people in the making and maintenance of peace has been acknowledged. We note the progress made on the implementation of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018), but challenges remain. We urge Member States and donors to support the work of young peacebuilders and to protect their human rights. We hope that adequate attention will be paid to how climate change and hate speech affect our future security and that Member States stand ready to create, jointly with younger generations, a society that guarantees sustainable peace and security. The challenges that we face require now more than ever a strong and efficient multilateralism. Let us turn 2020 - the year when we celebrate the seventy- fifth anniversary of the United Nations - into an example in that regard. Finally, we thank the Dominican presidency for its leadership, and the briefers for their personal engagement.
