Mr. Park In-Kook (Republic of Korea): My
delegation believes that today's debate is a timely
opportunity to further the progress on key issues such
as the implementation of resolution 1894 (2009), in
particular as political developments over the past few
months have refocused our attention on this issue. In
this regard, I would like to highlight the following
points.

First, no violators of international humanitarian
law should go unpunished, under any circumstances.
As the Security Council reaffirmed in resolution 1674
(2006), ending impunity is essential. In this
connection, we fully endorse the Secretary-General's
emphasis in his 2010 report (S/2010/579) on
accountability for those who commit mass atrocities
and on the responsibility of States to investigate and
prosecute those suspected of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes. In addition, my delegation
also emphasizes the role of the International Criminal
Court as the last line of defence for upholding the
principle of no impunity.

Compliance should also be enforced among
non-State armed groups, which are involved in an ever
greater number of conflicts. As such, the Security
Council and other relevant international bodies need to
devise measures to ensure full compliance, regardless
of the status of the parties in conflict.

Secondly, access to provide humanitarian aid and
basic safety and security to civilians affected by armed
conflict also needs to be guaranteed. Unfortunately, we
have seen many cases where humanitarian personnel
and supplies have failed to reach those in urgent need
due to the interference of certain parties involved in
armed conflicts. Such acts clearly constitute crimes
against humanity, and those involved should be held
accountable. My delegation hopes that the Security
Council, on the basis of the relevant paragraphs of
resolution 1894 (2009), can deliberate further on this
issue.
Thirdly, sexual violence against women and girls
in armed conflicts is one of the most horrible forms of
violence, not only against civilians but against
civilization itself, and it deserves our special attention.
Women and girls are most vulnerable, and sexual
violence has a devastating and corrosive effect on
society as a whole. My delegation hopes for increased
coordination among the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
UN Women, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and other relevant organizations to better
tackle these atrocious crimes.

Fourthly, more urgent attention should be paid to
the issue of refugees. Due to globalization and
deepened integration, it is expected that more refugees
will be involved with armed conflict. More specific
protection mechanisms should therefore be established,
with the contribution of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and widely
respected.

Fifthly, the role of regional organizations must be
duly recognized and enhanced. With their deeper
understanding of and sensitivity to the specific
circumstances of both inter-State and intra-State
conflicts, including a ready capacity for swift
intervention, regional organizations can play a greater
role in this regard.

Finally, my delegation also believes that such
efforts to protect civilians should be an integral part of
all United Nations peacekeeping missions. It cannot be
denied that the primary responsibility for protecting
civilians rests with States and the parties involved in a
conflict. However, we have witnessed situations of
armed conflict where the States and the parties
involved have failed to provide adequate protection
measures to civilians and armed groups, and where
States have even resorted to using violence against
their own innocent civilian populations as a means of
combat. In such situations, United Nations
peacekeeping operations are taking on greater
responsibilities to support and provide security to
civilians at risk, as seen recently in the case of Cote
d'Ivoire. In addition, the Security Council needs to
establish clear, credible and achievable mandates to
ensure the successful and effective protection of
civilians prior to deployment.

My delegation shares the deep concerns over
systematic, flagrant and widespread violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law and
crimes against humanity, all of which have a serious
effect on civilians. In this regard, the Republic of
Korea fully supports the continued attention that the
Security Council is giving to this issue. We welcome
the Council's timely actions over the past few months.
My delegation is also committed to rendering its full
commitment.

