Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset, I
would like to thank the President of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone, Justice Renate Winter, and its
Prosecutor, Mr. Stephen Rapp, for their very
informative briefings. Allow me to add that we are
honoured that an Austrian national, who previously
distinguished herself as an international judge in
Kosovo, is presiding over that important Court.

Austria has a long-standing commitment to
support and contribute to efforts to strengthen the rule
of law, promote human rights and end impunity for the
perpetrators of the most serious crimes. My delegation
thus highly commends the efforts of the Special Court
to bring to justice those responsible for the crimes
committed during the armed conflict in Sierra Leone
since 1991, including former Liberian President
Charles Taylor, who was arrested in the spring of 2006.
09-40569

The Court's work is vital to ensuring
accountability and promoting reconciliation,
peacebuilding and the re-establishment of the rule of
law in Sierra Leone. The Special Court plays a
pioneering role in combating impunity and
strengthening the rule of law at both the international
and the national levels. As the President and the
Prosecutor have already pointed out, judgements
delivered by the Court have greatly contributed to the
development of international criminal law and
international humanitarian law, in particular regarding
the recruitment and use of child soldiers and forced
marriages. As the Prosecutor has said, it is important to
note that lawyers from Sierra Leone have played a very
important part in these developments.

At the national level, the activities of the Court,
including through its capacity-building and outreach
programmes, have assisted in strengthening the justice
system in Sierra Leone. Further efforts in this field are,
however, needed.

As was highlighted by President Winter today, the
Special Court also faces a number of important
challenges. First and foremost, the very serious
financial situation of the Court is of great concern. As
is well known, the Special Court is funded exclusively
by voluntary contributions, and currently available
funds, as has been said, will be exhausted by early
August. We join in President Winter's urgent call upon
all States to help alleviate the dire financial situation of
the Court. The Austrian Government has made repeated
voluntary contributions to the Court, most recently
following the appeal of the Secretary-General in
March.

Secondly, the Court is doing its utmost to
accomplish its completion strategy and finish its work,
including the Taylor case, at the earliest date, while
maintaining all standards of fair trial and due process,
as well as undertaking effective outreach among the
local population in the region. Austria fully supports
these efforts and appreciates the projections that all of
the Court's judicial activities will be complete by
February 2011.

Finally, we must bear in mind that the work of the
Special Court will not be finished at the time of the
completion of the last case, but that a number of
residual functions, as has been said, will have to be
performed even after its closure. As chair of the
Security Council's informal working group on
9

international tribunals, which deals with the residual
issues of the ad hoc Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda, Austria follows very closely
the ongoing discussions in the Special Court and its
Management Committee on setting up a small
successor body to manage and perform such residual
functions, including the enforcement of sentences, the
maintenance of archives, witness protection and the
possible trial or transfer of the case of Johnny Koroma,
who is still at large.

In this context, Austria also supports the proposal
to establish a trust fund to cover the costs for the
upkeep of prisoners of the Special Court so that they
can serve their sentences in appropriate enforcing
States. Despite a number of legal and practical
differences between the Special Court for Sierra Leone
and the two ad hoc Tribunals, in essence we are facing
the same challenge - closing down an international
criminal tribunal, which, as some have said, seems to
be a much more complex task than setting up a new
tribunal. We stand ready to further intensify the
informal dialogue and exchange of views between the
members of the working group and the Special Court
and its Management Committee.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the President,
judges, Prosecutor, Registrar and all of the staff of the
Special Court for their tireless efforts in the name of
international justice, and to reaffirm Austria's
continued cooperation and support for the Special
Court.

