Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): On this,
the last day of your presidency of the Security Council,
Sir, my delegation wishes to express its sincere
appreciation to you. Over the past month, we have
been seized of matters of extreme importance for
humankind and the maintenance of international peace
and security. We hope that we have addressed those
questions in accordance with the dictates of our
conscience.

Since it first became a member of the Security
Council, my delegation has taken and continues to take
a keen interest in ensuring that our work is conducted
in conformity with the United Nations Charter,
international law and the positive perspective of
political considerations in servicing humankind. That
was our position with regard to the way the Council
has addressed many issues, including that of the Sudan.
The Sudan had taken the initiative to request the
assistance of the United Nations in dealing with some
of its internal affairs that need constructive and
transparent support from the international community.

I would like to welcome the presence of the
Secretary-General with us today.

No one can deny that the Sudan has taken
numerous positive steps in its partnership with the
United Nations and the African Union. These were
clearly evident in the consent by the Sudanese
Government to the deployment of the hybrid operation
in Darfur, as well as its explicit request to the Council,
during its visit to Khartoum last June, to adopt a
resolution authorizing that operation. In this regard, we
stress the need to strengthen the current momentum in
order to strengthen the tripartite partnership between
the United Nations, the African Union and the Sudan.

What the Sudan needs now is a continuation of
the approach of encouragement. It also needs that the
promise made by the Council during its meeting with
the Sudanese Government be honoured. I refer to the
promise to continue to assist the country while
respecting its sovereignty and its legitimate right to
receive assistance from the international community
and to compel the rebel movements to renounce
Violence and to join the peace process so that the
achievements made can be maintained and preserved
and, indeed, built upon.

Resolution 1769 (2007), which we have just
adopted, is aimed at the deployment of the hybrid
operation in Darfur. The resolution states that it will
have a predominantly African character, as much as
possible. We would like to thank the sponsors of the
resolution for having taken some of our concerns on
board, after we had expressed some of our reservations.
We would also like to commend the fact that a number
of the concerns of the Sudan, particularly those raised
in the last hours before the voting on the draft
resolution took place, were also taken on board. We
have seen understanding and responsiveness from the
sponsors. We commend that responsiveness, which
bridged the gap between the Viewpoints and helped us
to adopt the draft resolution before us.

We encourage our Sudanese brothers to continue
their cooperation with the United Nations for the
implementation of the resolution. We encourage them
not to hesitate in requesting any assistance that might

be needed to overcome any obstacles. This should be
done in a spirit of collective action and be based on
dealing with every question within its own perspective,
and without confusing it with other questions, and with
a professional approach. That is the best way to serve
humanity and to strengthen the role of the Security
Council in the maintenance of international peace and
security.

On the basis of these considerations, we decided
to vote for the resolution.

