Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman): Allow me at the outset
to seize this opportunity to extend to you, Sir, and to your
friendly country, Poland, our sincere congratulations on
your assumption ofthe presidency of the Security Council
for the current month and to express our confidence in
your diplomatic skills, which will lead the deliberations of
this body to a successful outcome. May I also avail
myself of this opportunity to pay a special tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Mahugu of Kenya, for the
exemplary manner in which he steered the work of the
Council in the month of February.

After the signing of the historic peace agreements
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority, a new hope
touched the hearts of millions of people in the Middle
East: a hope for peace, tranquillity, stability, harmony and
coexistence, marking a new beginning for this war-
ravaged region.

My country, along with many other peace-loving
nations such as your own, Sir, spared no effort to
strengthen the foundation of this peaceful trend in order
to make it more solid and sustainable. Unfortunately,
sweet hopes are never lasting and we are here once again
resorting to the Security Council for guidance and action
to salvage what might be damaged by one of the parties
to and partners of the peace process.

It is quite comforting at times to listen to some of
the statements issued by the Israeli Government
concerning how peace ought to be articulated and
agreement implemented. But at the same time, it is
shocking to view the record of this Government in
translating its words into actions. In fact, the latest
decision of the Government of Israel to built new
Security Council 3745th meeting (Resumption l)
Fifty~second year 6 March 1997

 

settlements in East Jerusalem in the area of Jabal Abu
Ghneim is not only counter-productive, but a flagrant
breach of the agreed principles of the peace process and of
the relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolutions 242 (1967), 252 (1968) and 338 (1973), which
reaffirmed the illegality of all measures taken by Israel
aimed at changing the demographic composition of the
Holy City and its status.

Without a doubt, the question of Jerusalem is of
particular importance and sensitivity to the overall
settlement of the Middle East crisis, which is one of the
major reasons why this whole question of determining the
final status of Jerusalem was left aside for a while. Taking
this decision now, in our opinion, will not only create a
volatile situation, endangering the peace process, but will
likely give extremist elements from both sides the
opportunity to jeopardiZe it.

It is our view that this record needs to be straightened
out once and for all with a clear, united message from this
Council that would reaffirm its unreserved support for the
peace process in accordance with the principle of land for
peace and relevant Security Council resolutions. In our
view, the latest decision of the Israeli Government is illegal
and ought to be rejected categorically.

It was very encouraging to note that all the statements
of the members of the Security Council expressed the view
that settlements were dangerous to the peace process.

Peace is a two-way track and it is a contract that has
been accepted and signed by the parties concerned. The
least to be expected is the full implementation of and
adherence to what has been agreed upon. If the Israeli
Government believes that only the Palestinians should be
expected to live up to Israeli expectations, then it is
mistaken. It is about time, in our opinion, for this Israeli
Government to live up to its commitment by refraining
from such acts and to move forward in the peace process
on all tracks.

Finally, I would like to conclude my intervention by
reiterating my Government's support for the peace process
and for a durable peace in the Middle East that will
alleviate the suffering of the people of the region ---« a
peace that will minimize the risk of confrontation and move
beyond lip service to concrete steps.

We firmly believe that the Israeli Government's
decision to build new settlements in East Jerusalem is, to
say the least, wrong, illegal and above all, inconsistent with

the spirit and objectives of the peace process. Therefore,
once again, we call on the Israeli Government seriously
to reconsider its decision and to act in a more responsible
manner. If Israel truly believes in peace, this is the right
time to prove and demonstrate it to the entire international
community.

The Israeli policy on settlements in the occupied
territories is a means of wasting time and prolonging the
implementation of the principles of the peace process.
This should not be allowed to happen. We appeal to you,
Sir, and to the members of the Council to demonstrate
your firm positions and to send a strong, collective
message to the Israeli Government to reverse its latest
decision.

