Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): Today the Security Council is once again
considering the tragic events in Lebanon. Two days ago,
at a formal meeting of the Council on this same issue, the
Russian delegation had an opportunity to lay out its
position on this question. Unfortunately, it must be said
that the situation has a clearly defined tendency to
escalate. The Israeli armed forces continue their
bombardments and shelling, resulting in many casualties
among the civilian population. A large-scale humanitarian
crisis is unfolding before our very eyes. The number of
refugees is already in the hundreds of thousands. The
fragile peace that had been established in long-suffering
Lebanon is now being destroyed. Invaluable historical
monuments are threatened.
This morning the world was shaken by the report of
the shelling by Israeli artillery of the headquarters of the
Fijian battalion of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, resulting in the deaths of over 90 Lebanese
civilians who had sought refuge in the area where the
United Nations forces were deployed. The United Nations
peace-keepers also suffered casualties.

The Russian delegation wishes to state that what is
currently happening in Lebanon is unacceptable, for
Israel's actions are undermining the sovereignty of the
State of Lebanon, hurting the civilian population and
damaging civilian targets. The tragic situation that has
developed in Lebanon can have the most unforeseeable
consequences for the Middle East, threatening the process
of Arab-Israeli reconciliation. As a sponsor of the peace
process, Russian cannot but be disturbed by this.

In the current situation, it is essential to demonstrate
restraint. A peaceful solution is required that provides for
the cessation of the military action against Lebanon while
not allowing terrorist attacks against the territory of Israel.

 

Our country is taking and will continue to take strong
political and diplomatic measures with a view to helping
put a halt to the present escalation of violence. This is the
approach of the Foreign Minister of Russia, Mr. Primakov,
in his intensive contacts with his foreign colleagues. We
also support similar steps being taken by other States. We
hope that all of these efforts will bear fruit.

Today the Security Council faced a difficult choice. A
group of Arab countries introduced a draft resolution that
did not receive the requisite number of votes in favour. In
principle, the Russian delegation agrees with most of the
ideas reflected in that draft resolution. But at the same time,
in our view, it does not give a full picture of the very
complex situation, passing over in silence such important
aspects as the need to provide guarantees for the security of
all States of the region and not to allow provocative
military actions by extremists from the territory of Lebanon,
which undermine the peace process and run counter to the
intensive diplomatic efforts under way. That is why the
Russian Federation was unable to vote in favour of the
draft resolution and abstained.

The second draft resolution is more balanced. We
would have preferred it to be worded more clearly and
precisely. Some things could have been called by their
names. However, the main point is that it does reflect
support for an unconditional cease-fire and for the efforts
to achieve peace. It clearly reconfirms all of the resolutions
adopted by the Security Council on Lebanon, particularly
resolution 425 (1978). Implementation of this resolution is
still the basic condition for achieving a genuine settlement.

We hope that the adoption of the resolution will help
to ensure an immediate cessation to the military actions and
to achieve a normalization of the situation in the Israeli-
Lebanese area. We see the main task as being to continue
the positive dynamics of the peace process in the Middle
East, and accordingly the Russian delegation voted in
favour of the resolution.

