Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to say,
respectfully, that the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
has chosen to take part in this debate even though we
believe that the subject at hand does not belong on the
Security Council's agenda. We caution that this is an
attempt to continue to "securitize" the United Nations
and usurp the competencies of other organs.

We are concerned by the attempt to address the
issue of illicit flows under such different and unrelated
headings - which are handled in quite a variety of
ways within United Nations bodies - as illicit drug
trafficking, conventional arms, smuggling, terrorism
and its funding, materials associated with weapons of
mass destruction, conflict minerals and human
trafficking. It should be emphasized that not every
illegal border event is a threat to international peace
and security.

There is no denying that the global consumerist
and speculation-driven capitalist system - which
punishes the world's poor and vulnerable while feeding
the unbridled quest for short-term, immoral financial
gain - is the root cause of illicit transborder flows.
Some experts recognize that such crimes are the
Achilles' heel of capitalism. The decadent capitalism of
today - brutal, inhuman and nature-despoiling - is
the systemic basis of transnational crime. A system that
ever more concentrates wealth, without any regard to
ethics, is a Petri dish for such crimes.

Despite the grave economic and financial crisis,
attempts are made to resuscitate the system through
inhumane neoliberal policies that deepen the inequality
gap in the world. The system and its drivers have no
regard for democracy, nations, culture, ethical values
or sovereignty. Illicit flows are part of the quest for
financial gain without regard to fundamental human
values.
An automatic link is alleged between illicit flows
and the proliferation of nuclear and conventional arms,
terrorism, organized crime and other destabilizing
factors. We challenge the attempt to merge various
illicit flows with different and distinct illegal activities.
We stress the need for separate issues to be dealt with
in different and specific ways, within the framework of
national policies and laws.

It is essential to recall that it is the purview of
sovereign States to determine and implement border
security measures. In that regard, we reiterate the
principles of sovereign equality, political
independence, territorial integrity and non-interference
in matters that fall within the exclusive domestic
domain of States, as set out in the Charter of the United
Nations.

Article 15 of the Constitution of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela stipulates that

"The State is responsible for establishing an
overall policy on land, island and maritime
borders, to preserve territorial integrity,
sovereignty, security, defence, national identity,
diversity and the environment, in keeping with
cultural, economic and social development and
national integration."

In Venezuela we have a constitutional and
legislative framework, legitimated by the sovereign
will of the people as expressed in referendums, which
allows no means of decision-making other than
approval or rejection by the people themselves through
constitutional mechanisms. They cannot be
circumvented by any multilateral initiative or by the
Security Council.

My country has always taken a strong position
against the illicit traffic in small arms and light
weapons. Thousands such weapons have been
confiscated in Venezuela, as never before in our
nation's history. Venezuela acknowledges the problem
posed by the manufacture and illicit trade in such
weapons in all its aspects in many regions of the world.
We agree with the need to establish controls, in
particular by producer countries, so that the supply of
such weapons is limited to Governments and their
authorized bodies, in accordance with international
law, in particular the right to self-defence, enshrined in
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations. In that
regard, we underscore the importance of effectively
implementing the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.

My country is concerned about the transfer of
weapons to non-State actors without the authorization
of Governments. The illicit transfer to subversive
elements and illegal armed groups, which threatens the
legitimate peace and stability of Governments, has
already led to the proliferation of illegal weapons in
various regions and is destabilizing neighbouring
countries.

Today's neocolonialist and imperialist wars and
policies seeking to plunder the natural resources of
developing countries are causing people more poverty,
inequality and suffering. That is producing diasporas
that are particularly vulnerable, and therefore
susceptible to becoming involved in illicit cross-border
flows. Meanwhile, the security agencies of imperialist
Powers often defend, protect and finance major
national or international drug barons and terrorist and
criminal networks in order to promote their subversive
agendas against sovereign nations.

If we truly want to reduce or combat the tragic
consequences of cross-border illicit flows, it would
suffice to put an end to the voracious appetite of
neoliberalism, its transnational companies and the
imperialist and colonialist policies that give rise to
poverty, and to stop economic, political and social
inequalities in the world.

In conclusion, we would like to state that it is
auspicious that the vast majority of countries
participating in today's debate have reaffirmed that,
under the principles of equality, political independence
and territorial integrity, only sovereign States are
competent to draft and implement measures on the
security of their borders.

