Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to welcome and thank Mr. Farid
Zarif, Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his briefing and for the detailed report on
the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I also
wish to welcome and commend the very interesting and
sharp analyses and cases made by the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia and of Kosovo, Mr. Vuk
J eremie and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.

For us, it is very important to note that the
political crisis in Kosovo has been overcome and that
the Government authorities now have the opportunity
to concentrate on building and strengthening
institutions.

The meetings between representatives of Pristina
and Belgrade, about which we received information
from both representatives, are very important. They are
of crucial value to the processes of dialogue and of
establishing specific areas, such as civil registry,
freedom of movement, regulation of academic
diplomas, movement of goods and all those issues that
are on the agenda.

Unfortunately, the violent incidents in July mar
and threaten that constructive dialogue and goodwill
towards a peaceful understanding. We wish to renew
our call for such outbreaks and such actions not to be
tolerated and for the authorities to do their utmost to
prevent them from reoccurring.

We wish to underscore the cooperation and
monitoring work that UNMIK is developing at the
technical level with the Ministry of Justice and the
Ministry of Internal Affairs of Kosovo and the work
with the Ministry of Justice of Serbia. We value their
work to facilitate dialogue between the authorities of
Serbia and States that have not recognized Kosovo and
the Ministry of Justice. We regret that mutual legal
assistance between the Ministries of Justice of Kosovo
and of Serbia remains at an impasse.
We are greatly concerned that incomplete
investigations, the inadequate implementation of
protection measures, lack of cooperation between the
police and prosecutors and a failure to prosecute
offenders exacerbate impunity. Without a strong
message from law enforcement mechanisms that
violence will not be tolerated, perpetrators will
continue to abuse, aware or confident that they will not
be punished.

We take note of the recommendations contained
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/514), as
they will help to strengthen the dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina. Sensitive issues with regard to
North Kosovo can be resolved only by peaceful means,
on the basis of consultations with all communities on
the ground, and not through unilateral actions. Joint
work must be undertaken to prevent the deterioration
of the situation, and we call forcefully for the
outbreaks of violence and tensions in northern Kosovo
to end. Violent unilateral actions are unacceptable
because they only disrupt peaceful dialogue and the
pursuit of lasting solutions.

We welcome the reiteration by the Kosovo
authorities of their will to cooperate with the
investigation into organ trafficking undertaken by
Mr. Dick Marty, Special Rapporteur of the Council of
Europe, and we would ask the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo to inject real momentum into
the investigation work entrusted to it by the Task Force
established to that end. The announced appointment of
the new prosecutor is a step in the right direction, and
we urge him to make meaningful progress in the
investigation. If he does not, another alternative will
have to be found.

Finally, it is regrettable that the Security Council
has been unable to agree on a draft presidential
statement with respect on a situation and debate as
important as today's.

