Mr. Ahmed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my appreciation and
thanks to Mr. Lacroix and Mr. Onanga-Anyanga for
their comprehensive briefings. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2019/817).

I take this opportunity to reiterate the full
commitment of my country to cooperating with the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA), so that it can implement its mandate pursuant
to resolution 1990 (2011) and subsequent resolutions
and carry out its functions in a way that contributes to
strengthening security and stability in Abyei and along
the border between the two countries.

I want to stress once again that the Agreement
of 20 June 2011, on temporary arrangements for
the administration and security of the Abyei area, is
the basis for a comprehensive settlement of the final
status of Abyei. The agreement stated that no change
would be made concerning what has been agreed upon
without the approval of the three signatory parties:
the Government of the Sudan, the Government of the
Republic of South Sudan and the Federal Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia.

UNISFA is a security force in nature. It was
deployed to carry out specific functions for an interim
period, as agreed by all parties and as ratified by
the Council, taking into consideration that Abyei is
part of Sudanese territory and that the Sudan has
full sovereignty thereover, pursuant to the 2005
Comprehensive Peace Agreement.

We have gathered here today to discuss the
situation in Abyei in the light of recent significant
changes in the Sudan followed by a major change in
the relationship between the two countries, particularly
in the context of the mediation of the Sudan between
the parties to the conflict in South Sudan and the fact
that the Sudan hosted the negotiations that led to the
signing of the peace agreement. Negotiations began
recently between the Sudanese parties to achieve peace
in the Sudan, sponsored and hosted by the Government
of the Republic of South Sudan. This round of talks
led to important and positive results that strengthened
the chances of reaching a just, comprehensive and
sustainable peace.

The efforts of the two countries - the Sudan and
South Sudan - to assist each other in achieving peace
and stability must be supported. These endeavours
are in the interest of the two fraternal peoples and
will lead to strengthening cooperation between the
two countries, which could represent a solid basis for
seeking a solution for Abyei through the implementation
of previous agreements.

Several meetings were held recently at which joint
bodies and commissions between the Sudan and South
Sudan addressed pending issues concerning Abyei. The
Joint Political and Security Mechanism in Juba held
its meeting earlier this month and discussed measures
that were implemented in order to establish joint
administrative mechanisms and to evacuate both forces
from the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone, as well as
complete the opening of border crossing points.

Both parties reaffirmed their commitment to the
agreements of 27 September 2012 and to the immediate
reopening of the Kosti-Renk crossing point. The Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism also
held a meeting and issued a full description of the
border areas agreed upon by the two countries, and it
agreed to meet again to complete its work on disputed
and claimed areas.

I would like to reaffirm the importance of
the Security Council considering these important
developments when extending the mandate of UNISFA
next month. It is also important for the upcoming
mandate to support the positive developments between
the two countries, leading to the final status of Abyei,
free of any measure that could undermine these
developments and efforts on the ground.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
determination of the Government of the Sudan to
cooperate with the Government of the Republic
of South Sudan and all partners to reach a lasting
and comprehensive solution leading to security and
stability for Abyei and the region, while giving the
people of Abyei the opportunity to live the decent life
that they deserve. We also assert our full readiness for
and openness to any initiative aimed at reaching our
main objective: resolving the final status of Abyei. I
would also like to thank all those who contributed
to facilitating the work of UNISFA, particularly the
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, the African
Union Commission and the United Nations.

