Namibia thanks you, Sir, for organizing this open debate on the issue of women and peace and security. We are encouraged, as always, by the overwhelming support for this open debate. When Namibia was campaigning to join the Security Council back in 1998, it was determined to make a positive and lasting contribution to international peace. At that time, Namibia had only been independent for eight years, and our experience in the liberation struggle certainly informed the decision to pursue progressive policies for the maintenance of world peace. During Namibia's liberation struggle, women played various important roles and were not necessarily seen as victims or as always needing protection. From early on, it was recognized that women could contribute to the liberation movement as teachers, doctors and fighters, and could certainly take a seat at the table when peace negotiations took place. Namibian women in exile played their part in bringing international attention to the colonial situation in Namibia, and engaged with various partners, including the United Nations. It followed that, by the time Namibia joined the Security Council in 1999, we were ready to introduce the historic concept that women can and must contribute to peace processes. The idea was premised on women's experience in the liberation struggle and also informed by regional and international experiences of women. Although, at the time, the agenda was not the most popular, Namibia managed to garner the support of civil society, women's organizations and many Member States, and in October 2000, under the presidency of Namibia, the Security Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. Resolution 1325 (2000) formally drew global attention to the unrecognized, underutilized and undervalued contributions of women in preventing war, building peace and helping rebuild societies after conflict. The United Nations acknowledged that the protection of women and the prevention of violence against women and children could no longer be left to men alone. At that time, we envisioned that the agenda would be adopted by all Governments and that, overall, we would see an increase in women's participation in peacekeeping, peacemaking and in general decision-making at the political level. Indeed, the basic goal has been attained. In Namibia, various policies and legislative frameworks have been enacted, such as the Defence Policy of 2010, the Namibian Defence Force Gender Mainstreaming Action Plan 2000-2005, the National Gender Policy 2010-2020 and, most recently, Namibia's first national action plan on women and peace and security, which was launched in 2019. These frameworks and policies have translated into tangible gains for women in decision-making and in the security sector. With 23 per cent representation, Namibia is among the countries with the highest proportion of women in the defence force in the Southern African Development Community region. Regionally, the African Union (AU) has spearheaded several initiatives, including the launch of the continental framework for reporting and monitoring on the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda, which was a huge milestone in advancing the realization of the transformative goals of resolution 1325 (2000) in Africa. The framework demonstrates the continued commitment of the AU to fully implementing the women and peace and security agenda in Africa. In addition, over 30 African countries to date have adopted national action plans on the women and peace and security agenda. However, these gains are not enough, there is more work to be done, not just nationally but globally as well. As the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) continues to spread, it poses an even more severe threat in conflict zones. Fighting the virus must not distract us from the zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse, and neither must it allow impunity for violations of that policy. In the context of conflict, therefore, our call for action must be to ensure that, as we focus on and bring all our energy to the battle against COVID-19, we must still keep a clear lens on peacekeeping operations. The missing piece for further implementation is political will. We should develop strategies to promote women's participation in decision-making, including engagement with national electoral systems and political parties to provide an equal playing field for women candidates. There is also a need to support leadership development for women and girls so that we assist them in cultivating their political potential and professional skills. There is need for increased integration of gender in national planning and budgeting as part of our strategies to train national officials to execute plans and programmes, and thereby strengthen the abilities of women to advocate for decision- making positions and political leadership in general. In addition, we should broaden the space for women's participation in peace processes, including training women mediators and advocating gender-equality measures as critical to security policies and practices. To this end, Namibia will be launching the international centre for women in peace and security, on 31 October 2020, as we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). The centre will focus on, among other things, research aspects of mediation and negotiations, as well as capacity-building and supporting women on issues related to gender-based violence.
