Mr. Inzko: Allow me to begin by thanking the
members of the Security Council for their ongoing
commitment to our common goal of irreversible peace
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina still
merits close attention if we are to ensure that the gains
made after the war in terms of stability, rebuilding the
country and reconciling its people are not lost. In my
address to the Security Council in May (see S/PV.6966),
I described how the political situation had reverted to
the negative trends of the past seven years and how the
country's elected leadership had failed to make a serious
effort towards progress on Euro-Atlantic integration.

I regret to say that six months later, with less than a
year left until the next general elections, that is still the
case. In the past six months, the political leaders have
again missed a chance to take a decisive step forward
by agreeing to correct discriminatory provisions in
the electoral system. Those changes are required by
the Seja'ie-Finci judgement of the European Court of
Human Rights. Such changes are not only a condition
for the country to move forward towards European
Union candidacy but also a test of the country's ability
to apply basic human rights standards in the conduct of
elections and to live up to its international obligations.

Similarly, progress has remained elusive in
regulating the question of the ownership of military
property, which has kept Bosnia and Herzegovina from
activating its membership action plan with NATO.

At the beginning of the reporting period, the public
expressed its dissatisfaction with the inertia of elected
leaders in demonstrations throughout the country, the
most dramatic of which were seen outside the building
of the institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina, where,
in June, several thousand demonstrators surrounded
the building over nearly two days, with employees and
visitors kept inside for several hours.

At the end of the reporting period, Bosnia and
Herzegovina again saw protests of a different nature
on a much smaller scale, related to the ethnic divisions
in the education system. I believe that the international
community as a whole has underestimated the
significance of education as part of the process ofpost-
war reconciliation and reintegration.

While those two protests were of a very different
nature and about very different issues, they reveal
the fundamental dissatisfaction that is present in
many different segments of the country both with the
unresolved divisions within the country and with the
lack ofurgency among the country's leaders in reaching
compromises to address those divisions and to move
forward.

They also reveal, in my view, that the public has
understood something that many Bosnian leaders
have still failed to grasp, namely, that democracy is
something to be exercised not only every four years
through elections but also in between.

Turning to the main political developments of the
past six months, the general trend has been negative
but there have been some exceptions. Significantly,
the country managed in October to conduct its first
population census since 1991. For 20 years, there
had been no census. It was conducted successfully
in October. That is a significant development and is
vitally important for providing statistical information
on social and economic issues. It is important that the
results of the census not be used to promote divisions or
to exacerbate ethnic tensions.

Generally, the economic situation has been
difficult. In addition to its own resources, Bosnia
and Herzegovina has continued to rely on external
budgetary support over the past year to pay its bills.
The official unemployment rate is still 44 per cent. That
is of course another indication of the serious economic
hardship suffered by a large portion of the population.
At the same time, it should be stressed that there have
also been some positive developments, for example in
the areas of exports, where we have seen an 8-per-cent
increase this year, and of industrial production, where
we have seen a 7-per-cent to date.

From the point of view of my mandate to uphold
the Dayton Peace Agreement, which includes the State
Constitution, I remain concerned by the readiness of
the entities, in particular the Republika Srpska, to
challenge the competencies of the State provided for
under the Peace Agreement. An area of particular
concern is the rule of law, where rhetorical attacks
against the judicial institutions established to exercise
the constitutional responsibilities of the State have
continued. This political interference in the work of the
judiciary was taken a step further in October, when the
Republika Srpska National Assembly issued another
set of conclusions against the State-level judiciary.

Another concern with the rule of law is the ongoing
failure of the domestic institutions to implement the
verdicts of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional
Court, which are final and binding under the terms
of the Peace Agreement. Over 80 decisions remain
unimplemented.

During the reporting period, the dispute continued
among the parties in Government in the Federation,
which is a bigger entity, but its intensity diminished
and the Government went back to work. My Office also
facilitated a resolution to fill long-standing vacancies
on the Federation Constitutional Court to ensure that
that important institution could continue its work.
Nonetheless, the crisis in the larger entity's Federation
has continued to reveal functional deficiencies and
gaps in the entity's system of Government and the
ongoing need for reform in the Federation to make the
system more functional, efficient and cost-effective. In
this context, I welcome the initiative of local experts,
supported by the United States Government, to reform
the Federation Constitution in order to improve the
functionality ofthe entity, which is a process my Office
strongly supports.

The functional inefficiency of the Federation
stood again in some contrast to the institutions of the
Republika Srpska, which functioned very smoothly.
During the reporting period, they met on a regular
basis f they also had some changes of ministerial
posts - and the Government continued its efforts to
tackle the economic and social challenges facing the
entity. However, from the point of View of future threats
to the stability of the country, I remain concerned about
the continued statements by some of the most senior
officials from the Republika Srpska advocating the
dissolution of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a country.

The Republika Srpska President remains the
most frequent and vocal critic of the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
recently boasting again that he will lead the entity to
independence. During the reporting period, the Serb
member of the Bosnia and Herzegovina presidency,
Mr. Radmanovic', also raised the possibility of an
independence referendum should half the States
Members of the United Nations recognize Kosovo. He
presented this as the official policy of the Republika
Srpska, previously adopted by the entity Assembly.

In this context, I believe that the continued presence
of the European Union and NATO military missions
in Bosnia and Herzegovina still plays a vital role in
reassuring the public that the country remains safe and
secure despite the difficult political situation. In my
view, the deterrent effect of a relatively small force with
an executive mandate is well worth the investment.
Given the difficult political circumstances and the
chance for further challenges in 2014, I consider their
continued presence to be a critical reassurance, and I
therefore warmly welcome the adoption of resolution
2123 (2013), prolonging the mandate of the military
mission for another year.

I want to conclude my remarks today on a more
positive note, for while we cannot ignore the ongoing
limited progress or the political instability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, we must also remember that the
country, its leaders and its people still have every
chance to work together, to succeed and to prosper.

The European Union (EU) has demonstrated its
commitment to assisting Bosnia and Herzegovina in
meeting the country's EU aspirations time and again,
engaging at the highest levels and reinforcing its
presence on the ground with one of its most experienced
and skilful diplomats, Ambassador Peter Sorensen. He
is doing an excellent job and has brought the European
Union to centre stage in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Peter
Sorensen and I and our offices are cooperating closely,
respecting our different but complementary mandates,
in order to achieve synergies for the country.

As we are at the United Nations here today, I should
also mention the very good work that the United Nations
family is currently doing on the ground in Bosnia
and Herzegovina under the able leadership of United
Nations Country Resident Coordinator Yuri Afanasiev.

To see the potential ofwhat Bosnia and Herzegovina
could achieve, we need only observe how the processes
of Euro-Atlantic integration have already transformed
Bosnia's neighbours and brought with them enormous
gains. In this sense, Bosnia and Herzegovina has the
benefit of the best regional situation in the past 20
years. The country has benefited from good relations
with Croatia, which is now a State member of the
European Union, under the capable leadership of
President Josipovie, Prime Minister Milanovie and
Minister for Foreign Affairs Pusie. Croatia also has
1,000 kilometres of common border with Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which means that the European Union
now has 1,000 kilometres of common border with
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The country also benefits
from good relations with Serbia, which is a future
candidate country, and the constructive policies of
President Nikolic', Prime Minister Dacic', Deputy
Prime Minister Vueie and Minister for Foreign Affairs
Mrkie. Ultimately, Bosnia and Herzegovina continues
to benefit from good relations with its third neighbour,
Montenegro. We should remember that exactly the
same opportunities are being offered to Bosnia and
Herzegovina's leaders as to the countries in the region
that I just mentioned.

At the same time, the past few years have shown
that the international community should not ignore, in
its approach, some of the specificities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's history, its post-war settlement - it has
been exactly 18 years since the war ended - and risks
to its future stability. Again, this should be cause not
for despair, but rather for the international community
to step back and consider whether there is a need to
recalibrate our approach and how we can best help
Bosnia and Herzegovina and its citizens on the track
towards prosperity and political stability.

In this context, we need to stand together to
support all those in Bosnia and Herzegovina who are
ready to help the country progress and stand against
those who would take the country backwards towards
further division and disintegration. With the sustained
attention and goodwill of this body and the international
community as a whole, I am sure that we can help
Bosnia and Herzegovina's leaders and its wonderful
leaders to reach their common goals.

