Mr. Wang Xuexian (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Security Council has convened this formal
meeting to discuss the question of Afghanistan, which
clearly shows the importance the international community
attaches to this question. We sincerely hope that today's
open debate will be conducive to a peaceful settlement of
the Afghan question.

The rivalries between the Afghan factions, and the
long drawn-out strife, have brought perpetual turmoil and
misery to the Afghan people. The Afghan conflict has led
to instability in the region. As a close neighbour of
Afghanistan, China wishes to express its profound
concern and disquiet. The Chinese Government believes
that the achievement of national reconciliation is the key
to a just and lasting settlement of the Afghan question.
The final settlement of this question depends,
fundamentally, on the Afghan people themselves. It
follows that, first, all sides concerned should show the
sincere political will to settle their differences through
peaceful negotiation. Secondly, the parties concerned
should immediately implement a ceasefire and cease all
hostilities. In our view, the attempt to use military means
to settle the conflict will only aggravate the conflict,
plunging the Afghan people into dire misery indefinitely.

This problem has many complex causes. We urge all
sides to take account of the fundamental interests of the
Afghan people, bury the hatchet, set aside their political
and religious differences and engage in serious

 

negotiations so as to establish as early as possible a stable,
broad-based government acceptable to all sides.

We appreciate and support the good offices of the
Secretary-General and his special representative in seeking
a political settlement of this question. We hope that the
United Nations can continue to play a central, leading role
in this field. At the same time, we have also noted the
political and diplomatic efforts of the countries concerned
in the region to give impetus to the settlement of this
question, and we welcome those efforts. We hope that,
through the joint efforts of the international community,
favourable conditions can be created for the settlement of
this question. We look forward to the day when there will
be a comprehensive and political settlement to the Afghan
question.

