Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to express my
gratitude to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his
informative briefing. I also thank him for his leadership
and all his support, in particular his tremendous efforts,
as well as those of his Special Envoy, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, and of the entire United Nations team, to
achieve the full implementation of resolution 2401
(2018) and a definitive resolution of the Syrian conflict.

Today's meeting should be another milestone in
the international response to the humanitarian crisis
prevailing in Syria. However, unfortunately, that is not
the case. As the Secretary-General underscored in his
briefing, in recent weeks, the parties involved at all
levels have intensified their fighting in eastern Ghouta
despite the humanitarian ceasefire agreed through the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2401 (2018) exactly
16 days ago.

Nevertheless, we welcome with satisfaction reports
that the United Nations and Syrian Arab Red Crescent
convoy was finally able to reach eastern Ghouta last
Friday to complete the delivery of food that could not
be unloaded on 5 March for security reasons. However,
the delivery of all necessary humanitarian supplies,
including the medical and health-care supplies that were
seized in the first attempt by convoys to the besieged
areas, continues to be urgent and must be carried out
without delay.

We also welcome the news that the Secretary-
General has just provided to us with regard to some
improvements in the situation on the ground in eastern
Ghouta. We hope that today's meeting will lead to
greater improvement or a definitive resolution of the
situation in that part of Syria.
We read the letter dated 9 March that the
co-penholders - France, the United Kingdom and the
United States - addressed to the Secretary-General
and the Council. We have also read very carefully the
many letters that the Syrian Government has addressed
to the members of the Security Council through its
Permanent Representative. Basically, we note in those
letters the repeated mutual accusations that have been a
characteristic of this long conflict since its beginning.
We are talking about a 30-day ceasefire, and time is
gradually running out. We have had enough of mutual
recrimination. The only collective task that we should
focus on is finding a coherent peace mechanism to stop
this endless and heinous war.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea remains deeply
concerned about the developments in the situation
in Syria. We reiterate the urgent need for Council
members who have influence over the national parties
to the conflict to redouble their diplomatic initiatives
with a view to reaching a common understanding on
how to find a political solution to the tragic crisis in
Syria, the effects of which are a threat to the region and
the international community, in particular because of
the humanitarian implications posed by the millions of
Syrians who are currently being displaced within the
country or seeking asylum and because of the security
risks caused by the expansion of Da'esh, the Al-Nusra
Front and other terrorist entities.

We also express our deep indignation at the
continuing fighting in the province of Idlib, which,
for seven consecutive days, has been subject to attacks
and rocket fire from Islamic factions in areas of the
cities of Kafraya and Fo'ah. Those events, like many
others, demonstrate the need for a common front that
will expel from Syria the Islamic State, Al-Qaida, the
Al-Nusra Front and all other associated entities that
threaten peace and security in the region.

In conclusion, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
calls on the guarantors of the Astana process - Russia,
Iran and Turkey - to ensure that the rounds of
negotiations to be held on 15 and 16 March - to which
the Special Envoy of the United Nations for Syria,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, was invited - serve not only
to plan future actions and strategies, but also to give
genuine impetus to finding a solution to the Syrian
crisis once and for all.

During my statement after the adoption of
resolution 2401 (2018), I said that we had partially
spared ourselves from embarrassment (see S/PV.8188).
However, since 16 days have passed since the adoption
of the resolution without it being implemented. I think
we remain completely shamed.

