The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I
thank the French presidency for having put today's
important item on the Security Council's agenda.
Transnational issues, including drug trafficking and
organized crime, are increasingly present on the
Council's agenda, clearly reflecting the gravity of the
threat. Drug trafficking and organized crime have an
impact on almost all United Nations activity, be it in
the spheres of development, security, the environment
or the rule oflaw.

From a different perspective, however, this also
means that all of our activities in every area could
reduce the risk represented by transnational threats and
their impact. Our response must therefore be global
and integrated both within the United Nations family
and as a family of nations.
2
(spoke in English)

First, as to the global response, Member States
have united to fight pandemics, poverty, climate
change and terrorism. We can and must do the same to
counter organized crime. Member States have already
worked together on a number of important initiatives.
These include the General Assembly's efforts against
drugs, the Kimberley Process against blood diamonds,
and the United Nations Global Initiative to Fight
Human Trafficking.

But there is so much more to be done against
emerging threats, such as cybercrime, money-
laundering, environmental crime and the dumping of
hazardous waste. The Crime Prevention Congress to be
held in April in Salvador, Brazil, offers an opportunity
to explore how we can strengthen the legal and
operational means to fight them. This year is also the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. I
urge the Council to sharpen that powerful instrument at
the Conference of the Parties in October.

One of the most important improvements would
be the establishment of a monitoring mechanism. In
this work, we should not focus only on what we are
battling against; we must never lose sight of what we
are fighting for - justice and the rule of law. We
cannot fight fire with fire. The criminals use ruthless
and exploitative methods that we can never
contemplate. Human rights must always be at the
forefront of efforts to control crime.

My second key word today is "integration".
Integration is essential at many levels. Nationally,
agencies must pull together to fight all aspects of
crime. Regionally, States must share information and
carry out joint operations. This is not always easy. A
lack of capacity and a lack of trust often cause
problems.

The lack of capacity can be overcome. We have
seen this in West Africa, where vulnerability to drugs
and crime is being reduced thanks to the work of the
Economic Community of West African States in
support of the Praia process. The West Africa Coast
Initiative, involving the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Political Affairs, is
also a good example of the One United Nations
approach. I urge the Council to support similar regional
initiatives, such as the Santo Domingo Pact launched
10-25007
here at the United Nations today, which has the same
aims for Central America and the Caribbean.

As for building trust, experience shows that
tackling common threats can build confidence and
good-neighbourly relations between countries that may
otherwise have their differences. Initiatives to share
information on the drug trade in West Asia, Central
Asia and the Gulf are among the examples of this
happening. With transnational threats, States have no
choice but to work together. We are all affected,
whether as countries of supply, trafficking or demand.
Therefore, we have a shared responsibility to act.

I welcome the Security Council's presidential
statement S/PRST/2009/32 of 8 December 2009, in
which the Council called for the issue of drug
trafficking and organized crime to be mainstreamed
into the United Nations work throughout the conflict
cycle. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
continues to carry out important work in providing the
evidence on these transnational threats and the
technical assistance with which to respond.

Transnational networks create vectors of violence
that blaze trails of death and destruction through some
of the world's most vulnerable regions. Crime
prevention is conflict prevention. Together, they build
safer and healthier societies. Criminal justice should
figure more prominently in United Nations
peacebuilding and peacekeeping.

(spoke in French)

In conclusion, we have to act without delay. In its
most recent presidential statement on this issue, the
Council recommended that I provide more information
on transnational threats. I will work more closely with
all the relevant components of the United Nations
system to bring impending threats to the Council's
attention. In return, I urge the Council to ensure that
early warning is followed up by early action. Together,
let us prevent drug trafficking and organized crime
from threatening international peace and security and
all of our hard-won achievements across our agenda.

