Ms. Banks (New Zealand): Since the launching
of the Bougainville peace process in 1997, New
Zealand has addressed open meetings of the Security
Council on a number of occasions. We have welcomed
steps forward and have urged parties to address issues
where progress has lagged. We have on several
occasions encouraged Council members to approve
extensions to the small United Nations political
mission that has been on the ground in Bougainville
since 1998.

It is therefore with pleasure that I am speaking on
an occasion that marks the end of the work of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Bougainville
(UNOMB). The fourteenth of June saw the
inauguration of the Autonomous Government of the
Papua New Guinea province of Bougainville, a
significant milestone in the Bougainville peace
process. The successful and peaceful conduct of the
elections means that the United Nations Observer
Mission in Bougainville can exit, having fully
discharged its mandate. Members of the Security
Council, past and present, can feel fully vindicated that
their decisions to extend the UNOMB mandate were
indeed the right ones.

Marian Hobbs, New Zealand's Associate Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Trade, has welcomed the
successful completion of the elections as an historic
moment and a cause for celebration. She described the
peace process as a good example of how the United
Nations and regional and other partners can work
together with stakeholders in a conflict over a long
period of time to achieve a peaceful resolution. Let me
add to that New Zealand's deep appreciation for the
work of the United Nations in Bougainville. I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Turk for his introductory
statement today and for his support for the process.

Even by United Nations standards, Bougainville
has been a difficult operating environment owing to its
remoteness. Nevertheless, the United Nations
succeeded in establishing a light and responsive
presence that usefully complemented regional
initiatives, including the New Zealand-led Truce
Monitoring Group and its successor, the Australian-led
Peace Monitoring Group. The United Nations political
mission was a good example of successful, demand-
driven United Nations action in the field. New Zealand
is particularly grateful for the contributions of United
Nations staff, both those from the Department of
Political Affairs and those who served in Bougainville
itself. Their commitment has been a major factor in the
success of the United Nations mission.

As we move to the next phase of the Bougainville
peace process, the economic development of
Bougainville will become an increasingly important
focus. New Zealand looks forward to continuing to
work with the United Nations and its funds and
programmes to support the people of Bougainville in
fulfilling their aspirations to a peaceful future.

