Ms. Sapag Mufioz de la Pefia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Nigeria for organizing this
important meeting in the framework of the activities
commemorating the twentieth anniversary of the
genocide in Rwanda, whose victims, among them many
children, we remember today with deep respect and
solidarity. We appreciate the statement made by Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson and through him the
commitment of the Secretary-General in this area. We
are particularly grateful to Ambassador Keating for
the reminder he has given us and for his words on the
lessons learned that we should consider today.

My country had the honour to participate in the
commemoration held in Kigali on 7 April. At that time
we conveyed our solidarity with the people of Rwanda.
We would like to once again express our gratitude
for our invitation to that commemoration, which our
special envoy described as a powerful experience in
both human and professional terms.

The gravity of the crime of genocide and its general
condemnation meant that a mere four years elapsed
between the conception and adoption of the Convention
on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide, which established that its States parties must
undertake to prevent and punish that crime in time
of peace or war. The International Court of Justice
has ruled that those obligations extend even to those
that are not party to the Convention because they are
obligations erga omnes.

Genocide springs up in divided societies, where
perceptions and feelings of exclusion that fuel actions
against specific groups, creating the conditions for
the crime. Such declines in respect for human rights
are often a warning sign that demands that national
and international authorities display the political will
necessary to recognize and report them, as many other
speakers have said. In that regard, we emphasize the
Secretary-General's Rights Up Front initiative, since it
reaffirms the central role of human rights in the United
Nations system, as well as the importance of the work
of the Offices of the Special Advisers on the Prevention
of Genocide and on the Responsibility to Protect, which
have a vital preventive role to play.
Prevention is possible and should be a central
part of our responsibilities as a Council and an
international community. There is room here to
exercise preventive diplomacy and make efficient use
of existing early-warning mechanisms. With that end in
view, we recognize the role of regional and subregional
organizations, such as the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, as well as of local and
religious leaders, women, young people, civil society
and the media. We must improve coordination and
cooperation with such actors. To that end, international
cooperation is necessary. The establishment of national
commissions for the prevention of genocide and the
efforts made in that regard by the Special Adviser on
the Prevention of Genocide, mentioned at the Arria
formula meeting on intercommunal dialogue and crime
prevention of 14 March, are examples to consider.

Greater commitment to strengthening the rule
of law and respect for international law, in particular
human rights and humanitarian international law, will
make it possible to improve levels of inclusion and
respect for diversity, development and social justice,
thereby dealing with the root causes of such conflicts,
as the Permanent Representative of Rwanda pointed
out.

Each State has the primary responsibility to protect
its population against massive and widespread human
rights abuses. The international community must stand
by and support Member States when they willfully or
owing to a clear inability do not meet that obligation
under the concept of the responsibility to protect,

enshrined in the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1). Chile has convened a series
of seminars and meetings at home in the context of
its commitment to the concept of the responsibility to
protect and its preventive nature. This year, we hope to
hold a new outreach seminar at the intersectoral level
together with the Global Centre for the Responsibility
to Protect.

Another key aspect is the need for international
mechanisms and/or tribunals to ensure accountability,
thereby preventing impunity and, at the same time,
serving as a tool for deterrence and the prevention of
future crimes. In that regard, we recall the important role
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. We
also underscore the role of the International Criminal
Court, established by the Rome Statute, which is one
of the most important developments in international
criminal justice of the past 50 years, since it is the
only permanent independent international criminal
court to complement national criminal jurisdictions
established in order to deal with, inter alia, the crime of
genocide. Given its complementary nature, States must
duly cooperate with the Court in order for it to fully
discharge its mandate.

In conclusion, Chile wishes to reiterate the appeal
we launched at the General Assembly for countries
that have the veto power to refrain from using it
in cases of crimes against humanity, war crimes,
genocide or ethnic cleansing, since that detracts from
the effectiveness of the Council in upholding the most
fundamental values and principles of humanity. We
urge the Security Council, in particular its permanent
members, to shoulder that responsibility. Let us not
forget the failures of recent years and the complex
situations facing us today. May we not act too late.

