Mr. Jagne (Gambia): At long last, the much-
heralded "solution" resolution on the question of Iraq is
before us. Your delegation, Sir, deserves commendation
for all the effort that was put into it. We are confident
that with the adoption of this draft resolution, the Council
will succeed in breaking the logjam that cast a spell on it
and threw it into a state of near-paralysis for a year, with
serious ramifications for regional peace and security.

The Council has been divided for much too long
over Iraq, and the continued stalemate has not been in
anybody's interest. That is why my delegation added its
voice to those of other members of the Council who
wanted this matter to be brought to a close as soon as
possible. The efforts deployed with patience, persistence
and perseverance, were not in vain. Moreover, for the
first time since the imposition of sanctions against Iraq,

 

this draft resolution offers real prospects for sanctions to be
suspended and for their eventual lifting. In other words, it
holds out the prospect of our seeing light at the end of the
tunnel. The other day, my delegation drew the attention of
the Council to the fact that the important thing is there is
light at the end of the tunnel. But if we just stand by, and
ask ourselves whether the light at the end of the tunnel is
candlelight or moonlight, we are not making any progress;
we are not helping Iraq.

There is no hidden agenda. Paragraph 7 is abundantly
clear about where we want to go and what the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) is required to do, in that it
clearly states what is required of Iraq. Secondly, on the
issue of Kuwaiti prisoners of war and Kuwaiti archives and
other property, this draft resolution provides a new
approach. From now on there is going to be an active and
close follow-up process. This important issue will not,
therefore, be relegated to a secondary position. It is a
serious humanitarian problem and must be treated as such.

Today, it is not the intention of my delegation to dwell
on this issue, since the Permanent Representative of Kuwait
has already spoken about it with unrivalled eloquence. My
delegation agrees fully with everything that he has said on
this issue. It will be recalled that the Gambian delegation
has always maintained that the question of Kuwaiti
prisoners of war, national archives and other property
cannot be swept under the carpet. Iraq must agree to
resume cooperation with the Tripartite Commission so that
we can bring to a close the question of the prisoners of war
and other missing persons. Some delegations have been
lamenting the nine years of sanctions against Iraq. But it is
also fair to lament the nine years of pain, anguish and
uncertainty that 600 Kuwaiti families have been
undergoing. Imagine the mental torture of 600 Kuwaiti
families - they do not know the fate of their loved ones.
The archives must be returned; failing to do so would be
like robbing a country of its national identity.

T hirdly, the draft resolution addresses the humanitarian
dimension of the Iraqi problem in a manner that we hope
will go a long way to alleviating the suffering of the people
of Iraq. It will now be possible for Iraq to sell as much
petroleum and petroleum products as it can. As soon as a
list is drawn up, humanitarian items such as foodstuffs,
pharmaceuticals and medical supplies, as well as basic or
standard medical and agricultural equipment and
educational items, will no longer be submitted to the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 661 (1990) for
approval. Only the Secretary-General will need to be
notified of their importation. This will remove the most
depressing constraints on the Iraqi programme and hence
make it possible for more humanitarian goods to reach
Iraq as and when required.

Moreover, provision has been made to appoint a
group of experts with the mandate speedily to approve
contracts for spare parts and other equipment necessary to
enable Iraq to increase its exports of petroleum and
petroleum products. This would eliminate the problem of
holds on spare parts for specified projects. Furthermore,
this draft resolution also makes provision for the
appointment of another group of experts, including oil
industry experts, to report on Iraq's existing petroleum
production and export capacity and to make
recommendations. The use of additional import routes for
Iraqi petroleum and petroleum products is not even ruled
out.

We could continue to enumerate and extol the
qualities and merits of this draft resolution. Henceforth,
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 661
(1990) will be directed to take a decision on all
applications in respect of humanitarian and essential
civilian needs within two working days. To crown it all,
there is a trigger mechanism to suspend sanctions,
provided that Iraq cooperates in all aspects in honouring
its obligations within the framework of the relevant
Security Council resolutions. While acknowledging the
progress made by Iraq to fulfil some of these obligations,
there are still key tasks that remain to be completed.
UNMOVIC and the International Atomic Energy Agency
will identify them, and then we will move on. The ball is
now in Iraq's court, and we sincerely urge the Iraqi
authorities to seize this unique opportunity to set in
motion the process for the countdown to the suspension
of sanctions and their eventual lifting.

It must be understood, however, that what is being
offered in this draft resolution is the lowest common
denominator, and we should be mindful of the fact that,
inasmuch as there is need for consensus, the Council
should endeavour to set and maintain high standards that
are consistent and even-handed at all times. If it makes
the sad mistake of changing or lowering the standards that
it sets for itself for one reason or another, it will be
setting a dangerous precedent. The Council must guard
against giving special treatment to any country, no matter
what happens. All countries should be treated fairly and
equally. That is why my delegation vehemently opposed
the idea of "implementability"; it is synonymous with
palatability and, is therefore, a non-starter.
 

We have always said that Iraq is a great country with
a rich cultural heritage, home to one of the oldest
civilizations known, and that, by virtue of its abundant
natural, mineral, human and other resources, it has huge
potential to become an economic force to be reckoned with,
not only in the Gulf region but also worldwide. Today,
there are a number of countries that are not military Powers
yet are forces to be reckoned with because of their
economic, cultural, scientific and technological strength. In
our view, that is real greatness - not military might and
the accumulation of weapons of mass destruction. In fact,
the draft resolution before us recalls the goal of establishing
in the Middle East a zone free from weapons of mass
destruction and all missiles for their delivery, and the
objective of a global ban on chemical weapons.

In the light of all that I have said, my delegation will
vote in favour of the draft resolution before us. It shows the
way forward, so that Iraq too - provided that it cooperates
in all aspects - can join the ranks of that category of
countries which have earned the respect and admiration of
all not because of the misleading notion of military might
but because of the enlightened pursuit of economic miracles
and success stories associated with technological
breakthroughs in the service of mankind.

We are convinced more than ever before that by
cooperating earnestly towards the implementation of this
draft resolution, on which the Council will soon be taking
action, Iraq has everything to gain and nothing to lose. In
any case, half a loaf is better than none.

Finally, the delegation of the Gambia would like once
more to pay a special tribute to Ambassador Celso Amorim
for the pioneering role that he played in the quest for a
Viable solution to the Iraqi problem. He is a true trail-
blazer.

