Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would first like to thank the delegations of
France, the United Kingdom and the United States for
requesting the convening of this meeting and Special
Envoy Staffan de Mistura for his informative briefing
and hard work in facilitating the political process in
Syria. The promptness with which this meeting has
been convened, so soon after the Council's meeting on
17 October (S/PV.8373) and the 24 October meeting in
Damascus, underscores the need for greater efforts to
address and resolve our new challenges and to set up a
constitutional committee without further delay, with a
view to opening the way to a peaceful political solution
to this long-running conflict.

While the Republic of Equatorial Guinea welcomes
the Special Envoy's exemplary conduct and the way
he has carried out his functions in extremely complex
circumstances, we can only deplore the fact that today,
after eight years of conflict, during which numerous
meetings have been held in the Geneva and Astana
formats, we find ourselves at a crossroads, as the
representative of France eloquently pointed out at the
17 October meeting and mentioned again this morning.
The spectre of military escalation and the difficult path
towards a resumption of peace negotiations between the
Syrian parties continue to be a focus of the international
community's attention.

We welcomed the meeting in Damascus on
24 October between the Special Envoy and Syria's
Minister for Foreign Affairs as part of the efforts to set
in motion the constitutional committee to be charged
with drafting a new constitution for Syria. We want to
remind the parties that significant progress still has to
be made, nine months after an agreement was reached
in Sochi on forming the committee. In that regard,
the demilitarization of Idlib favoured by the Astana
guarantors offers an opportunity to give the political
process greater impetus by creating an environment
conducive to intra-Syrian peace negotiations.

It is important to use this relatively peaceful
environment to deal with the difficulties that have been
preventing the committee from starting work without
delay. As has been emphasized, the main stumbling
block remains the composition of the middle third list,
of members of civil society, proposed by the United
Nations. We appeal to the parties to spare no effort to
establish a committee with extremely high credibility,
which is crucial, and one that is as representative as
possible. In addition, for the committee to be credible
and legitimate, its composition, rules of operation
and decision-making must be based on transparent
mechanisms. National parties must also renounce their
partisan interests and assume a position of equality
of all so as to ensure the success of the constitutional
committee's work. As Special Envoy de Mistura
has stressed on previous occasions and again today,
a credible and balanced committee could be the
cornerstone of an inclusive political process for Syrians
towards implementing resolution 2254 (2015).

It is on this basis that the Government of Equatorial
Guinea hopes that tomorrow's Syria summit between
the Russian Federation, Turkey, France and Germany
will significantly help to promote a political solution to
the crisis by giving priority to the debate on the start of
the committee's work. Additional steps to strengthen
security and stability, as well as conditions for the
return of refugees and the restoration of social and
economic infrastructure, also need to be addressed.

Article 24 of Chapter V of the Charter of the United
Nations confers on the Security Council the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. I therefore call on the Council to
bring peace and security back to Syria. After eight
years of conflict, the situation in Syria must no longer
be a subject that crystallizes the division among
the members of the Security Council. A sustainable
solution cannot be achieved in Syria without the
unhindered involvement of the members of the Council,
whether they are allies of the belligerents or have the
capacity to influence the national parties. The peoples
of the world are watching us, and history will judge
us. As members of the Security Council, permanent or
non-permanent, let us demonstrate the humanist values
that characterize our Organization and bring an end to
this conflict by putting the well-being and legitimate
prosperity of Syrians ahead of geostrategic interests.

We call on the Government and the people of Syria
to take into account their country's current political
situation, support the efforts of the international
community and undertake an inclusive debate among
the various parties to the conflict within the framework
of a constitutional committee and in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015), which was unanimously
adopted by this Security Council at the proposal of the
Russian Federation.

