Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I am addressing the Council today as a main
stakeholder in today's agenda item, given that the Arab
Syrian Golan is under Israeli occupation. As such, allow
me, Madam President, to deliver my statement in full.

It has been more than seven decades since Israel
occupied the Palestinian territories and unleashed the
tragedy and misery of more than 5 million Palestinian
refugees who have been expelled from their country
and dispossessed of their land, homes and livelihood.
For more than seven decades, some countries, including
members of the Security Council, have been relentlessly
attempting to legitimize the odious Israeli occupation,
which on 5 June 1967 spread to the Syrian Golan.
Those attempts were recently crowned by the launch of
provocative deals and initiatives.

The question we must ask ourselves now is: How
many decades must the Israeli occupation continue
before some finally admit that the Security Council
must take serious action to bring it to an end? How
many more innocent lives must be lost before some
are convinced that the Israeli occupation of the Arab
territories is indeed the root cause of instability in our
region? There is a long list of questions I could ask in
this regard.

My Government wishes to reaffirm its consistent
and principled position of support for the Palestinian
people in their aspirations to self-determination and
the establishment of an independent State throughout
the Palestinian territories, with Jerusalem as its capital,
while guaranteeing the right to return of refugees in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III)
of 1948. Any measures that will or seek to undermine
these rights are null and void. Such measures, including
the apartheid law adopted by Israel known as the
"nation-State law" and the decision of the United States
Government to transfer its Embassy to the occupied city
of Jerusalem and to stop funding the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) threaten peace and security in the
region and throughout the world. All these measures
are null and void and violate the relevant resolutions of
both the Council and the General Assembly.

Israel continues to occupy a cherished part of our
territory in the Syrian Golan. The Syrian people there
continue to suffer from the occupation and its practices
of repression and aggression. Israel, as members know,
has provided protection and logistical and even direct
military to terrorist organizations that have launched
repeated attacks against Syrian territory. In so doing,
they have violated the 1947 Disengagement of Forces
Agreement. They have also exposed the forces of
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF) to grave danger due to the terrorist activities
that the Israeli occupation authority sponsors in the
occupied Syrian Golan.

In this regard, I note that on 8 October, the
occupying authority issued an illegal and unjust verdict
against Syrian activist Sedqi Suleiman Al-Maqet, who
is the Mandela of Syria. Astonishingly, it decided to
imprison him for 11 years. The only reason for this
11-year verdict was because he had documented - using
recordings and photographs - the collaboration of the
Israeli occupation forces with the Al-Nusrah Front in
the disengagement zone of the occupied Golan.

Israeli attacks on scientific and civilian
infrastructure in Syria are irrefutable proof of a new
stage in Israel's exercise of State terrorism. In terms
of crime, terrorism and killing civilians, Israel is on
its way to compete with Da'esh and Al-Nusrah Front.
In addition, Israel evacuated hundreds of the so-called
White Helmets - a terrorist organization 4 to their
sponsoring countries to carry out attacks against Syria.

Unfortunately, all of this frenzied escalation has
not been acknowledged in reports issued by senior
United Nations officials. As we heard this morning,
these officials spoke of detecting a kite but they were
unable to record Israel's collaboration with terrorist
organizations in the disengagement zone in the
occupied Syrian Golan. Such are the reports issued by
the Secretariat.

In resolution 497 (1981), which was adopted
unanimously, the Council stated that the decision
taken by Israel on 17 December 1981 to impose Israeli
jurisdiction over the occupied Syrian Golan was null
and void and without international legal effect. The
resolution called on Israel, the occupying Power, to
rescind all measures and decisions in the occupied Syrian
Golan immediately. I remind the Council that this took
place in December 1981. Resolution 497 (1981) called on
the Secretary-General to report to the Security Council
on the implementation of that resolution within two
weeks of its adoption. Meanwhile, the Council decided
that, ifIsrael did not comply with resolution 497 (1981),
the Council would hold exceptionally another meeting
no later than 5 January 1982 in order to examine in
depth the necessary measures to be undertaken in line
with the Charter of the United Nations.

Under the principles of international law, I put the
following question to the Council. Thirty-seven years
after the adoption of resolution 497 (1981), what is the
current status of this resolution and why has it not been
implemented? Why has the Council not compelled
Israel to end the occupation of the Syrian Golan? The
Council should have enacted another resolution in
January 1982. We have been waiting 37 years for the
Council to implement resolution 497 (1981). Some
colleagues wonder about the reasons for persisting
conflicts in the Middle East. Why are there wars in the
Middle East? What are the root causes ofviolence in the
Middle East? They do not know that we are still waiting
for the implementation of a Council resolution adopted
37 years ago to liberate the Golan and Jerusalem from
the Israeli occupation and to create a Palestinian State.
These are the root causes of the war; these are the root
causes of the violence.

The Syrian Government categorically rejects
the decision of Israel, the occupying Power, to hold
elections for so-called local councils in the occupied
Syrian Golan. Residents of the Golan have reiterated
their rejection of all measures of the repressive Israeli
entity seeking to impose its jurisdiction on them,
including the organization of so-called local councils
in October. Mr. Mladenov did not address this issue or
comment on it.

It is unacceptable that the United Nations and
Member States continue to treat this odious occupation
as if it were simply a routine matter, without taking any
serious action leading to tangible results, especially
after the statement made by the Prime Minister of the

Israeli entity on 8 October, which proves that Israel has
no interest in the Charter of the United Nations and is
determined to violate Council's resolutions, including
resolution 497 (1981). The Israeli Prime Minister said:
"Israel on the Golan Heights is a solid reality based
on ancient rights. Israel on the Golan Heights is a fact
that the international community must recognize."

He also said that "as long as it depends on
me, the Golan Heights will always remain under
Israeli sovereignty."

Unfortunately, this serious statement and all the
serious developments in the Golan have not attracted
the attention of Mr. Mladenov, who turned a blind eye
to such developments in his briefing. He likewise failed
to mention any of the various and multiple resolutions
of the United Nations that call on the occupying Power
to end the occupation of Arab territories. We regret that
Mr. Mladenov has transformed his important role of
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
into that of a simple journalist.

We recall that General Assembly resolution
3314 (XXIX) qualifies occupation as the top form of
aggression. All those who remain silent on the occupation
are therefore partners in that act of aggression against
our peoples. To those who seek to turn the meetings
of the Council into a media show, simply to prevent
definitive legal measures from being taken to bring
the Israeli occupation of the Arab territories to an
end; to those who vigorously pursue other wars in our
region to deplete the potential of our peoples, we say
that they are responsible for future developments. We
are determined to liberate our territory by all means
available to us under the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations and relevant Council resolutions, no
matter how long it takes us. Indeed, we have the right to
do so and the law is on our side.

