Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption of resolution 2360
(2017), which extends the sanctions regime in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. That regime is a
hugely important tool for the Council, one that we must
use to hold to account those who commit human rights
abuses and violations in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Sadly, that now includes those who commit such
abuses against United Nations personnel, following the
horrific murders of Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalan.
We reiterate our condolences to the families of Michael
and Zaida and to the Governments of the United States,
Sweden and Chile. It is imperative that there be a full
and independent investigation into their deaths.

More broadly, the United Kingdom is extremely
concerned about the situation in the Kasais. High
Commissioner Prince Zeid Al-Hussein's statement
yesterday put into stark relief the horror of the situation,
which has led over 1.3 million people to flee. That scale
of violence and level of brutality - destruction of
villages, mutilation and murder, including of children
and pregnant women - cannot be allowed to continue.
We call on the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
protect its people, to act in accordance with human
rights principles and to bring perpetrators of human
rights violations and abuses to justice.

The United Kingdom also expresses its full support
for Prince Zeid Al-Hussein's call for an independent
international investigation into the situation in the
Kasais region of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We fully support the current efforts in Geneva
to mandate such an independent investigation through
the Human Rights Council. We call on the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to cooperate
fully with any international investigation and to ensure
that any domestic investigation is conducted credibly
and transparently and that the perpetrators are brought
to justice.

It is clear that the impact of the situation is being felt
beyond the Kasais and, indeed, beyond the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. More than 30,000 refugees have
been registered in Angola. It is essential that we in the
Security Council keep a very close eye on the situation
and are prepared to act.

