Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I should
like, on behalf of France, to extend a very warm
welcome to the ministers who have gratified and
honoured us by their presence today in the Chamber to
take part in a discussion the importance of which we
all appreciate.

I wish to associate myself with the statement that
the Permanent Representative of Belgium will be
making later on behalf of all of the countries members
of the European Union. I would just like to make a few
comments in my capacity as the representative of
France.

It is fortunate that today we have an opportunity,
in the presence of high-level representatives of the
countries that are our partners in the implementation of
the Lusaka Agreement, as well as of Ambassador
Kassem and his entire team - to discuss the reports of
the Panel of Experts on the illegal exploitation of
natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Rather than speaking of "reports", I should,
perhaps, say "report", because the outstanding study
produced by Ambassador Kassem is an addendum to
the report presented in April; the two make up one
whole. This exhaustive study, which encompasses all
the facets of the problem, prompts us today to draw
certain conclusions.

First, it is regrettably clear today that plundering
has become one driving force - perhaps the main
driving force - of the conflict. We had thought that
the illegal exploitation was a consequence of the
conflict. Now we have a reason to ask ourselves
whether the pillaging of resources has not become one
of the causes of the continuation of the conflict. Some
of the parties involved seem to have an interest in
perpetuating the conflict by plundering the resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

There are, of course, some positive elements that
we can welcome. Increasingly, the issue is being taken
seriously by the parties themselves, as attested to by
the work being done in Uganda by the Porter
Commission, set up at the request of President

Museveni. Nonetheless, much remains to be done. The
peace process is still fragile. It is making headway on
the question of the inter-Congolese dialogue, as
demonstrated by the recent and very encouraging
meeting at Abuja, the outcome of which Minister She
Okitundu told us about this morning.

For its part, the Security Council has decided on
the deployment of phase III of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), and it will soon be able to
launch the process of disarming and demobilizing
armed groups, which is a legitimate concern of the
States of the region. Uganda, as well as Angola and
Zimbabwe, have begun to withdraw their troops from
the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
while Namibia has withdrawn all its contingents.

Nonetheless, it seems to us that the peace process
has not yet reached the point of no return. The military
situation is still uncertain, particularly in the east of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is in the eastern
region that most of the resources now being pillaged
are located.

We all know today that the continued illegal
exploitation of the resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is incompatible with progress in
the peace process. Regrettably, as long as some have a
choice between pursuing their lucrative activities and
the implementation of the Lusaka Agreement, there is
little hope that peace will return and that the
sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
will be restored.
We listened with great attention and much
interest to the statements that have been made by
Minister Wapakhabulo and Mr. Mazimhaka. They
rightly insisted on the importance of MONUC's action
and on the need to strengthen its presence and speed up
its deployment, and we in the Council very much agree
with that. We are determined to continue the
engagement of the United Nations. They rightly
underscored the importance of the dialogue, and the
dialogue must make progress. They noted the key
importance of the demobilization and disarmament of
the so-called negative forces, and they are right.
However, if we move towards the withdrawal of forces
and the restoration of sovereignty of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we must not overlook an
essential aspect that Ambassador Kassem rightly noted
this morning: the link between the pillaging and the

Sll'V.4437

 

maintenance of foreign forces. This is the link that
must be broken. So what must we do, and how should
we do it?

Ambassador Kassem's report tells us that the
illegal exploitation of the resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo continues unabated. This
situation must end. It is incumbent on those who in one
way or another are playing an improper role in these
activities, either directly or through the intermediary of
movements that they control, to cease and desist. The
two reports of the Panel of Experts identify in this
regard several States of the region whose troops are
present in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. They
must give serious consideration to the information
contained in these reports and then take the measures
required.

Beyond the action of the States concerned
themselves, however, the international community in
its entirety also has a role to play in inducing the
parties concerned to do what is necessary. The
international organizations, the specialized
mechanisms, the United Nations agencies, the financial
institutions and, of course, the Security Council can
make a useful contribution to the settlement of this
issue and, as a consequence, to the pursuit and
achievement of the peace process.

It is in this spirit that we are inclined towards the
renewal of the mandate of the Panel of Experts for a
new period of six months. That extension will permit
us better to monitor the evolution of the situation on
the ground. It will also help us identify and prepare the
measures that we need to take. Since April this year,
the Experts have been presenting us with many
sensible recommendations, some of which could profit
from clarification. Some of them are innovative -
such as, for example, the proposed imposition of a
mandatory moratorium on certain resources. These
proposals need to be studied in depth. On which
materials would the mandatory moratorium be
imposed? What impact would such a moratorium have
on the financing of the conflict? What impact might it
have on the already catastrophic humanitarian situation
or the economy of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo? All of these are questions that deserve to be
studied closely.

One essential principle should guide us in our
action: we must not forget who the chief victims of
these activities are. They are - let us be clear - the

Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Congolese
population. It is a cruel and intolerable irony that the
extraordinary wealth of this country should be used to
inflict greater misery on its inhabitants. We must help
the Democratic Republic of the Congo confront this
situation, which it has not sought. Moreover, any
action by the international community can be
undertaken only in close liaison with the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and with its
consent.

Our meeting today allows us to continue to be
attentive to the views of our partners in the peace
process. We shall take into account their observations
and the commitments they have undertaken in our
presence to put an end to the plundering of the Congo.
It is by working together that we shall make progress
on this issue.

