Mr. Mutaboba: It is a privilege for me to present
the latest report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
2

(S/20ll/73). I also appreciate the opportunity to
exchange views with the Council on the most recent
developments in Guinea-Bissau. There has been
progress in the political and security environments in
the country, although the situation remains complex
and tenuous.

With the Council's permission, I will focus today
on four main areas: the efforts deployed to enhance the
stability of State institutions and to jump-start
implementation of the security sector reform
programme for the defence sector; the progress made
in the national dialogue and conference process; the
latest developments with regard to the fight against
impunity, drug trafficking and organized crime; and
finally, the complex relationship between the national
authorities of Guinea-Bissau and international partners.

The Council will recall that, in its presidential
statement of 22 July 2010 (S/PRST/2010/15), the
Security Council requested the international
community and the Government of Guinea-Bissau to
support the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) in its efforts to strengthen and
stabilize State institutions in the country. As the
Council is already aware, ECOWAS and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP)
have developed a road map in support of the
implementation of the security sector reform
programme and to help enhance the stability of State
institutions in Guinea-Bissau. The ECOWAS
Mediation and Security Council adopted the road map
on 24 November and submitted it to ECOWAS heads
of State and Government for final endorsement. It is
important to continue to impress upon the leadership of
Guinea-Bissau and ECOWAS the importance of
materializing their plans for jump-starting the security
sector reform programme in the defence and security
sectors to contribute to the stabilization process in
Guinea-Bissau without delay.

At the national level, the adoption of the road
map by the ECOWAS Mediation and Security Council
gave new impetus to efforts by technical partners to
jump-start the process. On 10 December, the National
Security Sector Reform Steering Committee, co-
chaired by the Minister of Defence, expressed its full
alignment with the road map and called on the
leadership of Guinea-Bissau and ECOWAS to expedite
its final endorsement.
11-24382

In addition, on 6 December, the National Popular
Assembly endorsed a bilateral agreement worth
$30 million between the Governments of Angola and
Guinea-Bissau to support security sector reform. That
agreement provides for the completion of a number of
tasks that fall under the ECOWAS-CPLP partnership
and the road map and should complement regional
efforts to help the Government of Guinea-Bissau to
advance its national priorities on security sector
reform. In January, a first group of Angolan military
and police officers was deployed to Guinea-Bissau to
work on plans to rehabilitate military infrastructure and
fine-tune training plans with their national
counterparts. We are told that the bulk of the Angolan
team will be deployed by the end of this month.

In recent weeks, I have continued to work with
the national authorities, in particular the President and
the Prime Minister, to underscore the importance of a
continuing firm commitment on the part of all national
stakeholders, in particular the political and military
leadership, to the ECOWAS-CPLP partnership and the
road map. In addition to my efforts with the national
authorities, in December I also wrote to Mr. James
Victor Gbeho, President of the ECOWAS Commission,
to reiterate the urgency of the adoption of the road map
at the level of ECOWAS heads of State and
Government in order not to lose momentum.

Furthermore, consistent with the provisions of
resolution 1949 (2010), which requested
comprehensive information detailing the proposed
modalities, timing and resources relating to the
implementation of the ECOWAS road map, I proposed
to the President of the ECOWAS Commission that
ECOWAS and CPLP experts begin working together
with national counterparts without further delay, with a
view to developing realistic timelines and benchmarks
in accordance with conditions set by international
partners, to enable us to revert to the Security Council
in a timely manner. I remain confident that the United
Nations will be in a better position to report to the
Security Council in the next progress report of the
Secretary-General, following the deployment of the
joint United Nations-ECOWAS-CPLP assessment
mission requested in the resolution. That exercise will
also be important for finalizing the ongoing
benchmarking exercise that is jointly being conducted
by UNIOGBIS and the United Nations country team in
order to finalize the mission's strategic work plan with
11-24382
the appropriate benchmarks and to devise the
UNIOGBIS exit strategy.

I would like to emphasize the positive momentum
generated by the partnership between ECOWAS and
the CPLP and the Government of Guinea-Bissau,
which in recent months has had a critical impact on the
political and security environment in the country.
President Malam Bacai Sanha and Prime Minister
Carlos Gomes Junior have maintained a close dialogue
in recent months on major domestic issues, including
on the decision to release the military officers who
were detained without due process since the 1 April
events. On 20 January, on the occasion of National
Heroes' Day, both leaders publicly claimed their
mutual respect and their resolve to strengthen the
stability of national institutions. That move prompted
the military leadership to confirm, through the Chief of
General Staff, that the military would continue to stay
out of politics, and to pledge support for the
Government throughout the rest of its term and the
tenure of the current legislature, until 2012.

Progress was also made in recent weeks on the
national dialogue process, which is expected to result
in the holding of the national conference in mid-2011.
With the financial and technical support of
UNIOGBIS, a series of eight national consultations
were organized in December and January with
personnel from the defence and security forces. Those
efforts, which took place amidst important
consultations on the issue of the ECOWAS-CPLP road
map for support to security sector reform in Guinea-
Bissau, have revealed a profound desire for change
among the rank and file.

The consultations, which also involved
representatives from Government institutions, civil
society and the media, alongside parliamentarians,
deplored the negative connotation of the armed forces
in Guinea-Bissau and its responsibility in the
successive crises faced by the country. The first round
of consultations with the defence and security forces
came up with a series of recommendations, including
on the need for a separation of roles for the defence
and security sectors; a career structure; mobility based
on merit; and an improvement in conditions of service.
The next step in the national dialogue will involve
consultations in March with the diaspora in the
subregion and Europe, with the support of the United
Nations Development Programme, as well as nine
regional conferences, to be held in April and May
3
throughout the country, to conclude the preparatory
process for the national conference.

Another area under institutional reform where
progress was made in recent months was the
constructive debate on a possible review of the Guinea-
Bissau Constitution. In their statements at the opening
of the last session of Parliament, on 19 November
2010, President Malam Bacai Sanha and the Speaker of
Parliament insisted on the need to consider that reform
as a priority for the stability of State institutions. At the
initiative of the parliamentary commission in charge of
the review of the Constitution, and in collaboration
with the Bissau Faculty of Law, UNIOGBIS organized
a series of debates and seminars for members of
Parliament representing all four political parties in
Parliament.

The purpose of those exercises, conducted in
December 2010 and January 2011, was to increase
awareness among the main political actors about
constitutional issues and to stimulate reflection on the
constraints of State-building processes in Guinea-
Bissau, as well as to increase the capacity of members
of Parliament to comprehend the various aspects of the
Constitution-making process and law-making
principles, structures and organs.

In 2011, UNIOGBIS will continue to support the
constitutional review process by opening up local and
regional venues for political dialogue between
members of Parliament and major national
constituencies, in order to collect views on the best
law-making arrangements, principles and political
options that could ensure lasting stability, security,
democracy and development in Guinea-Bissau.

In spite of these positive developments, much
progress is yet to be made on other important aspects,
in particular on the fight against impunity and the fight
against drug trafficking and organized crime. On the
fight against impunity, despite the release, in December
2010, of the former Chief of General Staff of the armed
forces and other army officers who were detained since
1 April 2010 without due process, not much progress
has been made on other fronts, such as the
investigations into the March and June 2009
assassinations.

I have continued to advocate for more clarity and
transparency from the judicial authorities of Guinea-
Bissau, so as to mobilize support among international
partners to complete these investigations. However, I
regret to note that both the Government of Guinea-
Bissau and the Office of the Prosecutor General have
yet to present an accurate status of these investigations,
and there are increased concerns in Guinea-Bissau that
the release of all officers detained in connection with
these investigations would once again amount to an
attempt to freeze the process.

With regard to the fight against drug trafficking
and organized crime, several measures taken by the
Government are worth mentioning. They include, as
the Council knows, the establishment of a transnational
crime unit, under the framework of the West Africa
Coast Initiative, with the support of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and INTERPOL. I am also
pleased to note the decision of the Government, in
January, to close the Cufar airstrip in the south of the
country, which has been used for illegal flights. In
addition, on 11 January, Presidents Sanha and Conde
agreed in Guinea-Conakry to join forces in the fight
against drug trafficking by enhancing collaboration
between the national anti-narcotic agency of Guinea
and the transnational crime unit of Guinea-Bissau.

Furthermore, on 10 February, the Guinea-Bissau
Judiciary Police held a drugs-burning ceremony near
Bissau, attended by the Minister of Justice - who is
present here - the General Prosecutor, representatives
of the diplomatic community and journalists. Fourteen
kilograms of cocaine, approximately 800 kilograms of
cannabis and 71 grams of crack, seized between 2007
and 2010, were burned. In their statements both the
Minister of Justice and the Prosecutor General said that
the ceremony showed the authorities' commitment to
combat the scourge and rejected rumours that drugs
seized were reintroduced into the market.

Finally, on 22 February, the Prosecutor General
issued a decree specifying the competence of the
Judiciary Police alone for investigations into drug-
trafficking-related cases. The implementation of that
decree will facilitate the work of the Judiciary Police
and cooperation among relevant police institutions.

While these developments are encouraging, it is
important, in my view, that the Government continue to
demonstrate its resolve to fight this scourge, including
by mobilizing adequate human and financial resources
for the newly established transnational crime unit.
Meanwhile, arrangements to allow for foreign vessels
to patrol territorial waters off Guinea-Bissau and
conduct joint policing activities with Guinea-Bissau
police would also be a sign of the firm commitment of
the Government to achieving progress on this
important issue.

I cannot conclude without addressing the
important role that regional and international partners
continue to play in the stabilization of the political and
security environment in Guinea-Bissau. Besides the
partnership with ECOWAS and the CPLP - which has
yet to materialize on the ground - it is important to
stress that the improved political and security
environment was largely influenced by the
announcement, in December 2010, that the country had
reached the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative
completion point. That development gave rise to
cautious optimism and boosted the morale of the
Government of Carlos Gomes Junior, who is here with
us, who has worked for the improvement of the
macroeconomic context of Guinea-Bissau. Yet these
encouragements from the international community
should not be interpreted by the leadership of Guinea-
Bissau as a sign that the negative trends and effects of
the events of 1 April 2010 have been fully addressed.

The decision on 3 February by the European
Commission and the Council of the European Union to
launch consultations with the authorities of Guinea-
Bissau, in accordance with article 96 of the Cotonou
Agreement, is yet another demonstration of the
continuous concerns among international partners with
regard to the remaining triggers of instability in the
country.

I am encouraged, however, with the constructive
response by the national authorities of Guinea-Bissau
to the European Union (EU) invitation for consultations,
conveying that the authorities of Guinea-Bissau shared
the concerns articulated by the EU in its
communication with regard to the sources of instability
in the country and the need to address them. The
Government also took positive steps in sending a
delegation headed by its Minister for Foreign Affairs,
who is also present, and including the spokesperson of
the President, the Chief of Staff of the Chief of General
Staff of the armed forces and a representative of the
League of Human Rights - also in the room - to
several European capitals to meet bilaterally with the
relevant stakeholders and prepare the consultations that
are scheduled to be held in March in Brussels.

In parallel, the Prime Minister travelled to Dakar
to seek regional support for Guinea-Bissau in the
upcoming consultations with the EU and to meet with
ambassadors of EU member States accredited to Bissau
but resident in Dakar.

In my view, these steps are a demonstration of the
change of approach by the leadership of Guinea-
Bissau, which seems to be ready to use this window of
opportunity offered by the consultations with the EU to
address in earnest those issues that prompted the
disengagement and suspension of EU support for
security sector reform in Guinea-Bissau. It is my hope
that these consultations will produce tangible results
and contribute to re-engaging the EU as a key partner
in support of the reforms in Guinea-Bissau, alongside
the African Union, ECOWAS, the CPLP and their
member States.

