Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I too would like to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Oscar Fernandez-
Taranco for his update on recent developments in the
Middle East. We welcome the presence at the table of
the Permanent Representative of Israel and the
Permanent Observer of Palestine.

Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Sweden on behalf of
the European Union, but let me add the following
points.

We welcome the recent intensified efforts by the
international community to break the deadlock in the
Middle East peace process. As suggested by Mr. Javier
Solana, High Representative for the Common Foreign
and Security Policy of the European Union, the
Security Council can assume a key role with its
steadfast support for the peace process and its final
objective, namely, a permanent two-State solution.

We would like to recall the European Council
conclusions of June and point out that, beyond its
continued political and economic support to the peace
process, the European Union is ready to contribute
substantially to post-conflict arrangements aimed at
ensuring the sustainability of peace agreements, while
also addressing regional, economic and security
dimensions.

We welcome the determination of the Quartet, as
expressed at its recent meeting, to seek a
comprehensive resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
The Arab Peace Initiative and the decision of the Arab
League of 24 June, underscoring the commitment to
comprehensive peace on all tracks, are also important
contributions to the Middle East Peace process.

We welcome the talks under way between the
United States and all parties in the region aimed at
creating conditions for the prompt resumption and
early conclusion of negotiations without preconditions
on all permanent status issues.

That Prime Minister Netanyahu has expressed a
commitment to a peace agreement that includes the
establishment of a Palestinian State is a welcome initial
move. But that needs to be followed up by concrete
steps, such as a revision of Israeli settlement policies,
with an immediate end to settlement activities,
including in East Jerusalem and including natural
growth and the dismantlement of all outposts erected
since March 2001. Furthermore, we call upon the
Government of Israel to refrain from unilateral actions
in East Jerusalem, including the demolition of houses
and evictions.

While we acknowledge the progress made by the
Palestinian Authority in security sector reform, efforts
to fight Violent extremism and to strengthen the rule of
law need to be stepped up. That includes reliable long-
term safeguards against renewed rocket attacks from
the Gaza Strip.

Palestinian reconciliation is Vital. More decisive
efforts towards a unified political leadership by all
political representatives of the Palestinians and a
common renouncement of violence are required. The
delay of the Cairo talks, already in their seventh round,
is therefore a source of concern. We hope that
Palestinian leaders will work towards the prevention of
even deeper separation between the West Bank and
Gaza, thereby preserving chances for the unity of the
future Palestinian State.

Half a year after the escalation of the Gaza
conflict, we again reiterate the importance of the full
implementation of resolution 1860 (2009). Ensuring
open access to the Gaza Strip is indispensable for
improving the intolerable humanitarian situation of the
people in Gaza and for the start of reconstruction
efforts.

Controlled but comprehensive supply of the Gaza
Strip would discourage tunnel trafficking and allow for
effective measures against the smuggling of weapons
through the tunnels, thereby also contributing to the
security of Israel. Austria continues to hold the view
that rebuilding Gaza also requires rebuilding trust and
respect for the rule of law. That includes a thorough
investigation of all allegations of violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law and a
follow-up to the findings of such investigations.

Concerning the situation in the West Bank, we
strongly encourage the continued and sustained easing
of restrictions on movement. As Prime Minister
Netanyahu has stressed, a strong Palestinian economy
will strengthen peace. We therefore hope that that
objective will be supported by a rapid and ambitious
programme of removal of barriers to freedom of
movement and economic activity in the West Bank.

Regarding Lebanon, we are very concerned about
ongoing developments in southern Lebanon. That is an
issue that we brought up in the Council earlier on. It is
clear that the most recent events constitute a violation
of resolution 1701 (2006). The explosion of an arms
cache and the incidents that followed have once more
revealed the general fragility of the situation. Thus, we
reiterate the need for the full implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) by all sides. We encourage all
sides to engage in visible steps in that regard.

Austria congratulates Lebanon on the successful
holding of parliamentary elections. We hope that the
process of the formation of a new Government under
Prime Minister-designate Saad Hariri will see steady
progress. We wish to stress the importance of close
cooperation by any new Government with the main
constitutional bodies as an important step towards
further consolidating Lebanon's democracy.
In conclusion, let me express once again Austria's
conviction that it is essential to make progress on all
tracks of the Middle East peace process. Only a
comprehensive peace will be a durable peace.

