Mr. Oh Joon (Republic ofKorea): Let me begin by
expressing my sincere appreciation to you, Sir, and the
presidency of the United Kingdom for having convened
this important debate today. We especially welcome the
presence ofMinister for Africa Mark Simmonds. We are
also grateful for the briefings by Special Representative
Martin Kobler, Special Envoy Mary Robinson and
Minister of Defence Goncalves Lourenco in Angola's
capacity as Chair of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR). We also appreciate
the presence of high-level ministers from Africa, which
is testimony to the importance of regional cooperation.

Emerging from a recurring cycle of conflict and
violence, the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
made meaningful progress in a relatively short period
of time. Although there are still a number of daunting
challenges ahead, we believe that the positive steps
taken by the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
along with the active engagement of international and
regional actors, provide a new window of opportunity
for future progress. To ensure that such momentum
continues, it is essential to address the threats posed
by armed groups in eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Even after the defeat of the Mouvement du
23 mars, the increasing threats posed by other armed
groups, particularly the Allied Democratic Forces and
the Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda
(FDLR), continue to be an obstacle to peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and to the stability
of the Great Lakes region as a whole.

In the light of that, we support the ongoing
successful military operations by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the Forces
armees de la Republique democratique du Congo. The
recent surrender of FDLR combatants is certainly
a welcome development that should lead to the
complete disarmament of the entire FDLR, including
its leadership. We also share the Secretary-General's
view that the military option must remain open should
the voluntary process prove unsuccessful within the
envisaged time frame.

However, none of the military actions will be
sustainable if they are not accompanied by concerted
political efforts. Improving governance and restoring
State authority in the areas retaken from the armed
groups are of vital importance. As the Democratic
Republic of the Congo moves towards elections,
scheduled for 2015 and 2016, we support the Congolese
authorities in leading an inclusive and transparent
electoral process and expect MONUSCO's good offices
to play an important role in that regard.

The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region is path towards the region's brighter future
and gives us hope for durable peace and stability. As
we now enter the second year of the Framework, it is
essential to accelerate dialogue and to build trust among
the neighbouring States, thereby ending the cycles of
conflict in the region. In that regard, it is noteworthy
that regional dialogue, led by Angola's chairmanship
of the ICGLR, provides a unique opportunity to resolve
regional conflict through the instruments of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework.

Finally, we would like to thank Special Envoy Mary
Robinson for her leadership and dedication to peace
and stability in the Great Lakes region. We wish her
all the best in her new undertakings. We also welcome
the appointment of Mr. Said Djinnit as the new Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General and look forward to his
contribution to the peace and long-term stability of the
region.

