Mr. De la Calle Garcia (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Once again, it is an honour to have the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) present. We thank
her for providing updated information that will help in
the implementation of resolution 1970 (2011).

Spain wishes to reiterate its acknowledgement of
the importance of the work of the Court and particularly
that of its Prosecutor. We are aware that this work often
takes place in conditions that are very difficult for
the members of her Office. We note and welcome the
update on the cases against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi. We recall that the warrant for
SaifAl-Islam Al-Qadhafi has never been executed. The
current complex situation complicates Libya's ability
to honour its obligations, but we hope that when the
proper conditions prevail, the Government of National
Accord will surrender those individuals without delay.
The responsibility to cooperate fully with the Court
and its Prosecutor remains in effect and now falls on
the shoulders of the Government of National Accord, as
the Council laid out in resolution 2259 (2015).

It is appropriate to acknowledge the dialogue
that the Libyan authorities have maintained and
continue to maintain with the Court, and in particular
the cooperation with the Prosecutor and her Office,
despite the difficulties generated by instability and
insecurity. We are aware of the difficulties that the
limited resources of the Prosecutor's Office place on
her investigation. The costs of referrals continue to be
supported only by the States parties to the Rome Statute,
and the Relationship Agreement between the Court and
the United Nations continues not to be implemented.
It should be recalled that the first recommendation
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in his
report on the investigations in Libya concern the issue
of supporting the Court, in particular providing the
Prosecutor's Office with the necessary resources.

The most recent report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(S/2016/452) shows an unacceptable level of violations
of international humanitarian law and abuses of
human rights on the part of all parties. We are very
concerned that armed groups and militias continue to
act unchecked and that Da'esh and its affiliates, as in
Syria and Iraq, are going nowhere and determined to
impose their reign of barbarism and terror.

Each and every one of the allegations of extrajudicial
executions, kidnappings, disappearances, torture,
attacks on human rights activists and journalists, and
abuses against immigrants must be investigated and
prosecuted, no matter who is responsible. Impunity
simply cannot be tolerated. In that regard, we see it as
a positive sign that the allegations of torture against
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi are
being investigated and that a determined effort is being
made to deal with those responsible.

We call not only on the Court to pursue its
investigation, including of crimes committed since
2014, but also on the Libyan institutions, particularly
the Prosecutor General, the tribunals and civil society,
which must all participate in the process and resolve
to bring the guilty parties to justice. In that regard, we
cannot fail to commend all the men and women who, at
the risk of their lives, continue to assist in documenting
abuses and raising their voices to denounce them.

The ICC should also enjoy the Security Council's
support. We recall that resolution 1970 (2011) calls
on all States and international organizations to
cooperate with the Court. Combating impunity is the
responsibility of all. Moreover, with regard to foreign
terrorist fighters enlisted in Da'esh and its affiliates, all
States must honour their obligations under resolution
2238 (2015).

Libya's situation remains critical, but in recent
months, since the approval of the Libyan Political
Agreement, we have seen progress that allows us a
degree of optimism for the first time. We recognize
the work of the Special Representative and of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya. We call on
all political actors in Libya to join the process being
led by the Presidency Council of the Government of
National Accord in a constructive manner. It is vital
that we pursue our efforts to ensure the implementation
of the Agreement, and in particular to strengthen the
foundation of support for the Government of National
Accord. Consolidating that process and re-establishing
an independent legal system committed to justice is
essential to rebuilding a State based on the rule of law
and respect for human rights.

The end of impunity must be incorporated into the
process of reconstructing the country. We must not
forget that impunity is incompatible with sustainable
and lasting peace. It is only recognizing the facts,
dealing with those who are guilty and providing
reparations to the victims that will bring the genuine
reconcilation that will allow Libyan society to look to
the future.
