Mr. Kafando (spoke in French): I thank you,
Madam President, for giving me this opportunity to
brief the Security Council on recent developments
in Burundi.

On 17 May, the people of Burundi voted in
favour of a new Constitution. According to the
Independent National Electoral Commission (CENI),
which announced provisional results on 21 May, of
the 4,768,148 people who voted, 73.25 per cent voted
in favour of the new Constitution, as opposed to the
19.34 per cent who voted against it. Blank ballots
totalled 4.11 per cent, and abstentions 3.28 per cent,
with a total voter participation of 96.24 per cent. Once
again, I point out that information was provided by
CENI. Overall, the referendum took place in a calm
environment despite many irregularities and incidents
reported by opposition and civil society representatives.
CENI itself also reported several incidents that, in its
View, were not such to influence the definitive results
of the voting.

During my briefing on 25 February (see S/PV.8189), I shared the concerns of the Secretary-
General, who had stressed in his report (S/2018/89)
the need for the Government to seek the broadest
consensus possible on an issue as crucial as amending
the Constitution for the future - and the very
fate - of Burundi. The Secretary-General underscored
in his report the spirit of consensus that prevailed in
the negotiations and the adoption of the Arusha Peace
and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi and the
2005 Constitution that resulted from it.

Now that the country is moving towards another
important phase in its history, we expect a strong
signal from the Burundian authorities in favour of
resuming the inter-Burundian dialogue under the aegis
of the East African Community. Reviving that dialogue
would make it possible for Burundians to discuss
together the challenges they face in a climate of mutual
trust. It is important to reiterate at this point that it is
only through an inclusive dialogue that Burundians
will reach sustainable solutions to the current crisis.
Without an inclusive dialogue, there is a risk that the
opposition's contesting of the results of the referendum
will further polarize an already tense political situation,
characterised by human rights violations and other
abuses, as well as the deterioration of the socioeconomic
and humanitarian situation.

In that connection, I would like to draw the
attention of Council members to the expulsion of
human rights experts deployed in the framework of the
implementation of Human Rights Council resolution
36/2, which the Group of African States in Geneva
endorsed on 29 September. Their visas were cancelled
by the Government on 26 April when they were
already in Burundi. I call on the Burundian authorities
to facilitate the return of those experts and to renew
cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights.

The security situation in Burundi is generally calm,
although there have been isolated grenade attacks and
there continue to be reports of the discovery of dead
bodies, including individuals in military uniforms.
The Government should be encouraged to continue
its efforts to restore security throughout the national
territory. In that regard, I welcome the measures taken
against certain forms of violence that were observed
before and during the election campaign. The events
that occurred on 11 May in the commune of Buganda,
in the province of Cibitoke, which we condemned at
the United Nations, during which 26 people, including
women and children, were killed by unidentified armed
men, reminds us that, even though there is general calm
at the security level, the environment remains volatile.

The humanitarian situation is undergoing
significant developments, but it is still a cause for
concern. Many Burundians continue to live in refugee
camps, particularly in Tanzania, Rwanda, Uganda and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I welcome the
efforts made by Burundi and Tanzania, with the support
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and within the framework of the tripartite
agreement, which have already enabled over 13,000
Burundians to voluntarily return to their homes. Those
efforts must be continued.

The situation I have just described highlights the
relevance of continuing the inclusive dialogue under
the auspices of the East African Community. Council
members will recall that during the nineteenth summit
of the East African Community, held in Uganda on
23 February, Heads of State of the subregion strongly
recommended continued dialogue facilitated by former
President Benjamin Mkapa and the mediation of
President Museveni. The Summit also requested the
facilitator to make every effort to convene the fifth
session of the dialogue as soon as possible.

In response to the facilitator's invitation of25 April,
the Government of Burundi indicated that it would not
take part in any dialogue session before the constitutional
referendum was held. In that context, the Conseil
national pour le respect de l'Accord d'Arusha pour la
paix et la reconciliation au Burundi et la restauration
de l'etat de droit questioned the appropriateness
and relevance of a dialogue after a referendum
that was supposed to bury the Arusha Agreement.
Consultations should be held in the next few days with
a view to relaunching the dialogue. I remain convinced
that an inclusive dialogue remains the only path to
a sustainable political settlement of the political,
socioeconomic and humanitarian challenges Burundi
has faced since 2015. Among those challenges is the
preparation and success of inclusive, credible and
transparent elections in 2020. In that regard, the Council
could renew its full support to the region, in particular
to the mediation led by Ugandan President Yoweri
Museveni and to the facilitator, former Tanzanian
President Benjamin Mkapa, with the support of the
African Union and the United Nations.

