Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Allow me to extend a
warm welcome to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, Mr. Vuk Jeremie, and to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, Mr. Skender Hyseni. It is a
pleasure to see them with us today, and I thank them
both for their comprehensive presentations.

I would also like to welcome Mr. Lamberto
Zannier and to thank him for his briefing and for
introducing the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/l69). I would like also to thank Mr. Zannier
for his leadership and to commend the work of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We are pleased to see that UNMIK
continues to discharge its mandate with an eye to
evolving circumstances. The common strategic
framework that is being developed by UNMIK and the
United Nations team in Kosovo to allow the United
Nations family there to focus on the implementation of
development programmes is a welcome step.

We also welcome the close cooperation between
UNMIK and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX), and the expansion of the role and
functions of the latter. We remain committed to
continuing our contribution to both EULEX and KFOR
in accordance with needs and requirements on the
ground.

In the two years since Kosovo became
independent, the number of countries that have
recognized Kosovo has constantly grown. Turkey
considers this to be an irreversible process that will
ultimately contribute to lasting peace, stability and
prosperity in the region. On the other hand, as a young
State, Kosovo faces some important challenges. To
surmount those challenges and to provide a better life
for all of its citizens, Kosovo must concentrate on its
priorities and continue to make improvements in areas
such as the economy, the rule of law, good governance
and human rights.

That said, as Minister Hyseni's statement
demonstrates, Kosovo has already made progress in
solidifying its democracy. Elections which are widely
recognized as fair and credible have been held.
Concrete achievements have taken place with regard to
decentralization, which is a key element in creating a
multi-ethnic society. Important steps have been taken
and legislation adopted towards the protection of
human rights and the integration of minorities. We are
also glad to see that there is a new momentum in the
returns process.

We are equally pleased to see that the security
situation remains stable. We share the concern related
to northern Kosovo and welcome the steps taken by the
Kosovo authorities towards reconciliation and the
integration of all of the communities there. Such efforts
will take time and require important resources, but we
believe that they will contribute to gathering all of
Kosovo's citizens around a common vision. In that
respect, we were very much encouraged by the words
of President Sejdiu, who, on the occasion of Orthodox
Christmas, confirmed the commitment of the Kosovo
institutions to work for a brighter, prosperous and
peaceful future in which all citizens of Kosovo would
feel totally free and equal in their common home,
Kosovo. Like President Sejdiu, we believe that it is
important that people of all ethnicities in all parts of
the country should come to feel that Kosovo is their
home and that Kosovo's future is their future.

It is with this understanding that we expect
Kosovo Serbs to take part in the political process and
administrative structures of the country. We also urge
all stakeholders to refrain from actions that will cause
unnecessary burdens in their lives.

It is encouraging that Kosovo is taking steps to
build friendly relations with its neighbours and
strengthen regional cooperation. It is our sincere hope
that relations between Belgrade and Pristina will also
ultimately serve to contribute to lasting regional peace,
stability and prosperity. While there are disagreements
over the status issue, it should not be a reason for both
parties not to cooperate pragmatically and make
progress towards reconciliation and the resolution of
some outstanding problems in areas such as cultural
heritage, energy, infrastructure, customs and organized
crime.

We agree with the Secretary-General's
observation that, by putting aside status considerations,
Belgrade and Pristina should show flexibility to enable
Kosovo's representation in regional and international
mechanisms and forums that are essential to the
economic and democratic development and long-term
stability of the region. We call on both sides to find
pragmatic solutions towards that end.

As an important player in the region, Serbia can
contribute more to the consolidation of peace,
democracy and prosperity in the Balkans. We also
welcome and support developing relations between
Serbia and the European Union. The international
community should continue to support Serbia in its
efforts to integrate with European structures. As for
Turkey, we are pleased to enjoy close and cooperative
relations with Serbia, which we are determined to take
even further to the benefit of both our countries and of
the entire region.
