President Chissano: Allow me to begin by
congratulating you, Madam, on your presidency of this
meeting and for the brilliant manner in which you are
conducting the affairs of the Council.

The initiative of the United States presidency to
convene this meeting to debate the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is not only
commendable but also of paramount importance in defining
an informed course of action to put an end to the prolonged
conflict in the Great Lakes region.

We also commend the United States Government for
taking the important initiative of declaring January the
month of Africa in the Security Council. Our sincere hope
is that the deliberations of the Security Council will be very
successful and achieve concrete results that will ease the
suffering of Africans.

The unprecedented presence of so many African heads
of State or Government before the Security Council bears
testimony to our resolve to find an immediate and peaceful
solution to the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It is also clear evidence of our resolve to put an end
to conflicts in Africa and focus our efforts on promoting
sustainable development throughout the continent.

I would also like to pay a special tribute to your
predecessor, Sir Jeremy Greenstock, Ambassador and
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom, for the
diligent manner in which he guided the work of the Council
last month, focusing also on Africa.

I wish also to express my profound appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report on the
United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and for his relentless efforts and
dedication to the cause of peace not only in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo but indeed in the
entire world.

A durable solution to the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo requires strong, concerted action
from the subregion, the continent and the international
community as a whole. Only then will the heavy loss of
human lives come to an end, and peace and political
stability will be restored in that sisterly country and in the
region. Only then will we have a united Democratic
Republic of the Congo, with common aspirations shared
by all legitimate political forces in a peaceful environment
- a nation at peace with itself and its neighbours.

We the leaders of the region and of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) are deeply
concerned about the conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in view of its strategic position for peace,
security and stability in Central and southern Africa in
particular and in Africa in general.

This is so because we strongly believe that the
success of all socio-economic policies and indeed of any
plans for development rests upon the eradication of all
focus of conflicts in our region and the attainment and
maintenance of peace and stability.

It was bearing in mind the reasons I outlined earlier
that the region, under the wise leadership of President
Chiluba of Zambia, carried out a process that culminated
with the signature of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and
its annexes by all belligerent parties on 10 July 1999. By
taking the bold decision of signing this Agreement, the
belligerents have shown their commitment, determination
and willingness to bring about peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

With this development, we had hoped to see a
cessation of hostilities and an end to the suffering of the
Congolese people. Instead, we became concerned, at
times, at the lack of progress in the implementation of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. However, we now feel
encouraged by the holding last week in Lusaka of the
meeting of the Joint Military Commission and in Harare
of the meeting of the ministerial Political Committee
established by the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, where the
Parties reiterated their firm resolve to respect all the

 

provisions of the Agreement. Having noted that some of
these provisions had already been implemented, they
solemnly recommitted themselves to implementing the
remaining ones on the basis of the revised calendar, and
called upon all the parties to ensure the prevalence of
conditions necessary for the successful implementation of
the Agreement.

At the SADC extraordinary summit held in Maputo
earlier this month, the regional heads of State or
Government evaluated the degree of implementation of the
Lusaka Agreement and reviewed the work of the
commissions with a view to the adoption of appropriate
measures for the rapid normalization of the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. SADC strongly believes
that for a peaceful settlement of the conflict in that country,
the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement remains the only valid
instrument. We also believe that any solution to the conflict
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo demands a strong
and structured partnership between the United Nations, the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and SADC in order
to guarantee an expeditious implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement, signed by all parties involved in the conflict.

The international community has played a significant
role in the search for peace in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. While expressing our appreciation for the
contribution rendered so far, we must underscore the need
for a more timely and effective action at this crucial stage
of the Congolese peace process.
The ceasefire in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is, like any other ceasefire, fragile and sensitive,
with difficulties inherent in its holding. However, these
difficulties should not deter the taking of necessary actions
to prevent its unravelling. Therefore, the international
community should not wait for a perfect ceasefire in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to play a meaningful
role in this country's peace process, or sit idle and witness
the collapse of the process.

The actions of the United Nations must also be seen
as supportive to the quick confidence-building necessary to
the parties for a smooth disengagement, demobilization and
disarmament, and, more importantly, for a successful
internal dialogue.

The appointment by the parties of a Facilitator of that
dialogue in the person of Sir Ketumile Masire, former
President of Botswana, constitutes a great breakthrough. We
thank him for having accepted this challenge. Knowing his
brilliant qualities as a statesman of long experience, and
with his love of peace, we are confident that he will
succeed in his endeavours.

In processes such as this one, any momentum should
always be seized to foster progress and protect positive
agreements.

In the ongoing international efforts to bring about
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
United Nations Secretary-General has played a very
important role. We applaud his actions, particularly the
appointment of his Special Representative, Ambassador
Kamel Morjane, the sending of a Special Envoy to solve
problems on the ground, his various reports to the
Security Council and the deployment of 79 military
observers. We encourage him to continue his efforts
towards a durable peace in that sisterly country. We are
confident that the presence of the United Nations on the
ground will deter violations of the ceasefire and restore
hope to the suffering Congolese people.

The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
The Council should not, therefore, transfer this
responsibility solely to the belligerents, to the
neighbouring countries or to the region. The belligerents
have already created enough of a basis for us, as the
United Nations, to take up our responsibilities. We would
be the ones to blame if, by our hesitation, we were to let
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
deteriorate. The decision to devote the month of January
to debating African issues, such as AIDS and the conflicts
in Burundi, Angola and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to mention just a few, is for us a clear indication
of the importance the Security Council attaches to African
problems.

The moment has now come for the United Nations
to assume its responsibility with regard to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In this regard, SADC member
States call on the Security Council to adopt concrete
measures to implement expeditiously the Lusaka
Agreement. Time is of the essence, because a lost
opportunity may never be recovered.

In one of his reports, the Secretary-General
requested the Security Council to authorize the
deployment of 500 military liaison observers as the next
stage of deployment of the United nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC). We feel that the Secretary-General has made
this proposal in awareness of the difficult situation in the

 

Democratic Republic of the Congo, but also based on the
tasks so far accomplished. SADC supports the Secretary-
General's proposal and urges the Security Council to adopt
a resolution authorizing the deployment of the military
liaison observers as the next step for a subsequent, robust
United Nations presence in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It should be made clear that this is only an
intermediary phase for the speedy deployment of a full-
fledged United Nations peacekeeping operation.

We firmly believe that the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo can no longer afford further delays
in the establishment of a full-fledged United Nations
peacekeeping mission with an appropriate mandate under
Chapter VII and with adequate numbers, taking into
account the size of the country and the magnitude and
complexity of the conflict. This United Nations mission
should be provided with the necessary logistical means for
its successful operation.

The conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has resulted in the unfolding of a humanitarian tragedy in
that country. As stated in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2000/30), a large number of people are facing critical
food insecurity. There are also a large number of internally
displaced persons and refugees. To these problems, we can
add the high rate of disease. The situation demands urgent
action. We appeal to the international community to provide
humanitarian assistance for those in need, as well as
resources for the process of national reconstruction.

What credibility would the Security Council have if its
role were converted into keeping the peace only in
countries where the people of the country had already done
so fully? We recall the sad moment in 1992 in
Mozambique, when we had to wait for over six months
after the signing of the pace agreement, keeping peace by
ourselves while both belligerent parties still had their
weapons in their hands, before the arrival of the
international peacekeepers. Only we, the Mozambicans, in
spite of the praise we received from the international
community, know the damage caused to our country by that
delay and hesitation - hesitation, yes, not only in sending
forces on time, but also in allocating substantial resources
for the process of reintegration of demobilized persons and
for the creation of new institutions to pursue efficiently the
maintenance of peace and security for our citizens after the
withdrawal of the United Nations forces.

Let us give the United Nations a chance to reinforce
its credibility before its member States and humanity. This
is an opportunity; let us decide now.

