Mr. Stock: It is a great honour to address the Security
Council, and I would like to thank the Australian
presidency very much for inviting me. I am here today
to speak about how INTERPOL assists countries
with the technical implementation and monitoring of
the Security Council's sanctions regimes. As United
Nations sanctions have become more targeted, their
implementation has become more complex for national
authorities. INTERPOL can help countries to fulfil
their implementation objectives and can enhance the
effectiveness of targeted United Nations sanctions for
countries transitioning out of conflict.

I would like to ask the Council to consider the
following question. How does the information on the
sanctions committees' lists reach the implementing
authorities dealing directly with the individuals and
entities? How does a border control officer know what to
do when a person subject to a travel ban appears in front
of him? How can details obtained in an investigation
by national law enforcement be identified and used to
enhance the listings and improve the reports of panels
of experts?

With its global cross-border network and modern
tools, INTERPOL is well placed to address those
practical aspects of implemention of United Nations
sanctions. We achieve concrete results. Last year the
Australian police used INTERPOL's databases to check
fingerprints and found a match with a set shared by
INTERPOL's National Central Bureau in Washington,
DC. The individual is subject to a travel ban imposed
by the Security Council, and his whereabouts had
previously been unknown. Thus with the use of
INTERPOL'S tools, Australia and the United States
were able to support Liberia in targeting a designated
individual who had threatened their security.

In my brief statement today, I will describe
INTERPOL's assistance in general terms, and then as
it relates to specific types of targeted United Nations
sanctions. I will conclude with some ideas as to how
that could be further improved.

INTERPOL's capacity to communicate information
on United Nations sanctions to police worldwide greatly
increases their visibility. The INTERPOL-Security
Council Special Notice was created in response to
resolution 1617 (2005) and an INTERPOL General
Assembly resolution. There are currently 526 valid
Special Notices, issued at the request of 10 of the 15
sanctions committees. INTERPOL notices are alerts or
requests for cooperation from national police that are
published and circulated in a standard, recognizable
format by our General Secretariat. The Special Notice
is one of many types of INTERPOL notices, which
include other non-criminal notices such as those that
help to locate missing persons and minors. The Special
Notices make the information from the United Nations
sanctions lists accessible to the 25,000 authorized users
in INTERPOL's 190 member countries, including some
immigration and border- control services, and to visitors
to its public website, where an extract is also published.

INTERPOL supports the implementation of
United Nations sanctions by enhancing the quality of
information available to the sanctions committees.
That involves seeking additional details and
identifiers - such as aliases, date and place of birth,
identity documents, fingerprints and photographs - to
supplement the lists. Sometimes that information is
already in INTERPOL's databases, such as in the case
of an individual subject to United Nations sanctions who
was listed in 2001. The limited data in the sanctions list
was greatly expanded when a check revealed identity
information and photographs from 1996 provided by
INTERPOL's National Central Bureau in Tashkent.

Authorized personnel of the secretariats of the
sanctions committees can conduct checks against
INTERPOL's nominal database to search for relevant
information or ask INTERPOL to make enquiries on
their behalf. In all cases, INTERPOL will contact
the country that owns the information for permission
to share it before any data can be used. In addition to
that support, INTERPOL also assists in the effective
implementation of specific types of United Nations
sanctions related to individuals, such as travel bans and
asset-freezing, or to goods, such as the arms embargo
and illegal natural resource exploitation.

With regard to the travel ban, INTERPOL is directly
alerted by our National Central Bureaus in many cases
when there is an attempted violation of this measure
by an individual subject to a Special Notice. Monthly
statistics are also produced by INTERPOL showing
which individuals and entities have been checked, when
and by whom. If further information is available, and
when authorized to do so by the country concerned,
INTERPOL shares details of operational checks with
the sanctions committees. Those details have included
border crossing times and dates and, in some cases,
copies of new passports or pages with entry stamps.

For instance, last year an individual on the travel
ban list of a sanctions committee, who is the subject
of a Special Notice, generated an alert in INTERPOL's
system when he attempted to leave C6te d'Ivoire. The
national authorities prevented him from boarding the
aeroplane and sent INTERPOL copies of his travel
document, the statement he made, his address and a
recent photograph, all of which was communicated to
the sanctions committee with the permission of C6te
d'Ivoire.

Concerning asset-freezing,INTERPOLisincreasingly
involved in coordinating international law enforcement
cooperation on that subject. The second INTERPOL
Expert Working Group meeting on the identification,
location and seizure of assets will be held here at
the United Nations in December. Over 100 experts,
including those from the sanctions committees and their
panels, have been invited to produce recommendations
on how to strengthen existing tools and identify new
trends and challenges.
As to the arms embargo, INTERPOL has a number
of tools that can assist the sanctions committees and
their panels of experts in helping countries to apply that
measure by tracing the origin of trafficked weapons.
INTERPOL regularly uses its reference table, network
and records to confirm the identification of weapons
depicted in photographs provided by the secretariat
of the sanctions committees or panels of experts.
INTERPOL recently assisted in the process to identify
handguns used in assassinations of Afghan police
officers, contacted the countries of manufacture for
further details, and then informed the Secretariat.

Due to INTERPOL's broad range of activities and
connections, specialized information can be provided
when designations extend to the illicit exploitation of
natural resources. Last year, a report on transnational
ivory-poaching syndicates was produced in the
framework of an INTERPOL operation in West and
Central Africa and shared with the panel of experts of
a sanctions committee with the permission of national
authorities in the Central African Republic.

Now that the Special Notices successfully disseminate
information from the United Nations sanctions lists,
the next step could involve increased leverage of our
network and contacts. Meetings could be organized
for law enforcement officers to exchange information
based on region, sanctions committee or type of
measure. Other innovations could include a compilation
of national guidelines for the implementation of United
Nations sanctions and the possibility of a new type of
notice linked to asset-freezing. A further initiative is
training for law enforcement officers on United Nations
sanctions and the use of Special Notices, building on
the seminars already organized thanks to funding from
the Canadian Government and collaboration with a
monitoring team.

We were interested to hear ideas put forward
during the recent high-level review of United Nations
sanctions, and remain keen to assist countries through
our cross-border capabilities in boosting their capacity
for implementation. INTERPOL has been privileged
to enjoy a close working relationship with the Security
Council Affairs Division of the Department of Political
Affairs, with which we are in constant contact. We
would like to take this opportunity to thank the Division
for its unstinting work over the years, and look forward
to continued excellent collaboration.

In conclusion, this month INTERPOL celebrates
100 years of international police cooperation and
has worked with the United Nations since 1949. Our
long-standing collaboration with the Security Council
sanctions committees has evolved over the years, and I
am confident that it will continue to move from strength
to strength.

