Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today's debate. I also
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Honore for her briefing. So far this year, Haiti's
political process has registered positive progress. Haiti
has formed a new Government and established the
provisional Electoral Council. It has announced the
election calendar and thereby officially initiated the
formal election preparations. Haiti's overall security
situation has remained stable, with a gradual restoration
of economic development, which has led to conditions
favourable for accelerating the advancement of the
country's political process.

On the other hand, it should also be noted that
the country's political situation remains complex and
fragile. Cholera prevention, appropriate settlement of
internally displaced persons and other humanitarian aid
tasks continue to face challenges, and peace rebuilding
remains arduous and has a long way to go.

In January the Security Council carried out a
successful visit to Haiti, where it engaged extensively
with the country's leaders and various stakeholders,
thus demonstrating the great importance it attaches to
the question of Haiti, as well as determination to find
a solution. Currently, there is an important opportunity
in Haiti's peace process. It is China's hope that the
international community will offer support mainly in
the following three areas.

First, it is neces to advance steadfastly in the
electoral process. The prompt and smooth completion
of the relevant elections is critical to achieving
sustainable peace, stability and development in the
country. China hopes that the Haitian parties will focus
on the country's future and its people's well-being,
seize the opportunity, meet each other half way and
work together to create favourable conditions for the
holding of the elections. The international community
and concerned regional organizations, based on
respect for the country's ownership, can actively play a
monitoring and coordinating role and provide support
for the elections.

Secondly, it is important to concentrate efforts
on accelerated national development, given that
underdevelopment is one of the root causes triggering
the country's political and social problems. The
country's current external environment has been stable.
Positive achievements registered during the post-
earthquake reconstruction prepared a good foundation
for accelerated development. The Government should
promptly establish a development strategy adapted
to its own national context, strengthen infrastructure
development, and enhance its capacities in disease
prevention and disaster reduction and promote
comprehensive economic and social development. The
international community should effectively honour
its aid pledges to Haiti, actively engage in Haiti's
State-building, and assist Haiti in attaining its goals of
reduced poverty and self-led development as soon as
possible.

Thirdly, it is necessary to adjust the peacekeeping
deployment in an orderly manner. Under the leadership
ost. Honore, the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) has played an important role
in such areas as supporting the political process and
maintaining social order and security, which China
welcomes. We hope that MINUSTAH, in starting its
gradual downsizing, will take situation on the ground
into account and implement this work steadily and
surely, while strengthening communication with the
Government. We also hope that MINUSTAH will
continue strengthening the training of the Haitian
National Police with a view to their early assumption
of comprehensive responsibility for national security.

