Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to welcome Your Excellency
Mr. Stjepan Mesic', President of the Republic of
Croatia, and to thank you for presiding over this debate.
I should also like to congratulate your country, Croatia,
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of December and to thank your
delegation for organizing this important debate.

The resurgence of terrorist attacks throughout the
world - the most recent of which struck the city of
Mumbai, India - remind us that vigilance and
international cooperation are always appropriate in the
face of this threat to international peace and security.
Algeria strongly condemns acts of terrorism in all their
forms and manifestations, regardless of the place or
context in which they are committed.

The United Nations has a leading role to play in
the fight against terrorism. Its actions must have
concrete objectives. In that connection, the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy must be
translated into a firm commitment on the part of all
Member States, which is the only way that we can
achieve the desired results.

Reacting to the consequences of terrorist acts is
not enough; a preventive approach is essential, since
the terrorist threat is ever-changing and terrorists are
increasingly using sophisticated means and complex
tactics to avoid detection by States.

We have to focus, first of all, on combating the
financing of terrorism. Networks that finance terrorism
must be shut down. Those networks evolve through
various kinds of organized crime such as smuggling,
drug trafficking, weapons trafficking and, recently,
piracy and hostage taking.

Financing terrorist groups through taking
hostages and securing ransoms seems to be one of the
more lucrative methods used by terrorists. Algeria
would warn against a short-term approach that involves
complying with terrorist demands without considering
the consequences of giving into them.

We have to continue analyzing and addressing the
factors that fuel terrorism and promote its spread. The
purpose is not to excuse terrorism but to understand it
in order better to fight against it. The Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy recognized this point by making
understanding terrorism one of its pillars.
Young recruits of criminal groups are not
terrorists because of some ancestral or religious
connection; they are victims of a combination of
several factors, including a lack of future prospects and
the harmful consequences of the propaganda of those
who promote extremist, fanatic and fatalistic

08-6369!)
ideologies. This particularly vulnerable group is often
left with little hope for a better future.

Moreover, studies carried out by the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force with some
Member States, including Algeria, on the rehabilitation
of terrorists who have repented for their crimes have
been very useful. Learning from these most unfortunate
experiences is one way of helping us to teach those
who might otherwise be seduced by terrorist
propaganda.

We must stress that the Internet is still the weak
link in counter-terrorist action by the international
community. Despite several General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions, such as Council
resolution 1624 (2005), no real progress has been made
in blocking the dissemination of messages that justify
terrorism on the web. Experience has shown that
terrorists are experts in computer technology and use it
to recruit and train members and to finance their work.
Reluctance has to be overcome, so that the
international community can take concrete action
together on this matter.

Algeria welcomes the ongoing commitment by
the Security Council to combat terrorism. Its subsidiary
bodies, Counter-Terrorism Committees and the 1267
and 1540 Committees play a decisive role in
mobilizing efforts and coordinating the activities of the
international community. The international community
must focus on assistance to developing States that do
not have the necessary human and material resources to
become more involved in the implementation of the
relevant international instruments. Assistance from
developed countries in the form of technical assistance
must be commensurate with the work to be done.
Border control, developing better financial systems and
controlling weapons trafficking are some of the major
issues to be tackled.

Here we would stress the importance of
strengthening cooperation with specialized regional
bodies through, inter alia, technical assistance
programmes. Regional and subregional organizations
know what the situation is on the ground, and they
know the specific constraints in each particular area.
They have a crucial contribution to make.

In Africa, the Algiers Research Centre on
Terrorism, despite its limited resources, is becoming
increasingly active in mobilizing, supervising and
training African personnel to take on the fight against
terrorism. Accordingly, it is a resource that should be
encouraged and we must involve it in various kinds of
training, technical assistance and consultations.

Finally, in the face of the scourge of terrorism,
Algeria wishes to reiterate its call to the international
community to rise above regional, ideological and
political divides so that we can tackle this scourge and
its underlying causes together.

