Mr. Hasrin (Malaysia): First and foremost, I wish
to commend you, Mr. President, for convening today's
open debate, which allows Member States to participate
and express their views on the worrying situation in
the Middle East, in particular on the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory.

Malaysia wishes to align itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of Uganda, on
behalfofthe Organization ofIslamic Cooperation (OIC),
and the statement to be delivered by the representative
of the Bolivian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

As we gather at today's quarterly open debate,
Malaysia shares the concern, as reflected in the tenth
report on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016),
that no steps have been taken by the occupying Power,
in particular on the illegal settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.

As we have pointed out on countless occasions,
the ongoing expansion of Israeli settlements is a grave
violation of resolution 2334 (2016), as well as of other
United Nations resolutions. It constitutes a flagrant
contravention of international law and international
humanitarian law. Not only are such actions a threat
to international peace and security, but they are
nothing short of acts of defiance against the voice
of the international community. The international
community must continue to call for the immediate
reversal of negative trends on the ground that imperil
the two-State solution. Israel must cease immediately
and completely all illegal settlement activities in the
occupied territories, as well as the continued illegal
demolition of Palestinian homes.

The ongoing escalation of violence in the Gaza
Strip and the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
remains precarious. We condemn the continuous use
of force by Israel against Palestinians. Those acts of
provocation and incitement against the Palestinian
people and holy sites in occupied East Jerusalem,
including Al-Haram Al-Sharif, threaten the sanctity
and stability of holy sites. The international community
has a duty to collectively ensure that Israel's continued
violations are put to an end.

Malaysia commends the initiative taken by the OIC
to convene the Open-Ended Extraordinary Meeting
of the Executive Committee at the Level of Foreign
Ministers on the Israeli Violations in the Occupied City
of Al-Quds Al-Sharif, on 17 July.

Israel's recent opening of the so-called Pilgrims
Road tunnel, which was cut from under the village
of Silwan to reach the Al-Aqsa Mosque, has sparked
widespread indignation and anger across the OIC
membership. The construction of the tunnel has not
only resulted in the weakening of the structure of the
mosque, but has also left 80 Palestinian homes in Silwan
damaged, while dozens more are at risk of collapsing,
forcing Palestinian families from their homes. Surely
the international community cannot be expected to
stand on the margins and continue to witness further
destruction unfold?

The financial situation of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), compounded by the decision of the
United States to cease its funding, remains deeply
alarming. The discontinuation of funding to UNRWA
would unravel 25 years of work and perseverance, not
only by the United Nations and its agencies but by all
other parties that have dedicated their lives to the name
of peace and humanitarian assistance.

Malaysia remains deeply concerned by the
unilateral actions taken by the United States that
further jeopardize the international consensus on the
two-State solution. Malaysia believes that a legitimate
political process is the only way forward in order to put
an end to the illegal occupation ofPalestine and address
all final-status issues in accordance with relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions
and previous agreements. The stalled Middle East
peace process serves only to exacerbate the current
situation in Palestine, therefore credible conditions
must be created in order to revive the peace process,
based on the existing terms of reference to the two-
State solution.

Malaysia remains convinced that the ongoing
occupation is the stumbling block to progress and
development in the occupied Palestinian territories. We
continue to believe that it is the responsibility of the
Security Council to strive towards a two-State solution
whereby the Palestinians and the Israelis can live side
by side in peace, based on the pre-l967 borders and
with East Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine. It is
our sincere hope that the views expressed here will be
considered seriously by Council members for the sake
of maintaining peace and security in the region.

