Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): Due to the lateness of the
hour, I shall dispense with the usual complimentary
remarks.

Let me, however, thank you, Sir, for convening
this open meeting of the Security Council to consider
the current grave and tragic situation in Palestine. The
brutal military and other actions taken by the Israeli
Government against the Palestinian National Authority
and President Yasser Arafat himself must not be
allowed to continue. These actions are brazen acts of
aggression and intimidation. They are short-sighted and
intended to serve only the short-term security and
tactical interests of the Government of Mr. Sharon,
whose only interest is to cow the Palestinian National
Authority and the Palestinian people into submission.
The undermining of the Palestinian Authority and of
President Arafat's personal authority and prestige
carries with it grave risks of further destabilizing the
region, with all their political and security
implications.

It is clear to all, except to Mr. Sharon and his
supporters, that the role of the Palestinian Authority
and of President Arafat himself continues to be
indispensable to the peace process, particularly at this
critical juncture. Mr. Sharon's handling of the situation
has sent the Middle East crisis spinning almost out of
control. It is incumbent upon the international
community, and on this Council in particular, to
restrain Mr. Sharon and to pull him back from the brink
of the precipice. Non-action by this Council will send
the wrong signal to Mr. Sharon, who will be
emboldened to take whatever further measures he
wishes, with impunity. The course of action pursued by
Mr. Sharon is a dangerous one and, if not checked, will
plunge the region into an upheaval that we shall all
regret.

It is therefore the responsibility of this Council to
act decisively to stop this dangerous trend. The
responsibility lies here, in this Council, not elsewhere.
We are not here to isolate Israel; we are here to make it
realize the folly of its policies and do the right thing.

As a member of this Council, Malaysia strongly
supported the idea of a United Nations peacekeeping or
protection force as the most effective mechanism to
stop or at least minimize the violence. We believe that,
had such a force or international presence been
established, the current spiral of violence would have
been greatly curbed and the crisis better managed,
thereby improving the chances of reviving the peace
process. While the current draft resolution merely calls
for the establishment of a "monitoring presence" to
help the parties implement the recommendations of the
report of the Sharm El-Sheikh Fact-Finding
Committee, or the Mitchell report, my delegation
considers that to be a concrete and positive step in the
effort to de-escalate the violence and, hopefully, to
pave the way to bringing the peace process back on
track. The reasons given by Israel for why it cannot
accept these proposals are disingenuous and
unconvincing.

Peace in West Asia, or the Middle East, is in the
interest of all of us, as it is in the interests of the
peoples of the region, Arabs and Jews alike. It must
therefore be pursued and promoted, not shunned,
frustrated or impeded by policies that are only intended
to provoke and inflame. Since the people of Israel have
a big stake in ensuring that the peace process is
revived, they should encourage their Government to
pursue peace and not take further military actions of
provocation and confrontation. They must realize that
only a just and comprehensive peace with the
Palestinians and their Arabs neighbours, based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), would guarantee their future security and
stability, not a continuing policy of hostility and
confrontation. It is our hope that countries with
influence in the region will spare no effort in
encouraging Israel to return to the peace process, as it
is the only viable option, now and in the future.

Malaysia is encouraged by recent remarks made
by President George Bush of the United States, as well
as by Secretary of State Colin Powell, on the
Palestinian issue and the general recognition that at the
core of the Arab-Israeli conflict is the problem of the
continued Israeli occupation of Palestinian and Arab
lands. We believe that further evolution of the position
of the United States in the right direction would be a
positive and significant contribution towards resolving
the Arab-Israeli conflict. However, early and tangible
steps must be taken to give substance to these policy
statements.

We strongly believe that the cause of peace would
be better served if friends of Israel, particularly the
United States, used their close relationship with Israel
to moderate its policies and practices against the
Palestinians and influence it to manifest greater
commitment to the peace process, and not condone its
hostile and aggressive behaviour.

Israel has tried to equate the United States-led
efforts to combat international terrorists that had
brutally attacked the United States with Israel's
problem in handling terrorist acts on its own soil and in
the territories under its illegal occupation, including
Jerusalem. The two situations are not the same. There
are fundamental differences between them, and some
of these were just mentioned by the Permanent
Observer of Palestine.

While there can be no justification for the taking
of innocent lives - and we condemn these acts - we
must pause to fathom the reasons why these violent
acts continue to be carried out by people who are
prepared to sacrifice their lives for the cause they
believe in. How does one stop individuals from
blowing themselves up for a cause larger than
themselves? Unless this issue is squarely addressed and
addressed early, there is little hope of resolving the
Arab-Israeli conflict in the foreseeable future.

The grave situation in Palestine was discussed at
the recent special ministerial meeting of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference in Doha, Qatar,
in which some 51 foreign ministers and representatives
of Muslim countries participated. It is deeply
regrettable that President Yasser Arafat could not
attend the meeting, as Israeli occupation forces
prevented him from leaving for Doha to address the
Conference. That meeting decided, among other things,
to establish a special ministerial committee that has
been tasked with making contacts with the United
States, the Russian Federation and the European Union
for the purpose of seeking international support for the
immediate halt to Israeli aggression and plans to
dismantle the Palestinian Authority and for the
dispatch of international observers to protect the
Palestinian people. In carrying out its assigned tasks,
the ministerial mission looks forward to the positive
response of their interlocutors.

