Mr. Guehenno (spoke in French): Members of
the Council will recall the words of Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Afghanistan, in his briefing to the Council
on 6 May. He described the significant progress made
in the Bonn process, but he also warned against the
security environment in Afghanistan and of the threat
posed by the prevailing security situation to the gains
made.

The emphasis on drugs in Afghanistan which you,
Sir, have designated for this meeting is indeed
welcome, given the importance of the issue to the
immediate and long-term stability of the country and
the region. Mr. Costa, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, will be focusing
more specifically on that issue, and I will provide an
update on the situation in Afghanistan since the last
briefing.

Over the past month, some positive progress was
made. Most notably, President Karzai took resolute
action towards establishing and affirming the
Government's authority in the provinces. We have also
seen the commencement of public consultations on the
Constitution, and planning for the electoral process is
now in its final stages. But the security situation
remains a serious impediment to progress and is a
major risk to the entire process. Solutions exist for this
problem, but resolving it will require the strong
commitment of the Afghan authorities and the
international community.

Before turning to the issue of security and its
influence on the Bonn process as a whole, I wish first
provide the Council with an overview of recent
developments in a number of other areas.

First, regarding relations between the centre and
the periphery, some 18 months since the Bonn
Agreement and the establishment of the Interim
Authority, the authority of the Transitional
Administration beyond Kabul is still, unfortunately, too
limited. The majority of provincial authorities continue
to act with an autonomy that denies the Transitional
Administration the means to implement its national
development plan. Yet the population expects the
Afghan Administration to improve the economic
situation and the security environment, which would
give the Afghan Administration its credibility. It is
clear that the patience of the Afghan population is
wearing thin.

In a determined effort to assert the authority of
his Government, President Karzai summoned 12 of the
country's most powerful governors and regional
commanders to Kabul on 20 May, threatening to
resign if he failed to secure their full cooperation. The
persons brought together committed themselves to
implementing a l3-point decision of the National
Security Council, which seeks, among other things, to
forbid the recruitment of private militias and military
action unauthorized by the central Government, to
reaffirm the ban on any individual holding both a
military and civilian post and to dissolve some
extragovernmental bodies; it also provides for
administrative powers for its implementation.

The National Security Council decision also
requires that all governors transfer provincial income
to the central Government. The Minister of Finance has
since secured the transfer of customs revenues from
several provinces, including $20 million from Herat's
Ismael Khan. The Minister of Finance also continues to
visit other provinces to seek the transfer of funds and
put in place an automatic transfer mechanism. At issue
is the gradual collection by the Government of $200
million that is anticipated for the budget. To date, $40
million has been collected. This infusion of new cash
has enabled the Government to pay some of the
overdue salaries of its civil servants and Afghan
National Army troops. However, regular remittances
will be the real test of the provinces' compliance with
the Government's directive.

Unfortunately, there are already signs that written
agreements do not necessarily translate into tangible
action. For example, Ismael Khan has already signalled
his unwillingness to yield any authority to Kabul and
has refused, for the moment, to resign one of his posts.
The Government and the international community must
send a strong signal that the signatories will be held
accountable for their pledges.

(spoke in English)

The overall human rights situation continues to
be negatively affected by extortion by local
commanders, arbitrary detentions and the general lack
of the rule of law. This remains a source of instability
and diminishes the credibility of the Government. As
part of the response, the seven satellite offices of the
Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission are
now fully operational. Their staff, with the support of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), has undertaken joint monitoring and
investigations of human rights violations as well as the
organization of educational and other promotional
activities. During the public consultations on the
Constitution and initial preparations for next year's
elections, and through its capacity to monitor human
rights abuses, it is expected that the offices of the
Commission will play an important role in the Civic
education process.

Of all the elements of the peace process, re-
establishing the rule of law and, in particular, the
justice sector, is one of the most important areas for
long-term stability. Yet that area also requires the
greatest investment of time in order to train lawyers,
build the judiciary and public confidence in it, and
bolster its position with respect to other State
institutions. As part of its overall work plan, which
includes determining which laws are currently in force
and surveying and developing the human, technical,
and logistical needs of the justice sector, the Judicial
Reform Commission took several steps this past month.
The Ministry of Justice has begun to compile and index
national laws with participation of foreign experts. Law
revision has been initiated in the fields of criminal law
and criminal procedure, as well as on judicial
organization, which are crucial areas for the
establishment of the rule of law. The Commission also
initiated discussions with the Afghan Independent
Human Rights Commission on areas of the
Constitution relating to the judiciary. In Kabul,
reconstruction of the High Court and the Property
Deeds Office is already under way with United States
support.

I would now like to turn to the Constitutional
Review Commission, which formally started public
consultations on 6 June. Teams of three Commissioners
will lead the consultations with elders, local shuras and
ordinary citizens in all 32 provinces of Afghanistan, as
well as with the refugee community in Iran and
Pakistan. The first five teams were sent to Mazar,
Gardez, Jalalabad, Kunduz and Bamyan on 10 June.
The Commission has decided not to circulate the
current draft of the Constitution, which was prepared
by the first Drafting Committee and which is
incomplete.

It reasoned that it would first wish to learn about
the population's expectations of its provisions and that
consideration of the current draft as it now stands could
limit the dialogue. A draft Constitution, which takes
into account the results of the public consultation and
the views of the full Commission, will be circulated in
September. Meanwhile, a working group appointed by
the President has been discussing options for the
organization of the Constitutional Loya Jirga.
Recommendations will be finalized and forwarded to
the President later this month. Logistical and security
arrangements are being discussed among Government
representatives, UNAMA, international representatives
and the international security forces. Their complexity
should not be underestimated.

UNAMA's preparations for the electoral
registration process have continued, and last month the
capacity to pursue that process was significantly
enhanced beyond the four-person team with the
approval of the supplementary budget that established
the Electoral Unit. Six Regional Coordination Officers
have now been recruited and are being deployed into
the regions, where they will undertake an on-the-
ground needs assessment of the situation as it now
exists and determine the practicality of the current
work plan. Due to the lack of an Afghan counterpart
and the timing of the election, UNAMA has had to plan
on the assumption that most of the electoral
registration would have to be done directly by United
Nations staff, international and local. However, we
were recently informed that the Government is now
considering more actively the option of establishing an
elections commission, which would allow for greater
Afghan involvement in electoral management, given
time for capacity-building. The finalized draft budget is
to be presented to donors shortly, and it is hoped that
the necessary voluntary funding will be forthcoming.

The election process is fundamentally a shared
responsibility between the Government, the United
Nations and the international community. The
feasibility of conducting the registration and its
ultimate credibility will depend not only upon the
various technical contributions to the management of
the registration process from the United Nations and
the Government, but also, critically, it will depend
upon the effective creation of an improved political
environment, and most important, on security.

On 7 June, the international community was
brutally reminded of how fragile peace remains, even
in Kabul, when a suicide car bomber detonated a large
explosive alongside a German International Security
Assistance Force bus, killing four personnel and one
bystander and injuring 29 personnel in the most deadly
attack on the international security force in its 18
months of operations. This dreadful act was designed
to shake the resolve of the international community in
its commitment to the peace process. But it did not.
Germany and the rest of the international community
have reaffirmed their commitment to Afghanistan.
Nevertheless, this incident underscores that Kabul is
not immune to the security problems of the hinterland,
and that if security is not extended from Kabul, then
the city itself will become more vulnerable and thus
less stable.

Other signs of the activity of those seeking to
subvert the process continue to occur in the rest of the
country. Across the north, factional fighting regularly
continues. The outbreak of fighting on 16 May between
two police commanders belonging to rival factions in
Mazar-e-Sharif led to the suspension of United Nations
activities in the city for four days. Among those killed
was the local United Nations security focal point.

In southern and south-eastern Afghanistan,
incidents of Violent crime and reported clashes between
suspected Taliban and Coalition and Afghan National
Army forces continue amid an apparent marked
increase in Taliban infiltration. In the second week of
June, police officers were twice ambushed while
travelling on roads in the province of Zabul, resulting
in the death of two police officers.

International and national non-governmental
organizations operating in several cities, including
Kandahar and Jalalabad, have been the target of
grenade attacks. In response to a series of attacks and
threats to demining teams, the United Nations Mine
Action Centre was forced to suspend all activities in 10
provinces and along the Kabul-Kandahar road.

In the current security environment, United
Nations road missions have had to be severely
restricted in the provinces of Zabul, Uruzgan,
Kandahar and northern Helmand. Where not
suspended, missions must be accompanied along main
roads by armed escorts provided by the Afghan
authorities. In effect, one third of the country is
currently inaccessible to the United Nations, which
seriously hinders the ability of the Organization and
others to carry out reconstruction efforts and to lay the
groundwork for the Constitutional Loya Jirga, for the
elections and for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) in the affected regions.

Ultimately, national security structures will have
to assume responsibility for domestic security, backed
by a functioning justice system. But it will take time
for those institutions to develop the necessary capacity
and to become truly national in character. Satisfactory
progress has been made in the training of the national
army and police forces by the lead nations - the
United States and Germany, respectively. Some of
those forces have already been successfully deployed.
But the funding for the forces' salaries is woefully
inadequate. The success of these structures in
providing security also depends on the establishment of
an effective justice system - to which I referred
earlier - and on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration efforts.

With the support of the Government of Japan and
of UNAMA, the DDR programme will be ready to
commence later this week. Within the Government, the
Ministry of Defence is to have the lead role in the
implementation of the DDR programme, but the
Ministry is conspicuously lacking in regional and
ethnic balance and thus does not have the trust of the
factions that are to participate in the programme. Until
the Ministry of Defence reforms itself - including at
its uppermost echelons - it will not enjoy the
necessary trust of the factions. Accordingly, the
commencement of DDR has now been made contingent
on the implementation of a series of confidence-
building measures signalling that reform of the
Ministry of Defence is indeed irreversible and in
conformity with the presidential decree of 1 December
2002.

We welcome the contribution of the provincial
reconstruction teams to improved security, and we are
encouraged by the recent expression of interest by a
number of countries in participating in the teams, of
which there are currently three, composed of 185
personnel. They can provide a platform for supporting
and expanding the work that is being undertaken on
security sector reform. They can assist in the provincial
training of police and can help provide an environment
conducive to judicial reform as well as other measures
aimed at improving local governance. They can also
carry out infrastructure work to support Government
authority, such as renovating police stations, rebuilding
courthouses and constructing barracks for the new
Afghan National Army.

The early deployment of elements of the Afghan
National Army to Gardez and Bamyan has also
highlighted the role that the provincial reconstruction
teams can play in familiarizing such forces with the
concept of civic action and, through such engagement,
contributing to the establishment of greater security.
Finally, the teams can play a confidence-building role
in connection with a number of processes that have
started or are about to start, namely, the constitution-
making process, DDR and electoral preparations.
However, in the current environment, we must be
aware that the teams, at their current strength and level
of deployment, are still far from an adequate response
to the security challenge posed to the Bonn process.

Therefore, we must continue to stress that, while
national Afghan institutions are ultimately the answer,
further deployment of international security elements
that are of a reasonable size and are able to project
credible strength is needed to provide the security
environment and confidence necessary for the Bonn
process to move forward to its natural conclusion.

Finally, we can say that, in the past month, civic
processes central to the Bonn Agreement have
commenced - and others will soon begin - that offer
all Afghans a stake in achieving a stable State. The
technical and logistical dimensions of moving ahead
with the peace process are being put in place, but the
necessary environment is not there. There are still
some within Afghanistan for whom the process
represents a threat, and it is their intent to subvert it
and to force the Government and the international
community into retreat. They are relatively few in
number, but the vicious technology of terror gives them
power that is disproportionate to their number. The
aims of the Taliban, Al Qaeda and Hekmatyar are
reasonably clear. More difficult to gauge is whether the
professed commitment of regional commanders and
powerful governors to the nation-building process is
genuine, or whether in fact they are prepared to
undermine it.

Much has been invested in the progress made to
date in Afghanistan. The process has now entered its
most critical and most sensitive stage - the
constitutional and electoral processes - but prevailing
insecurity poses a serious risk of derailing it. Those
who wish to subvert the process should not be allowed
to triumph over the aspiration of the vast majority of
Afghans to a stable State. I encourage the Afghan
authorities and the international community to
demonstrate a shared commitment to providing the
conditions necessary for the peace process to move
forward.

