Ms. Krisnamurthi (Indonesia): My delegation
wishes first of all to thank the presidency of the Russian
Federation for having convened this open debate. Let
me also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov and Mr. Stephen
O'Brien for their respective briefings. Our appreciation
also goes to the five non-permanent members of
the Security Council 4 Angola, Egypt, Malaysia,
Senegal and Venezuela 4 for having conducted the
Arria Formula meeting on the issue of settlements. It
was an eye-opening meeting that gave us precise and
actual facts on the conditions in the occupied territories
of Palestine.

We would like to align ourselves with the statement
delivered by the representative of Venezuela and that to
be delivered by the representative of Kuwait, on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, respectively.

As we all know, in 2017 Palestine will mark the
fiftieth year of its occupation by Israel. Throughout
those years, a lot of Palestinian blood has been shed
and a lot of talking has been done by members of the
international community. There have been meetings
and proposals and real solutions, but there has been no
tangible peace in Palestine. The reports available to
us speak of the continued deterioration in the security
and humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory. Worst of all, the denial of the basic human
rights of Palestinians by the occupation authorities is,
sadly, limitless. We will not and cannot wait another
50 years for the Palestinian people to regain their
sovereignty and dignity as an equal member of the
international community.
As we gather here in this edifice for yet another
debate, the biggest challenges to the two-State solutions
are the persistent gross human rights violations and the
restriction of access to basic humanitarian requirements
in Palestine. Unfortunately, Israel's illegal settlements
and the continued construction of the separation wall
remain ongoing features of Palestinian life, as a result
of the failure of the international community to find a
concrete, practical solution.

Only last month, during the general debate of the
General Assembly, Palestinian President Mahmoud
Abbas urged world leaders to declare 2017 as the
international year to end the Israeli occupation (see A/71/PV.14). In that light, we would like to express our
support for this notion. It was in that context, and in
view of the stalled Palestinian-Israeli peace talks in
April 2014, that we were pleased to participate in last
June's ministerial meeting on the Middle East peace
process, led by France and aimed at finding a path back
to the peace process. We therefore welcome the report
of that meeting.

Furthermore, Indonesia is on record as having
repeatedly called upon the Security Council in recent
times to fulfil its responsibility under the Charter of
the United Nations for maintaining peace and security
and to take action to achieve what is right on behalf of
the Palestinian people. We reiterate our conviction that
the Organization was founded principally to satisfy the
hunger of the peoples of the world for peace and security
and to promote the equal rights and self-determination
of peoples.

While we do not deny or seek the abrogation of the
rights of Israelis, we are firm in our position that the
fundamental rights of the Palestinians must be heard.
Without any doubt, the task of resolving prolonged
conflicts and ending foreign occupation, particularly in
the case Israeli-Palestinian conflict, remains the United
Nations greatest challenge. While Israel continues
to expand its illegal settlements in the West Bank,
including Jerusalem, the humanitarian situation in the
Gaza Strip following the 2014 war remains desperate.
The illegal settlements are a prime obstacle to the
peace process and the prospect of achieving a two-State
solution.

Moreover, we remind the Council that Israel's
continuedconstructionoftheseparationwallcontravenes
the 2003 advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice. In the process, Israel is fully restricting the
access and movement of Palestinian populations even
as its forces revel in violent incursions into the West
Bank, killing, injuring and making arrests at will. What
we are dealing with is not a mystery. It is about a basic
moral obligation that the international community has
regrettably failed to uphold. That means it remains
a principled challenge for the Council because the
Council and no other authority has the responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.

It is strange to reflect on the fact that the Security
Council alone has adopted approximately 89 resolutions
on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, some of which call
for the withdrawal of the Israeli occupation force.
It is stranger still to consider that neither Israel nor
the Council 4 the very body responsible for those
resolutions 4 has honoured them. History will further
question the commitment of the Security Council to the
issue at hand.

My delegation welcomes the accession of Palestine
to a number of multilateral treaties and conventions,
with particular reference to human rights-related
instruments, as this works to enhance its status at the
United Nations. It is a regrettable fact of history that for
over 60 years, the Palestinian people have been living
without a homeland. It is time to take seriously the task
of advancing the two-State solution.

We therefore call on the Security Council to
champion the pursuit of peace as mandated by the
Charter rather than the unassigned role of a referee.
In our view, only one thing stands between us and
the achievement of the two-State vision of Palestine
and Israel living side-by-side in peace: political will.
Indonesia calls upon the Security Council to summon
the political will to implement its own resolutions,
which will break the stalemate and impunity and enable
the Palestinian people to actualize their dream of a
sovereign State of their own.

