Mr. Pascoe: Recent events starkly illustrate just
how volatile the Middle East conflict remains and how
sizeable the obstacles are to progress towards peace.

One immediate concern must be ending the
violence that has erupted in Gaza and has extended to
southern Israel. The longer it continues, the greater the
risk of escalation, and the greater the threat to both the
survival of the National Unity Government and to the
prospects for any fruitful Israeli-Palestinian dialogue.
Leaders on all sides have a responsibility to do their
utmost to rein in the violence.

In Lebanon, we have also seen a dangerous
outbreak of violence. The armed clashes between the
Lebanese Armed Forces and the Fatah al-Islam gunmen
around a Palestinian refugee camp have added a new
and explosive element to an already tense situation.

The factional fighting in Gaza erupted soon after
the resignation of Palestinian Interior Minister Hani
Kawasmeh on 14 May. It included brutal urban warfare
involving clashes of Hamas militants and Executive
Force members with Palestinian Authority security
forces and Fatah armed gangs. The Karni crossing was
attacked by Hamas gunmen, as was the home of a
senior security official affiliated with Fatah. Battles
2

took place in residential areas, with no regard for the
safety of civilians. All told, the upsurge in inter-
factional violence this month has left 68 Palestinians
dead and more than 200 wounded.

The Secretary-General has repeatedly called for
an en to the violence. Egypt is to be commended for its
continuing efforts to mediate. In order to address the
situation comprehensively, Palestinian leaders must
live up to their responsibilities to bring law and order
to areas under Palestinian control and to reform the
security forces.

Rocket fire against Israel escalated significantly,
with more than 270 rockets fired during the reporting
period. Rockets have hit homes and schools in Sderot
and the Israeli Government has declared the area an
emergency zone. An Israeli woman was killed on 21
May. In addition to the other aforementioned
casualties, many residents have been evacuated. The
Secretary-General has emphasized the need for the
rocket fire to cease.

In response to the rocket fire, Israeli tanks
entered the Gaza Strip for the first time since the
ceasefire was agreed in November last year. The Israeli
Air Force has conducted air strikes aimed at militants
and facilities. However, there have been civilian
casualties, including six family members of a Hamas
Legislative Council member, who were killed in a
single strike on their home. All told, in Israeli-
Palestinian violence this month, militant rocket fire has
killed 1 Israeli and injured at least 16, together with
dozens treated for trauma, while Israel Defense Forces
(IDF) air strikes and ground incursions have killed 57
Palestinians and injured at least 175 others, with
children accounting for six of the dead.

While recognizing the right of Israel to defend
itself, the Secretary-General has called on Israel to
ensure that its actions do not target civilians or put
them at undue risk. All parties must abide by the basic
tenets of applicable international law. The Secretary-
General has spoken to both President Abbas and
Foreign Minister Livni and has urged them to do all
possible to calm the situation and to exercise control
and restraint, respectively. With rocket fire continuing,
militants threatening to resume suicide bombings and
the Government of Israel announcing its determination
to intensify its actions, there is a great danger of
escalation.
07-3567]

United Nations operations and personnel face real
dangers. On 7 May, an internal Palestinian clash
outside a school in Rafah operated by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East left one person dead and
eight injured, including two children. British journalist
Alan Johnston, who was kidnapped on 12 March 2007,
has not yet been released. There has been no further
movement on the release of Israeli Corporal Shalit,
who was captured by Palestinian militants on 25 June
2006, or on Palestinian prisoners. Yesterday, Israel
arrested some 30 Hamas officials, including elected
mayors and legislators. The most prominent arrestee is
Mr. Nasser Eddin Al-Sha'er, the Palestinian Minister of
Education, who was active in the negotiations to form
the National Unity Government.

There has been no action towards a freeze in
settlement construction or in the dismantlement of
settlement outposts. Nor have the settlers I reported on
last month been evicted from the buildings in central
Hebron despite an order from the Defence Minister. In
early May, a plan for three further settlements in East
Jerusalem, comprising another 20,000 housing units,
received preliminary approval. The Secretary-General
has expressed his concern about these plans and stated
that a halt to settlement expansion is one of the basic
obligations in phase one of the Quartet's Road Map. He
noted that, as occupied territory, the final status of East
Jerusalem is subject to negotiations between the
parties. Construction on the wall continued throughout
the reporting period, contrary to the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice.

This month there was slight improvement in
movement in the Jordan Valley. However,
commitments to ease movement and access in the West
Bank remain unmet. A total of 549 physical obstacles
to movement were in place as of 15 May 2007, a slight
increase from last month. Closure levels have doubled
since the Agreement on Movement and Access was
concluded 18 months ago. Serious action is long
overdue. A recent World Bank report underscores the
relationship between Israeli restrictions on Palestinian
freedom of movement and continuing Palestinian
economic collapse. Obstacles and a permit regime have
divided the West Bank into 10 economically isolated
enclaves, denying Palestinians access to some 50 per
cent of the West Bank.

In the Gaza Strip, the number of trucks exporting
in April was only 11 percent of the targets decided on
07-3567]

in the Agreement on Movement and Access. Due to the
upsurge in violence, Karni was closed between 15 and
20 May and has reopened only sporadically since then.
As of 21 May, the Rafah crossing was open for only
five days of the month. It is good, however, that the
European Union Border Assistance Mission at Rafah is
being renewed.

United Nations staff members and other
humanitarian workers crossing into Israel continue to
face arbitrary and sometimes humiliating treatment by
Israeli authorities. The United Nations continues to
follow up access issues faced by our staff and other
humanitarian workers with the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs.

The recent United States decision not to block
bank transfers to Palestinian accounts, the re-
establishment of the single treasury account and the
ongoing efforts by Finance Minister Salaam Fayyad to
re-start a transparent and accountable budget process
should be welcomed and supported by all. The
Norwegian Government plans in the near future to
transfer $10 million to the Palestine Liberation
Organization account. We also welcome Arab efforts to
provide financing but stress that the major step
required is the resumption of the transfer of tax
revenues withheld by Israel, now amounting to
approximately $1 billion. In addition, the temporary
international mechanism continues to provide a
transparent, efficient means to transfer payments to
public service providers and the most vulnerable
Palestinians.

In the reporting period, Israeli politics have been
dominated by the release of the interim Winograd
report, which was critical of the conduct of last year's
conflict with Hizbullah, while noting that there had
been inadequate attention given to trying to reach
peace agreements with Israel's neighbours. The final
report is due to be released in August.

There have been no further bilateral meetings
between Prime Minister Olmert and President Abbas
since 15 April. The next meeting is tentatively
scheduled for 11 June. United States Secretary of State
Condoleezza Rice postponed a planned trip to the
region. However, the United States-proposed
benchmarks on security and Agreement on Movement
and Access implementation have been shared with the
parties. These benchmarks reportedly provide for
enhanced operations at the Karni and Rafah crossing
3
points, as well as for easing the restrictions on
movement in the West Bank and between the West
Bank and Gaza.

Efforts to promote the Arab Peace Initiative,
which was reaffirmed by Arab League members at their
summit meeting in Riyadh in March, have continued.
During the reporting period, dialogue took place
between Israeli, Jordanian and Egyptian officials at the
highest levels, including a meeting of Foreign Minister
Livni with her Jordanian and Egyptian counterparts in
Cairo on 10 May, and Prime Minister Olmert and King
Abdullah of Jordan on 15 May. A ministerial-level
follow-up meeting is anticipated in Israel in the coming
weeks.

Quartet members held a positive informal
exchange of views in Sharm el-Sheikh with members
of the committee of the Arab League tasked with
implementing the Arab Peace Initiative. The Secretary-
General strongly encourages all concerned to continue
to discuss the next steps required to benefit from this
important initiative, which provides the framework for
a comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict,
consistent with Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973). He will continue to convey this
in his discussions with the Quartet when he joins them
next week in Berlin.

I shall turn now to Lebanon, where the security
situation has deteriorated drastically over the reporting
period. On 20 May, heavy fighting erupted between the
Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) and Fatah al-Islam
gunmen in Tripoli in northern Lebanon and around the
Nahr al-Bared Palestinian refugee camp. The fighting
began following a police effort to arrest, in Tripoli,
Fatah al-Islam militants suspected in a bank robbery
which had taken place a day earlier. The militants
resisted arrest, and a gun battle ensued which spread to
the surrounding streets. Fatah al-Islam gunmen
subsequently attacked the Lebanese Army positions at
the entrance to Nahr el-Bared refugee camp, killing
soldiers. Heavy fighting continued through Monday
and Tuesday. According to security and the media,
approximately 32 Lebanese soldiers and 22 members
of Fatah aI-Islam have been killed since the fighting
erupted on Sunday.

The situation faced by civilians in the camp is
extremely difficult. According to Palestinian sources in
the camp, thousands initially fled their homes on the
edges of the camp, where fighting was most intense, to
shelter deeper inside the camp. During a truce on
Tuesday and Wednesday, at least 15,000 refugees fled
the camp. Dozens of homes are reported to have been
destroyed, and civilian casualties and public health
issues are reported to be mounting. Much of the camp's
supply of medicine, water and electricity is reported to
have been interrupted.

Because of the heavy fighting, UNRWA has been
able to send only one convoy to the camp to provide
humanitarian assistance. Three of the six convoy
vehicles were completely destroyed or heavily
damaged when the convoy came under attack.
Fortunately, there was no report of any injury to staff.
Although it has not been possible to confirm them
independently, reports indicate that at least 27 civilians
have been killed and approximately 70 others wounded
since the fighting erupted.

Major Palestinian factions in Lebanon expressed
concern over the incidents and dissociated themselves
from Fatah al-Islam. Palestinian representatives in
Lebanon, together with several Palestinian local
leaders, continued their meetings with Lebanese
officials to ensure the safety and protection of
Palestinian civilians during the fighting.

The Lebanese Government has expressed
determination to confront the group and has also
reiterated its position that only the Lebanese Army and
security forces should carry weapons. There has been
general Lebanese and Palestinian support for that
approach. However, there are real concerns in Lebanon
that instability could spread to other camps.

The Secretary-General and his Special
Coordinator for Lebanon have issued statements
strongly condemning the criminal actions of Fatah al-
Islam as attacks on Lebanon's stability and
sovereignty. The Secretary-General has called on all
sides to do their utmost to protect innocent civilians.
He deplored the attacks on UNRWA's humanitarian
supply convoy and called for the immediate
establishment of safe corridors to allow medical staff
to assist and evacuate those in need. The Secretary-
General has maintained close contact with Prime
Minister Siniora of Lebanon and has talked over the
phone with leaders in the region, including King
Abdullah II of Jordan and the Foreign Ministers of
Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Iran and Syria. He has spoken
with the Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States, Mr. Amre Moussa, and notes the statement of

07-3567]
the Council of the Arab League supporting the efforts
of the Government of Lebanon to maintain peace and
stability.

In addition to the events in northern Lebanon, on
the night of 20 May a large explosion in Beirut killed
one person, injured at least 18 others and caused
extensive damage to buildings in the Achrafiye
neighbourhood. On 21 May, another powerful terror
attack took place in Beirut's Verdun neighbourhood.
There were no reports of fatalities, but hospitals
confirmed that at least seven people were wounded. On
23 May, at least 16 people were injured when a third
explosion targeted the main commercial street in the
town of Aley.

Last month, on 23 April, two youths whose
families support the Progressive Socialist Party of
Walid Jumblat were abducted and murdered. Political
and religious leaders from across the spectrum in
Lebanon condemned the killings, called for calm and
asked their supporters to exercise restraint and allow
the competent authorities to deal with the perpetrators.

In southern Lebanon, the strength of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) stands at
just over 13,000. During the reporting period the
overall situation along the Blue Line remained calm,
although there have been a number of tense stand-offs
between IDF and LAF soldiers at various points along
the Line. In all cases, swift intervention from UNIFIL
has helped to de-escalate the situation.

Ongoing tensions have also been reflected in a
number of provocative billboards erected by Hizbullah.
In addition, Israeli aerial violations of the Blue Line
have continued on a regular basis, in direct violation of
07-3567]

resolution 1701 (2006). The United Nations reiterates
its call on Israel to cease its violations of Lebanese
airspace.

Finally, pursuant to the presidential statement
issued on 17 April 2007 (S/PRST/2007/12), the
Secretary-General informed the Security Council, in a
letter dated 23 May 2007, that arrangements for
dispatching an independent mission to Lebanon to
assess the monitoring of Lebanese-Syrian border
security have concluded. Security circumstances
permitting, the mission will be dispatched to Lebanon
early next week.

In conclusion, as the Council is aware, the
Secretary-General has appointed Mr. Michael Williams
as the new Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and his Personal Representative to the
Palestine Liberation Organization and the Palestinian
Authority. I had hoped that the new Special
Coordinator could be with us today, but the Secretary-
General has dispatched him urgently to the region. He
begins consultations today with senior Israeli and
Palestinian officials, and will then travel to Cairo for
meetings with the League of Arab States and the
Government of Egypt. He will brief the Secretary-
General before the Quartet meeting to be held in Berlin
on 30 May.

