Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): At the outset, I
would like to thank Mr. Pascoe for providing the
3
Security Council with a comprehensive briefing on the
situation in Libya.

This meeting is taking place exactly 100 days
after the start of the NATO aerial bombardment in
Libya. Despite that military action, there has not been a
solution to the Libyan crisis. In fact, the situation has
deteriorated, with more loss of civilian life and
massive destruction of infrastructure.

Since the beginning of the Libyan crisis, South
Africa has continued to call on the international
community, including the Security Council, to focus its
energies on finding a political solution, and not a
military one. To date, we still maintain that the
political, rather than the military, solution is the only
way in which durable peace can be achieved in Libya.
This is emphasized in paragraph 2 of resolution 1973
(2011), which stresses the need to intensify efforts
aimed at a political outcome. It is for that reason that
we strongly feel that resolution 1973 (2011) should be
implemented in its entirety in letter and spirit.

When South Africa voted in favour of resolution
1973 (2011), our intention was to ensure the protection
of civilians as well as unhindered access to
humanitarian aid for those who desperately needed it.
We had hoped that this would have created an enabling
environment within which the Libyans would negotiate
a solution to the crisis that had befallen them. Our
intention was never regime change; nor was it the
targeting of individuals. The future of Libya should be
decided by the Libyans themselves, and not by
outsiders.

In an effort to support the political process in
Libya, the African Union (AU) has devised a road map
that encourages an inclusive and consensual Libyan-
owned and -led transition. This will lead to the
adoption and implementation of the necessary political
reforms to address the causes of the current crisis,
including democratic elections to enable the Libyans to
freely choose their leaders. The African Union is
central to any solution in Libya and will continue its
efforts towards finding a political solution to the crisis
there.

Having said that, we believe that the United
Nations should take the lead in peace efforts in Libya
in order to coordinate the different initiatives and avoid
any confusion that the plethora of initiatives may
cause. In that context, we support fully the role that the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy, Mr. Al-Khatib,
continues to play in Libya.

Yesterday, South Africa hosted a meeting of the
AU ad hoc High-Level Committee on Libya in Pretoria
to review developments in Libya and the role of the
African Union. The Committee reiterated the AU's
deep concern about the continuing fighting between the
Libyan warring parties and the NATO-led aerial
bombardment. The Committee reiterated the African
Union's conviction that only a political solution would
make it possible to sustainably settle the current
conflict. In pursuing its objectives to find a political
solution to the crisis, the Committee agreed to continue
its work with the Government of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya and the Transitional National Council of
Libya based, inter alia, on the following elements.

The first is calling on both parties to commit
themselves to an immediate suspension of hostilities.
Following the suspension of hostilities, and in
accordance with paragraph 3 of resolution 1973 (2011)
and the African Union road map, the Libyan parties
should begin the national dialogue for a comprehensive
ceasefire, national reconciliation, transitional
arrangements and the agenda for democratic
transformation. The national dialogue would be
followed by the establishment of an interim
Government, with the support of the African Union and
the United Nations through the AU ad hoc High-Level
Committee and the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General.

The Committee further reiterated the African
Union's demand for an immediate pause in the fighting
and the NATO-led bombings to provide a respite to the
civilian population, alleviate its suffering and make it
possible to deliver much-needed humanitarian
assistance to all those requiring it.

The Committee also welcomed the decision by
Colonel Al-Qadhafi not to be part of the negotiations
process. We hope that this decision by Colonel
Al-Qadhafi will help the Libyan parties to immediately
begin a political dialogue in line with the AU road
map. The AU Summit, which will take place in Malabo
later this week, will further pursue efforts to implement
the road map.

In conclusion, South Africa calls on the Security
Council, the United Nations in general and other
stakeholders to work hand in hand with the African
Union in our collective resolve to deliver the people of
Libya from the scourge of the conflict in which they
find themselves.

