Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French):
Canada welcomes the preliminary report released on
9 September by the Dutch Safety Board and commends
the investigation team, whose work has been exemplary
despite the difficulties that they encountered in pursuing
their important task. The report was prepared despite
the initial efforts of the Russian-backed insurgents in
control of the area to hinder the work of the investigation
and despite the limited access to the crash site due to
the violence caused by the insurgents.

(spoke in English)

As we now know, the investigation has found no
evidence of problems with the aircraft or with the crew
before the tragedy. Its findings are consistent with what
we and others have asserted since the tragedy on 17 July,
namely, that the flight was destroyed by an anti-aircraft
missile following an increased flow of heavy weaponry,
including rocket launchers, from Russia into insurgent-
controlled areas in Ukraine.

The tragedy is but one of many examples ofthe cost
of Russia's reckless behaviour in Ukraine, where more
than 3,000 people have died since Russian-sponsored
violence erupted in April. Its actions there undermine
the most basic norms of international conduct. They
pose a grave threat not only to the security of eastern
Europe but also to the rules-based international system.

The Russian Federation can end the ongoing
tragedy in Ukraine. We support the ceasefire agreement
reached on 5 September and commend the Government
of Ukraine for acting on its commitments to secure
lasting peace. Russia and the insurgents must begin
acting in good faith and do the same. The task of the
Flight MH-l7 investigation team is not yet complete.
We look forward to its final report, as well as to
the outcome of the work also under way within the
International Civil Aviation Organization. The need
for answers and justice and respect for the victims and
their grieving friends and family members from all the
countries affected, including Canada, should unite all
Member States in support of those efforts.

In July, we joined others in sponsoring resolution
2166 (2014). Today, we call once again on Russia and
the insurgents to allow access to the crash site. We
reiterate the need for those responsible for the tragedy
to be brought to justice. As we continue to mourn the
victims, Canada stands ready to contribute further to
the investigation.

