Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation is
thankful to you, Sir, for convening this meeting. It
affords the Council another opportunity to further
assess the progress made in the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
detailed report. We are pleased to welcome
Mr. Bernard Kouchner back to the Council. We are
grateful for his comprehensive and extremely useful
update. We are impressed by the very strong
commitment he has demonstrated in carrying out his
onerous tasks. We continue to be impressed by his
undiminished enthusiasm, which we witness every time
he addresses this Council, as he has just done this
afternoon. We appreciate his openness and candour in
addressing the issues and problems he and the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) have had to face thus far. He does not duck
these difficult issues. He has openly admitted mistakes
that have been made, but through admitting them
remedial actions have been taken. We welcome this
candour, this transparency, which augurs well for the
further progressive implementation of resolution 1244
(1999).

During previous meetings of the Council on
Kosovo, my delegation has already articulated its
views on a number of the issues raised by
Mr. Kouchner in his briefing and those contained in the
Secretary-General's report. Nevertheless, we take the
opportunity to reaffirm once again Malaysia's strong
support for Mr. Kouchner's leadership of UNMIK and
his efforts in the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999) in Kosovo.

Clearly, UNMIK has made significant progress in
the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). We
welcome the achievements that have been made so far.
We note with satisfaction that the Mission has
consolidated those achievements and continued with a
whole range of further efforts to lay concrete
foundations for peace, democracy and self-government,
as well as for long-term development and
reconstruction in Kosovo.

We now see a relatively smooth functioning of
the various institutions or organs that have been
established in Kosovo: the Joint Interim Administrative
Structure, the Interim Administrative Council and the
Kosovo Transitional Council. The representation of
Kosovar ethnic minorities in these administrative and
consultative organs is also being enhanced, while
efforts are being made to further strengthen the Kosovo
Protection Corps and the Kosovo Police Service. We
further note that a number of important administrative
regulations have been signed into law.
UNMIK is therefore on the right track towards
the full implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). We
are greatly encouraged by what Mr. Kouchner told us,
and we encourage him and UNMIK to press ahead. Of
course, success will depend on two factors of crucial
importance: the continued strong support of the
international community and the support, commitment
and full cooperation of all leaders and people of
Kosovo.

In the context of today's consideration of the
subject, my delegation wishes to highlight the
following five points.

First, we fully support Mr. Kouchner's decision
and his actions with regard to the conduct of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia elections in Kosovo
last Sunday, 24 September 2000. Considering the
mandate of UNMIK and the complexity ofthe situation
on the ground, those decisions and actions were
entirely appropriate. We are relieved that the event
passed without serious incidents. We hope that the
outcome of those elections will have a positive impact
on the overall situation in Kosovo.

Secondly, we welcome the successful conduct of
the civil registration process in Kosovo. This is
certainly one of UNMIK's major achievements and, in
the words ofthe Secretary-General,

"an important milestone on the province's path to
self-governance" (8/2000/878, para. 114).

The focus is now on the preparatory work for the
municipal elections and the actual conduct of the
elections themselves on 28 October 2000. We look
forward to these elections. However, their success can
only be guaranteed by the active support of the
international community, as well as the support and
cooperation of all Kosovar political forces, and
ultimately the full participation of all registered voters.
We have repeatedly urged the participation of all
communities in the registration process and in the
upcoming municipal elections. We trust that the efforts
of Mr. Kouchner and UNMIK in this regard will bear
fruit.

Thirdly, the continuing precarious security
situation in Kosovo is completely unacceptable. The
recurrence of ethnically motivated violence and the
apparent increase in politically motivated violence and
acts of harassment overshadow the substantial progress
made in the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).
There also exist some irresponsible elements that are
out to sabotage the process. Their actions should not be
tolerated. We therefore support the continued efforts by
UNMIK and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) to tackle the
security problem effectively, including the recent
measures to improve the overall security situation and
the protection given to members of political parties.
While the two missions work to enhance their capacity
to deal with the security problem effectively, success
will ultimately depend on the strong commitment,
political will and full cooperation of all leaders of
Kosovo's different ethnic communities. We therefore
urge all Kosovars - leaders and people at every
level- to play their part in fighting extremism and
promoting inter-ethnic harmony.

In the context of UNMIK's efforts to curb crimes,
we were impressed with the success attained by
UNMIK so far, as graphically presented by
Mr. Kouchner today, from a high of 300 major offences
in a week in June this year down to less than about 20
in September. This is highly impressive.

Fourthly, Mitrovica undoubtedly remains a
potential flashpoint in Kosovo. We fully support the
efforts by UNMIK and KFOR to enhance security in
this area. It is imperative that UNMIK assert its
authority throughout the northern part of Kosovo, as it
has done elsewhere in the territory.

Finally, the twin issues of missing persons and
the continued detention of Kosovar Albanians in jails
in Serbia remain a major concern that requires an early
solution. We warmly welcome the appointment of
Ambassador Henrik Amneus as the Special Envoy
responsible for this matter. We earnestly hope that this
appointment will greatly contribute to finding a
comprehensive solution to this important human rights
and humanitarian problem, which should have a
positive impact on the overall reconciliation process in
Kosovo. We, however, agree with Mr. Kouchner on the
need for the international community and this Council
to exert pressure on the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia so as to change its
uncompromising stand on this issue. Without the
necessary pressure, the Special Envoy's efforts will be
thwarted by Belgrade and the missing persons will
remain missing. This is completely unacceptable,
especially in the light of what Mr. Kouchner has just
told us about the torture that those in detention are
being subjected to. This is outrageous conduct on the
part of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia prison
authorities, for which they should be made
accountable.

