Mr. Wood (United States of America): Today we
reaffirm the mandate of the United Nations Commission of
Inquiry, established to investigate arms sales in violation of
Security Council resolutions 918 (1994), 997 (1995), and
1011 (1995).

The Commission of Inquiry has done an excellent
job, in spite of inadequate cooperation from several key
Governments. The evidence of violations of the embargo
on arms sales to members of the former Rwandan forces
in June 1994, when those forces were committing
genocide, is shocking. The allegation in the Commission's
report of continuing violations of the embargo, including
shipments to Goma and Bukavu for the former Rwandan
armed forces, must be thoroughly investigated. That is
why the Security Council reaffirms the Commission's
mandate.

We call upon all Governments to cooperate fully
with the Commission's investigations. The terms of the
mandate are clear and robust. The Commission has the
authority to interview witnesses in private, without
representatives of any Government present to listen to the
testimony. The Commission is free to choose its own
interpreters, without the approval of any Government. All
United Nations members are obligated to assist the
Commission, to provide such security for its members as
the Commission requests and to provide access to
witnesses and places as the Commission requires.

The embargo on sales and transfers of arms to
former Rwandan armed forces and militias was imposed
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Such arms sales are threats to international peace and
security. As the United Nations commission of experts
and the Security Council have determined, the
ex-Rwandan armed forces have already used their
weapons to commit genocide against Rwandan people,
and now they are using their arms to spread terror and
insecurity inside Rwanda. Their armed insurgency must
be stopped. Those leaders of the ex-Rwandan armed
forces who committed genocide should be prosecuted by
the International Tribunal for Rwanda.

We are determined that the embargo on arms sales
to ex-Rwandan armed forces will be enforced. This
Commission of Inquiry is part of that enforcement effort.
The evidence the Commission uncovers should be used
by Member States to investigate, arrest and prosecute the
arms traffickers, who have violated domestic and
international law by violating this arms embargo. We call
upon all United Nations members to enforce this arms
embargo and to cooperate fully with the Commission of

Inquiry.

