I thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing. I would also like to extend our gratitude to Ms. Mustafa, not only for her presence in this video-teleconference today, but for her decision to lend her voice to drawing attention to the many women and girls who still live in detention in Syria. Many might have taken the legitimate decision to move on, but her determination to advocate on behalf of the families of detainees is a source of inspiration. Those in detention as well as those in over-cramped camps are at a higher risk of suffering from the devastating potential effects of a global pandemic. But they are also suffering from another pandemic - that of living a life without knowing when their nightmare will end or when they will be reunited with their families. The unilateral humanitarian release of detainees in the context of the coronavirus disease pandemic must, and will, bring some sense of humanity to the many families that still do not know the whereabouts of their loved ones. Accordingly, we continue to encourage the Special Envoy and the Member States with the ability to do so to strengthen their efforts until more significant results are seen in this particular area. The Dominican Republic invites the Syrian Arab Republic, in coordination with relevant international organizations, civil society, women's organizations and young people, to join their fellow Syrians and realize that goal. Families should be reunited, there needs to be justice and accountability, and impunity needs to cease to exist if we genuinely want sustainable peace in Syria. Families are the very fabric of society from which nations are made. With political will, joint efforts and determination, this could be the starting point towards the country that Syrians legitimately want for themselves. We are satisfied with the news that the Constitutional Committee will be able to meet at the end of August for the first time in almost ten months. We are also fully aware of the difficult and complex process that ultimately led to this meeting; therefore, while managing our expectations, we would like to wish all participating parties a successful session and to encourage them to move things forward with the due diligence that the issue deserves. The Syrian people will wait no longer. They must not continue to harbour the sense of defeat, mistrust or hopelessness that has been in them for so long as a result of a long and painful conflict. Hope must return. In that regard, the peaceful protests that have taken place in recent weeks over a range of grievances must be allowed and heeded. Violence and tensions must be avoided, and dialogue and durable solutions need to be put in place. In conclusion, we reiterate our full support for a Syrian-led, Syrian-owned political process that, through United Nations facilitation and in line with the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015), can achieve the legitimate aspirations of a population heavily beaten down by conflict. We urge all parties to the conflict, as well as all relevant actors, to adhere to the ceasefire agreements in order to protect civilians and to refrain from any violation of international humanitarian law. The world is watching. Justice and accountability will be ensured.
