Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): South Africa wishes
to welcome His Excellency Mr. Djibrill Bassole,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso, in his
capacity as representative of the Facilitator of the
Ivorian peace process, President Blaise Compaore, and
thank him for his briefing here today. May I also use
this opportunity to express my delegation's sincere
appreciation for the continuing and active facilitation
role of President Compaore. I would be remiss if I did
not also congratulate Burkina Faso on its election as a
non-permanent member of the United Nations Security
Council for the period 2008-2009. We look forward to
working together with Burkina Faso on this Council.

My delegation also wishes to thank Mr. Abou
Moussa, Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in cote d'Ivoire for his continued
dedication, and the work of the United Nations
Operation in C6te d'Ivoire (UNOCI), under his
leadership, as well as for the briefing to this Council.

The signing of the Ouagadougou political
Agreement on 4 March 2007 was historic. It led the
Ivorian parties, with the assistance of their neighbours,
particularly President Compaore of Burkina Faso, to
reach an agreement and create ownership for resolving
an issue that had baffled the international community
for many years. The Secretary-General has described
the signing of the Ouagadougou Agreement as a
"unique turning point" in the Ivorian peace process.
"Ownership of the peace process", the Secretary-
General has stated, "imposes a unique responsibility on
the Ivorian parties to implement the Ouagadougou
Agreement in full and in good faith". Since the signing
of the Agreement, it has often been pointed out that
some of the processes and obligations that the Parties
had to carry out in terms of the Ouagadougou
Agreement have not yet materialized. South Africa,
however, remains optimistic that all the parties in Cote
d'Ivoire have demonstrated the political will to move
the process forward and to adhere to the agreed-upon
time frames. We agree with Prime Minister Soro, who

has reassured everyone that his commitment to
preserving the credibility of the electoral process is
more important than adhering to strict deadlines.

South Africa welcomes the setting up of the
Integrated Command Centre, the establishment of the
six mixed brigade units and the launch of the mobile
courts, as well as the initial work done with regard to
the identification and registration of voters, the
disarmament and dismantling of militias, the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme and the restoration of State authority
throughout the country. My delegation is particularly
mindful of the technical, logistical and capacity
challenges that hamper the efforts of the parties to fully
adhere to the timetable for the implementation of such
difficult technical processes as the dismantling of
militias, the cantonment of former fighting forces, the
redeployment of State authority and the deployment of
the mobile courts. Nevertheless, we are confident that,
with the assistance of the United Nations Operation in
C6te d'Ivoire, the support of the international
community and the political commitment of the parties,
those challenges are not insurmountable.

The recently held donors' round table is
demonstrative of the goodwill, commitment and desire
of the international community to see peace, prosperity
and development return to Cote d'Ivoire. We welcome
the pledge of $388 million in support of the peace
process made by the international community. What is
now required is for those pledges to be honoured.
South Africa calls on the international and donor
communities to continue their material and technical
support for the Government of C6te d'Ivoire and for
the full implementation of the Ouagadougou
Agreement.

In conclusion, my delegation shares the view of
the Secretary-General expressed in his most recent
report, in which he states that

"The positive political atmosphere that has
prevailed in Cote d'Ivoire since the signing of the
Ouagadougou Agreement gives the Ivorian
parties the opportunity to make concrete progress
towards its implementation." (S/2007/593, para. 59)

We also agree with the Secretary-General that the
momentum generated by the signing of the Agreement
should not be lost and that
"The overall peace process and the improved
security situation will remain fragile and
vulnerable to reversals unless it is underpinned
by concrete progress". (ibid)

South Africa therefore commits itself to working
with the leaders of Cote d'Ivoire and the international
community in ensuring that the promises of the
Ouagadougou Agreement come to fruition and that
peace, stability and prosperity once again return to the
people of Cote d'Ivoire.

