Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland welcomes your initiative, Mr. President, to
organize this high-level meeting. I would like to thank
you for the concept paper that was distributed in order
to prepare for this thematic debate. We agree with the
statement that the concrete situations with which the
Security Council is today confronted in many crises
underline the need for it to review its role and to reflect
on the best way of implementing Article 26 of the
Charter. I would like to briefly raise five points.

First, my country considers it essential that the
main organs of the United Nations respect their
specific areas of competence. The legislative role that
requires the greatest possible transparency is clearly
that of the General Assembly. The Swiss positions on
the main disarmament and non-proliferation issues
relating to conventional weapons and weapons of mass
destruction are well known and I will not repeat them
here. The Security Council, for its part, focuses its
attention more on specific conflicts, intervening in the
event of a crisis. It is therefore its duty to consider new
security policy challenges and to make use of the
lessons learned.

Secondly, Switzerland believes that specific
projects and concrete programmes, the supervision of
illicit arms trafficking in the context of peacekeeping
operations, the monitoring of regional agreements and
fact-finding missions on the illicit trafficking of arms
can be crucial tools in reinforcing the close link
between disarmament, development and peace. On the
basis of these experiences, we believe it useful for the
Security Council to present proposals to parties to
conflicts and to make disarmament a key subject in
peace negotiations.

Thirdly, allow me to mention the linkage between
socio-economic development and armed violence.
Launched in 2006, the Geneva Declaration on Armed
Violence and Development is based on the premise that
armed violence is a serious obstacle to development
and may impede the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals. Conversely, armed violence can
be reduced by the effects of economic and social
development. The importance of the Geneva
Declaration was recognized in the report of the
Secretary-General on small arms (S/2008/258), issued
in April at the request of the Security Council.
In the framework of the implementation of the
Geneva Declaration, a number of voluntary pilot
countries were identified with a view to drawing up
and implementing policies and programmes to reduce
armed violence. My country suggests that the Security
Council should use a similar methodology. The
innovative aspect of this approach is that it takes a
comprehensive view of armed violence and thus
considers violence generated in conflict and
post-conflict situations, as well as in cases of terrorism
and of crime. Indeed, if we examine the list of conflicts
of which the Council is seized, we are often confronted
with layers of different forms of violence that call for a
determined and more systematic action by the Security
Council. In this respect, Burundi and Haiti, to take only
two examples, illustrate the complex relations that
exist between armed violence and economic
development. The projects initiated in these two
countries in the framework of the Geneva Declaration
could also give impetus to United Nations action in the
area of peacekeeping.

Fourthly, Switzerland would also like to note that
reduction and regulation of armaments are not the only
way forward in this area. Security sector reform and
the demobilization, demilitarization and reintegration
of former combatants can also contribute to this effort
and reduce tension. The links between the two themes,
which have been discussed by the Security Council,
and their practical implementation need to be looked at
as a whole.

Fifthly, and finally, I would like to emphasize that
my country endorses the basic idea in the concept
paper, which stresses the importance of regional arms
control and disarmament measures. However,
Switzerland also believes that it is essential to bear in
mind the specific nature of each region in exercises of
this kind and to create a sense of ownership by the
main actors.

