Mr. Jurica (Croatia): I shall first make a joint
statement on behalf of the Chairmen of the 1267, 1373
and 1540 Committees, followed by my own statement
2
in my capacity as the Chairman of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC).

On behalf of the Chairmen of the three subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004),
I would like to make some introductory remarks on the
cooperation between those Committees.

As requested by the Security Council in all its
recent resolutions pertaining to the Al-Qaida and
Taliban Sanctions Committee, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the 1540 Committee - and more
specifically in resolutions 1735 (2006), 1805 (2008)
and 1810 (2008) - we have worked on enhancing the
ongoing cooperation between our three Committees,
mostly through our expert groups.

Over the past few months, the three expert groups
have continued to jointly implement their common
strategy approved by the three Committees in 2007 to
assist non- and late-reporting States. After the first
regional workshop - which was held in Dakar at the
end of September 2007 for West and Central African
States - a second one, still in cooperation with the
Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, was organized on 29 and
30 November 2007 in Gaborone for Southern African
States. As was done after the Dakar workshop, a post-
workshop briefing for all African Union missions in
New York was held on 18 December 2007. The third
subregional workshop, for Northern and Eastern
African States, is envisaged to take place in November
2008.

Those workshops provided an opportunity for the
experts of the three Committees to jointly interact with
the officials in charge of the implementation of the
measures decided by the Council, and therefore to
update them on the work of the Committees. They also
enhanced the understanding of Member States of the
different mandates and roles of the three Committees.
Progress has already been achieved as new reports and
additional information on States' implementation have
been submitted to the three Committees.

Another concrete example of such cooperation is
the visits to Member States carried out jointly by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) and the experts of the 1267 Committee's
Monitoring Team. So far, nine such visits have taken
place, the most recent one to Saudi Arabia from 22 to
29 March 2008. In order to derive common benefit
08-32878
from the CTC's visit to Niger last February and from
the mission led by the Chairman of the 1267
Committee to Mauritania, Senegal and Mali, each
provided input and questions to the other prior to the
trips and information was subsequently exchanged
between the Committees and expert groups.

We continue to encourage our three expert groups
to share, as appropriate, information and their analyses
of the efforts by Member States to implement their
obligations under the relevant Security Council
resolutions. That exchange of information also includes
requests for technical assistance and other requests
made by States. Since the last briefing to the Security
Council, the Monitoring Team, CTED and the 1540
expert group have continued their regular contacts in
order to maximize the exchange of information and the
sharing of resources, as well as to avoid duplication.
We also encourage our experts to work closely together
as they develop their relationships with other relevant
international, regional and subregional organizations,
which could possibly be an avenue for even closer
cooperation.

The three expert groups are also cooperating
within the framework of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, which was established to
ensure overall coordination and coherence in the
counter-terrorism efforts of the United Nations system
in the context of the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

That cooperation is not only crucial for the
effectiveness of the work of our respective
Committees; it is also essential for the coherence of the
important contribution of the Council in countering
these threats. Avoiding duplication of efforts is of
paramount importance. To that end, together with our
expert groups, a comparative table has been developed
to highlight the main aspects of the respective
mandates and areas of competence of the three
Committees and of their expert groups. We are of the
View that that will be a useful tool for Member States
to better understand the specificities and
complementarities of our work. The table will be
issued today in a press release and will be posted on
our respective websites. It will also be used in our
various outreach activities and interactions with
Member States, with which rests the primary
responsibility to implement the obligations under the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
08-32878

Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction pose a threat to international peace
and security, and cooperation by all remains crucial.
The Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), as well
as their respective expert groups, remain committed,
within their respective mandates, to their work to
contribute to the overall United Nations and
international efforts to assist States to fully implement
the respective resolutions. In that context, the three
Committees look forward to further guidance from the
Council on areas of common interest in order better to
coordinate their efforts, as indicated in resolutions
1805 (2008) and 1810 (2008).

In my capacity as the Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), known
as the Counter-Terrorism Committee, it is my honour
to brief the Security Council and the wider membership
on the work of the Committee in the past six months.

As terrorism remains one of the major threats to
international peace and security, the Committee is a
crucial instrument of the international community to
address that global scourge. As the Chairman of the
Committee, I intend to abide by its guiding principles
and focus on concrete results and achieving realistic
objectives. I believe that the Committee should adopt a
pragmatic approach in order to fulfil obligations
entrusted to it by resolution 1373 (2001).

Before entering into the core of this presentation,
I would like to extend the Committee's gratitude to
Mr. Mike Smith, Executive Director of the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), and his team
for their valuable assistance. I also appreciate the
constructive atmosphere in the Committee, which
greatly contributes to fulfilling its mandate.

Transparency is one of the basic principles in our
work and therefore, together with the Executive
Director, I briefed the States Member of the United
Nations on the work of the Committee and CTED on
29 April, and we intend to continue with that practice
in the future.

At the outset, I am pleased to report that, since
the last briefing in November 2007, the Committee has
initiated or accomplished several key initiatives that
have established a sound basis for our future work.
3
The first accomplishment is the adoption of the
new organizational plan of CTED. The Security
Council heard a detailed presentation of the plan by the
Executive Director at its meeting on 19 March.
Without unnecessary repetition, for the purposes of this
briefing I would like to reiterate its main elements.

The adjustments to CTED's organization and
methods of work will have the effect of improving the
quality and consistency of its technical judgments and
will enhance the ongoing dialogue between CTED and
the Member States. It will also strengthen CTED's
cooperation with relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations.

The plan further envisages an addition to the
existing practice of conducting full-scale assessment
missions by organizing more flexible visits tailored to
the specific circumstances and the nature of the
terrorist threat in countries belonging to all regions.
The increased flexibility should make the work of
CTED more efficient and allow it to focus on issues of
the highest priority to the Committee and to the visited
country. The organizational plan also gives greater
priority to engaging donors and matching their
capacities with the needs of recipient countries, as well
as to implementing a more proactive communications
strategy and strengthening collaboration among
Security Council expert bodies active in the counter-
terrorism field.

The plan charted the way forward for CTED, and
was affirmed in Security Council resolution 1805
(2008), adopted on 20 March. The resolution extended
the mandate of CTED until the end of 2010, but also
set the direction for the Committee in the next few
years. The resolution contains a provision for an
interim review by 30 June 2009 and a comprehensive
consideration of CTED's work prior to the expiration
of its mandate.

The second major initiative is the adoption of
Preliminary Implementation Assessments (PIAs),
which are basically tools geared towards intensifying
dialogue with Member States on the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). By the end of last year, 158
PIAs had been adopted, and since then the Committee
has continued to analyse, through its subcommittees
chaired by France, the Russian Federation and Viet
Nam, and adopt the remaining documents. Thus far, the
Committee has adopted some 167 PIAs, and the rest
should be formally approved by the Committee in the

coming months. One of the goals of the current
chairmanship is to make sure that every Member State
receives a copy of its preliminary assessment.

The Committee adopted its work programme for
the period 1 January to 30 June, and divided its
activities into several main categories. Within the first
category, monitoring and promoting the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), besides
adopting the PIAs, the Committee has commenced its
consideration of a revised version of a document
entitled "Survey of the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001) by Member States".
That document was first discussed in the Committee in
May 2007 and was subsequently revised on the basis of
the views of Committee members and the updated
evaluations of implementation contained in the PIAs.
The survey examines the implementation of counter-
terrorism efforts in all regions and subregions,
pinpoints areas for further improvements and identifies
shortfalls and vulnerabilities that need to be addressed
either in particular regions or at the global level.

In that context, let me remind the Council that
resolution 1805 (2008) directs the Committee to submit
an annual report on the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). While the decision on the status of the
survey is still being discussed, many delegations have
stated that the document could serve as a useful tool
for the Committee to define its priorities in its future
programmes of work.

Another important activity of the Committee is
organizing visits to Member States. Throughout this
year, the Committee is performing visits that were
approved at the end of 2006. Those visits, which are
carried out with the consent of the countries involved,
constitute a fundamental component in effectively
monitoring and promoting the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) and allow CTED to gain first-
hand experience on the ground. Since our last briefing,
the Committee has concluded successful full-fledged
on-site visits to Bosnia and Herzegovina, Niger and
Saudi Arabia; as we speak the Committee is in
Cambodia, and will later visit the Lao People's
Democratic Republic.

The visits typically include experts from CTED
and other international and regional organizations, and
result in a comprehensive assessment of all counter-
terrorism measures. That not only enhances the
Committee's understanding of the counter-terrorism
measures in place, including challenges, best practices
and technical assistance needs or programmes, but also
strengthens its cooperation with the other international
organizations involved. Furthermore, following the
proposal in the organizational plan to conduct flexible
visits, the Committee conducted a fact-finding mission
to Jamaica.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
Governments of those Member States for their valuable
cooperation in the preparations for the Committee's
visits. In addition, the Committee will continue
encouraging Member States to become party to and
implement the 16 international counter-terrorism
instruments.

Regarding the second category, facilitation of
technical assistance, the Committee and CTED in
particular are engaged in continuous dialogue with
Member States, and their role in facilitating technical
assistance is growing in importance. With that in mind,
as part of its reorganization, CTED is reviewing the
existing strategies and mechanisms for facilitating
technical assistance and for refining them with a view
to strengthening the Committee's contribution and
recording its impact in the technical assistance field.
The challenge in the forthcoming period will be to
devise more creative approaches so that the
Committee, through CTED, can exercise its brokering
role as effectively as possible.

In its dialogue with Member States, the
Committee continued reminding them that they must
ensure that any measures taken to combat terrorism
comply with all their obligations under international
law, in particular international human rights, refugee
and humanitarian law.

The Committee also posted on its website two
helpful tools: the technical assistance matrix, which is
targeted at donors to help them guide their assistance
programmes and decision-making, and a directory of
assistance, enabling recipients to View and identify the
programmes that best suit their needs.

With respect to the implementation of resolution
1624 (2005), the Committee submitted to the Council
its second report regarding progress made by Member
States in its implementation. Likewise, in its work
programme, the Committee has agreed to initiate
discussions to explore the technical assistance needs of
States to implement the resolution, as well as to
facilitate the provision of such assistance, while
encouraging those States that have not yet reported to
do so.

The Committee continues to play its part in the
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, and CTED is participating actively
in the work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force. The Committee is also assisting Member
States in implementing those provisions of the Strategy
that fall within its mandate. The Committee has
included in its work programme a discussion of its
contribution to the implementation of the Strategy.

The Committee continued to cooperate with other
relevant parts of the United Nations system and
specialized bodies, and in particular with the two other
Security Council committees that deal with counter-
terrorism, as requested by the Council in its resolution
1805 (2008). Furthermore, as the Council has just
heard in the joint message, the second workshop in the
framework of the common strategy by the three
Security Council Committees for non-reporting and
late-reporting States was organized for States of the
Southern African Development Community on 29 and
30 November 2007 in Gaborone.

Finally, as part of its cooperation and exchange of
information with counter-terrorism partners during its
meetings in New York, the Committee heard several
briefings by representatives of relevant organizations
and United Nations bodies.

