Mr. Pildegovics (Latvia): I thank the Dominican
Republic, as President of the Security Council, for
organizing today's debate. The perspective of your
country, Sir, as it is directly affected by climate change,
gives us a particular sense of urgency. I also thank all
of the briefers for their useful updates in that regard.
Latvia fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

Climate change is one of the greatest challenges of
our time, faced by all countries. Undoubtedly, it also
affects geopolitical stability and security, while acting
as a threat multiplier, especially for the most vulnerable
regions - in some cases reinforcing the conflicts.
Climate-related disasters threaten populations and the
stability of whole regions, particularly countries in
Central America and the Caribbean, as well as South,
Central and South-East Asia. We are well aware of the
particular vulnerability of many small island developing
States to climate change and sea-level rise.

Latvia fully welcomes the fact that the Security
Council is discussing the issue. We believe that
climate-related security risks should be mainstreamed
in the Council's conflict-prevention and peacebuilding
efforts. Deepening our understanding of the
implications of climate change on international security
will help countries and individuals to step up climate
action. We also applaud the Secretary-General for his
strong commitment to putting climate change high
on the United Nations agenda, in particular this year
in preparation for the United Nations climate summit
in September.

The effects of climate change are becoming
increasingly evident and more severe. Last summer,
we again witnessed record-breaking heat all around
the world. Like other countries, Latvia is experiencing
the effects of climate change. Records of average
air temperature in Latvia ShOW a long-term trend
of warming. Every storm causes flooding and great
distress to the people living in coastal regions. And
the threat of coastal erosion along the Baltic Sea could
intensify in the future. Only with joint multilateral
efforts and cooperation is it possible to combat climate
change by reducing greenhouse-gas emissions and
building resilience and through better preparedness for
the negative impacts of climate change, including more
frequent climate-related disasters.

Climate action has a clear interlinkage with the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Latvia is strongly convinced that
reaching the Sustainable Development Goals is the
ultimate prevention agenda, as they address the drivers
and root causes of instability and conflict. Therefore,
investing in human dignity, eradicating poverty,
fostering climate resilience and promoting economic
and social progress will reduce the incidence ofconflict,
instability and despair.
The Paris Agreement on Climate Change provides
clear guidance on what we must do before it is too late.
Latvia is fully committed to the long-term goals of the
Agreement. Latvia's obligations will be to implement
the commitment made by the European Union's
nationally determined contribution to collectively
reduce greenhouse-gas emissions by at least 40 per cent
by 2030 as compared to 1990. Latvia is now working
on its National Long-term Low-carbon Development
Strategy 2050 and its National Plan for Adaptation to
Climate Change 2030. Moreover, Latvia is developing a
detailed national energy and climate plan for the period
2021-2030. At the regional level, Latvia, currently holds
the presidency of the Council of the Baltic Sea States
and prioritizes dialogue and cooperation in the field
of climate adaptation and low-emission development.
We will promote the effective implementation of the
Paris Agreement in that framework. We will also focus
on the pollution problems of the Baltic Sea. Chemical
pollution and plastic waste have emerged as one of the
growing threats to the Baltic Sea basin ecosystem over
the past decade, which calls for an immediate solution.

Latvia strongly believes that mitigation and
adaptation to climate change, especially finding
concrete solutions, is a common responsibility at all
levels. However, it is crucial to build trust among various
stakeholders, especially to send a strong signal to the
private sector to advance innovation and investment in
the green economy. That will require many changes in
sectoral policies, and, above all, in people's mindset.

Last December, the United Nations Climate
Change Conference, held in Katowice, Poland, adopted
a balanced package of decisions. It is our urgent task
to fully implement them in order to operationalize the
Paris Agreement. Now, in anticipation of the United
Nations climate action summit, to quote the Secretary-
General, "We are at a defining moment". We truly are,
and the survival of our planet is at stake. This is an
issue we must all care about deeply. We must act for the
sake of future generations.

