Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation has asked for the floor in the belief that
today's meeting is informative not just for the Security
Council but for the membership in general. As an
elected, non-permanent member of the Council, we
feel that it is up to us to share the information with
the membership that elected us - that is, to share our
opinions about what is discussed at such meetings. We
feel that this helps improve transparency in our work.

I would like to thank Mr. Keating and Mr. Madeira
for their detailed briefings, and especially for their
excellent work and untiring dedication in what is an
extremely difficult area in every sense. We saw the
difficulties on the ground for ourselves when we visited
Mogadishu in May.

Uruguay believes that we have seen genuine
progress in recent months in creating a federal State in
Somalia, including preparing the framework needed for
a political transition this year. Somalia has embarked on
the process of transitioning power that will eventually
produce a new Parliament and Government. It is a
decisive and historic moment on the country's path to

consolidating a democratic, inclusive, stable and fully
empowered State. Somalia has also begun to prepare
the way for general elections in 2020 on the basis of
one person, one vote. That progress could still falter,
however, which is why Uruguay was very sorry to
hear the news received in just the past few hours of
another postponement of the election dates previously
announced for October and November. We strongly
urge the Somali authorities to stick to the new dates.

Uruguay deplores the continuing threat of the
terrorist group Al-Shabaab, which is the main threat to
peace and security in Somalia. It continues to be a latent
problem in the centre and southern parts of the country
in spite of the efforts to deal with it. Unfortunately it
appears that Al-Shabaab is likely to step up its activity
during the run-up to the elections. In our view, it seems
clear that security sector reform is key, especially
regarding the provision of fast and effective training for
the Somali National Army. Operations with the regional
forces should be planned and coordinated in order to
facilitate more effective participation by the National
Army in joint operations with the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), which will enable the
Federal Government's security forces, including the
police, to take on more responsibility for maintaining
peace and security and protecting Somali citizens.

Uruguay is very concerned about the increased
violations of human rights in the first half of the
year, mainly as a result of security operations and
Al-Shabaab's activities. The measures in place for
preventing sexual violence and protecting people from it
are still inadequate, and the issue is a particular problem
for internally displaced persons and civilians affected
by the conflict. Despite the significant commitments
for protecting children that the Somali authorities have
made in the past few years, the detention of children
for alleged links to Al-Shabaab is still worrying.
Uruguay calls on the Government of Somalia to ensure
that children are treated primarily as victims and
that its guiding principles are the best interests of the
children involved and international standards for their
protection. The death sentences that have been given
to children in Puntland are unacceptable and violate
international instruments regarding children.

Uruguay would particularly like to emphasize
the importance of protecting civilians, particularly
children, women and the elderly, and we urge the
Federal Government of Somalia to pursue mediation and
stability, especially in areas where access to supplies and
humanitarian aid is Vital. We reiterate that the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, AMISOM. and
the international community should work more closely
than ever, and with better coordination, with regional
administrations and the Federal Government in order
to prioritize capacity-building and the strengthening
of regional institutions, so as to help regional
administrations to consolidate and gradually create the
conditions needed for providing governance, security
and basic services to local populations.

