Mr. Schulz (Germany): I would like to thank all of
our briefers for their insightful presentations.

Somalia has in the past decade made remarkable
progress in establishing more functional national
institutions and State-building as well as in enhancing
security and stability. But today Somalia is once again at
a critical juncture. The task and challenge ahead today
is to consolidate the gains made and at the same time
make further progress in transitioning to democracy
and in State-building. Two areas are particularly crucial
to achieving this objective: first, cooperation between
the Federal Government of Somalia and the federal
member states and, secondly, the elections scheduled
for 2020 and 2021.

On the issue of federalism and the cooperation
between the Federal Government and the federal
member states, let me first ofall express our appreciation
for the renewed commitment of the Somali Government
to State-building at the Somalia Partnership Forum.
Germany welcomes the clearly defined objectives and
targets of the Mutual Accountability Framework with
regard to the elections to be held in 2020 and 2021, as
well as the legislative reforms concerning the political
party law, the electoral bill and the constitutional review.

In order to achieve these goals, constructive
political cooperation between the Federal Government
and all federal member states must be given the highest
priority. Unfortunately, we have not seen sufficient
progress since the Somalia Partnership Forum, and we
think that coordination meetings should be resumed
swiftly and take place regularly in order to resolve the
outstanding issues.

Turning to the elections - the first democratic
elections since 1969, as we have been reminded by our
briefers - Germany underscores that credible, free
and fair elections in 2020 and 2021 are absolutely key;
this is obviously one of the most important tasks ahead
for the Somali Government. Somalis deserve to vote
in a timely fashion in a one-person one-vote election.
I think that the principle of a one-person one-vote
election cannot be overemphasized. Because present-
day power-sharing models before the next democratic
elections have, to a large extent, excluded women
and some marginal groups, such one-person one-vote
elections are is absolutely critical from our point
of View.

For this to become a reality, two conditions must
be met: first, the timely adoption of the electoral
code by the end of the year, which is in five weeks,
and, secondly, a broad consensus across the political
spectrum on the modalities of its implementation. Let
me also say that we attach great importance to the vital
role of the National Independent Electoral Commission.
Germany has supported the Commission financially,
and we would like to assure it of our continued political
support for its very important and difficult work. Let me
also say that, with respect to the timeline that has been
agreed, in our view any extension is not an option. It
would put last year's achievements at risk, and therefore
the current agreed timetable should absolutely be met.

I would like to briefly refer to two or three other
areas that are also very important to us. First of all,
as many briefers have mentioned, the current political
situation with regard to the states of Galmudug and
Jubaland is an obstacle to further progress and must
be tackled through dialogue and compromise. The
political processes must do some major catching up in
view of the 2020 elections.

My second point is about the security situation,
which, unfortunately and obviously, continues to
remain a huge challenge despite considerable progress
achieved in the security sector. We are particularly
saddened and shocked by the news that civil-society
activist and former diplomat Almaas Elman was killed
yesterday in the vicinity of Mogadishu airport. I extend
our condolences to her family and the people ofSomalia.
Another reminder of the challenging security situation
is the fact that only last month the United Nations
compound was again the target of an Al-Shabaab
mortar attack, reminding us that the support provided
by the United Nations and the African Union Mission in
Somalia to the Somali authorities to fight Al-Shabaab,
and their contribution to security and stability, remains
absolutely crucial.

Lastly, I would also like to say a word about the
current humanitarian situation. Germany remains
extremely concerned about the situation and its impact
on civilians. Drought and flooding, in addition to
existing challenges, are a very heavy burden on Somali
society. It is urgent that we continue current efforts to
redress the growing food insecurity. We would like
to encourage partners to continue operationalizing
measures to address that nexus. The aggravating
effects of climate change on Somalia's humanitarian
situation and fragile statehood clearly demonstrate
the challenges that climate change poses to regional
stability and security, and we feel that it is high time
for the Council to take due account of climate change
as a factor relevant to peace and security.

Before concluding, I would like to take this
opportunity to ask Ms. Ibrahim, the Chair of the
National Independent Electoral Commission, a question.
I would be interested in her views on a particular issue
related to the upcoming elections. Given the number
of challenges, most partners and experts appear to
agree that a paper-based registration process seems
more practical at this stage than a biometric one, and
I would be very interested to know whether she agrees
with that assessment and how she envisages taking
things forward.

