Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Bangladesh
thanks you, Mr. President, for holding this open debate
on East Timor. This morning, we heard a very useful
briefing by the Special Representative of Secretary-
General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello. His presentation
was characteristically cogent and eloquent. We note the
substantive progress made in various fields since the
last report that Sergio Vieira de Mello presented to the
Council on the East Timor situation, on 26 January
2001. For that, we commend the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
and, in particular, the leadership of Sergio Vieira de
Mello.

We would also like to welcome the valuable
address that Mr. Jose' Ramos-Horta made to the
Council this morning. He has once again provided the
Council with helpful perspectives on East Timor's
situation and on its future after the elections.

East Timor has travelled a long distance since
September 1999. With the first democratic elections
only a month away, the East Timorese are now
approaching a critical point in their history. Mr. Vieira
de Mello has informed us of a number of developments
in addition to those described in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2001/719). He has also outlined a
number of preparatory steps that UNTAET is taking for
the smooth conduct of the elections and the subsequent
transfer of authority to the first full-fledged East
Timorese Government. We believe that the four broad
objectives he outlined are very relevant, and those
objectives have our full support. In that context, we
very much welcome the format and content of the key
benchmarks set out at the end of the Secretary-
General's report.

A lot has been achieved in a very short period of
time through cooperative engagement of the Timorese
people and the international community. The Secretary-
General's report portrays the participatory and on many
occasions innovative approach followed in establishing
a pluralistic society and a multi-party democracy in
East Timor. Particularly, some noteworthy
achievements over the past months signal East Timor's
advance towards a sustainable social and economic
base. Let me cite a few of these: women are
increasingly taking part in decision-making; the
election process is attracting qualified individuals, and
we were particularly pleased to hear this morning from
Sergio Vieira de Mello that a large number of women
candidates will be participating in the elections; the
East Timorese civil service is being integrated into all
major decision-making areas; substantial Trust Fund
resources, as high as 40 per cent, are being invested in
the social sector, particularly in health and education;
and women are coming up prominently in
entrepreneurial efforts, and we note with satisfaction
that women occupy one third of the jobs generated by
the World Bank's Small Enterprises Programme.

Still, we believe, there are a number of areas
where unfinished tasks should be approached carefully
and with a well planned timetable for implementation.

The first area is capacity-building and technical
assistance. For some more time, East Timor will need
support from the international community in the areas
of civil administration, policing, the judiciary and basic
social services. We welcome Sergio Vieira de Mello's
comment this morning that capacity building is the
main endeavour of the United Nations in East Timor.
Multiple sources closely familiar with the territory and
following the developments there confirm the need for
the ongoing commitment of the international
community in post-independence East Timor. It is
absolutely necessary for Timorization to take root.
Otherwise, all the efforts of the international
community will be in vain. Both the current report of
the Secretary-General and his last one (S/2001/42)
underline clearly the need for an international presence
in the early years of an independent East Timor.

The second is a continuing United Nations
presence. While East Timor will continue to receive
assistance from bilateral donors and international
financial institutions, United Nations assistance will
constitute the core of all international assistance. The
United Nations is engaged in meeting urgent needs in
areas such as security, public safety and governance.
The Secretary-General's report sufficiently explains the
reasons behind the need for a continuing United
Nations presence in the civil administration - and
within that, particularly in public finance and public
sector management - and in civilian police, defence
and the justice system. In all those spheres, the United
Nations is engaged effectively. If the United Nations
makes a rapid withdrawal, the precious investment we
have made in East Timor during the past two years
would be at stake.

Therefore, a phased withdrawal should be
finalized only following consultation with the new East
Timorese national Government. In that regard, for
some months, back-stopping by international advisers
could be a useful way to assist East Timorese
effectively to build up capacity and to gather
experience. East Timorese should not get the
impression that the international community has
abandoned them at a critical stage of their nation-
building.

Thirdly, the cooperation and support of Indonesia
is another important aspect for an independent East
Timor. We hope that the new Government just installed
in Indonesia will realize that expectation effectively. At
the same time, worthwhile people-to-people contact
between Indonesia and East Timor is necessary to
generate understanding and promote a culture of peace
between them. We believe that while the Governments
make efforts to promote closer relations, civil society
in Indonesia and East Timor could complement
governmental efforts.

The fourth area relates to the role of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN).
East Timor would obviously look towards eventual
membership of ASEAN. In a regional setting, ASEAN
can play a key role in maintaining the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of East Timor as its future member.

We welcome the establishment by the Secretary-
General of the working group on post-UNTAET
planning in East Timor, and we would emphasize the
importance of there being a civilian component to the
United Nations presence for some time more.
Bangladesh would be happy to contribute civil
administration and civilian police professionals to such
a presence.

We note UNTAET's preparations for holding
elections to the Constituent Assembly, as mentioned in
paragraph 62 of the Secretary-General's report. We
fully support its efforts and hope that a free and fair
election can set East Timor robustly on its path to
independence.

Let me conclude by saying that in the run-up to
the election to be held in exactly a month's time and in
the subsequent independence, we would encourage
UNTAET to continue to employ determined and well-
planned efforts to prepare East Timor effectively for its
sovereign existence. Bangladesh has been making its
humble contributions to the empowerment of the
Timorese people through the Grameen Bank's
microcredit initiatives. We believe that - as the
territory emerges as the first independent State of the
new millennium, in an expression of the will of its
people - continued support to East Timor is a major
responsibility of the international community.

