Mr. Aboulgheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, and to extend to you our thanks
for organizing this important meeting devoted to
evaluating the progress achieved towards implementing
the summit declaration adopted by the Council last
September on ensuring an effective role of the Security
Council in the maintenance of international peace and
security, particularly in Africa.

Your deliberations on this important subject-
with the participation of non-member States fwill
undoubtedly be for us all an opportunity to take stock
of the Council's effectiveness in addressing the various
challenges it faces and its response to the changing and
complex nature which currently characterizes many of
the armed conflicts threatening international peace and
security. Furthermore, this debate might enable us to
agree on the steps that could be taken to enhance the
role and performance of the Council in this field,
taking into account the fact that the Council discharges
its responsibilities on behalf of all of the States
Members of the Organization, as stipulated in Article
24 of the Charter.

The declaration adopted by the Council
addressed, in its various components, a number of
subjects to which Egypt attaches special importance
and which are of interest to other Member States.
Given that time may not allow us to address all of these
subjects, I would like to confine my comments to the
following points, which my delegation deems
especially important.

First, the declaration reaffirmed the primary
responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security, in
accordance with the Charter, and affirmed its
determination to give equal priority to all regions of the
world while paying special importance to the needs of
Africa. We have in the past seen that the Council is
indeed capable of swiftly and decisively responding to
crises that erupt outside Africa, namely in East Timor
and Kosovo. We have also seen that the Council has
gradually shed its hesitation in addressing crises that
erupt on the African continent, as we witnessed in
Sierra Leone when the conflict resumed in May last
year, in Ethiopia and Eritrea when the two parties
signed the peace agreement in Algiers last December,
and in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, when the
Ceasefire Agreement was on the verge of collapsing.

In this context, the delegation of Egypt-like
other African delegations -was somewhat optimistic
about the seriousness of the Council in addressing
African questions and the many armed conflicts raging
throughout its territory, and we had hoped that the
Council's swift response to the crisis in Sierra Leone
would represent the rule and not the exception for what
we expected the Council's role in the African
Continent to be.

Regrettably, however, we feel that there remains a
wide gap between what the Council promises to do in
Africa on the one hand, and the concrete steps it takes
to resolve the conflicts raging across the continent and
to address the causes that lead to their continuation on
the other. Hence, the ongoing crisis on the borders
between Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia is spiraling
and threatens to erupt into a regional conflict, the
repercussions of which no one can foresee. The Somali
crisis remains unresolved, and we have yet to see the
necessary enthusiasm on the part of the Council to
seize upon the positive developments that have resulted
from the Arta conference in order to support the
ongoing peace and reconciliation efforts.

Secondly, aside from the situation in Africa and
what we expect from the Council in that continent, we
cannot speak about the Council's role in the
maintenance of international peace and security
without expressing our regret at the Council's approach
to the crisis that has affected the Middle East since 28
September, especially given the fact that it began to
explode only three weeks after the Security Council
summit and the adoption of the Declaration we are
examining today.

Despite its diligence in continuously reminding
us of the need to respect human rights, uphold the rule
of law and prosecute those responsible for crimes
against humanity and for violations of international
humanitarian law, the Council failed to discharge its
responsibility towards the defenceless Palestinian
people and to put an end to the blatant aggression by
the Israeli occupation forces. As long as the Council
persists in failing to address the Palestinian question
and in disregarding Israel's systematic and grave
violations of the Fourth Geneva Convention, the
Council's credibility will continue to decline and its
pledge to give equal priority to all regions of the world
will remain a hollow and meaningless one.

Thirdly, the Council affirmed its determination in
the Declaration adopted at the summit to take a number
of specific measures to enhance the capabilities of the
Organization in the field of peacekeeping. While we
welcome the attention the Council has given -
especially since the submission of the Brahimi
report- to enhancing its performance in those areas
falling within its purview and responsibility in a
manner that helps to meet the new prerequisites
imposed by the complex nature of armed conflicts that
the United Nations is asked to settle or contribute to
their resolution, we also feel that there are a number of
shortcomings that require credible action on the part of
the Council.

Whereas the Council pledged to adopt clearly
defined, credible and appropriate mandates for its
peacekeeping operations, we have recently noted that
Security Council resolution 1341 (2001), on the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC), was inconsistent
with all of the above. Instead of being encouraged by
the positive circumstances, the Council opted to reduce
the military component of the operation, curtailing its
tasks, while at the same time entertaining the hope that
it would contribute to the achievement of peace and
stability in a country that is larger than Western Europe
and on whose territory six African armies, three rebel
groups and a handful of armed groups are fighting.

Fourthly, the Council also expressed its
determination to enhance consultations with troop
contributors when it formulates peacekeeping operation
mandates. While the Egyptian delegation welcomes the
steps taken by the Council in this area to improve its
relationship with those countries that provide and
sometimes sacrifice their personnel to implement the
tasks adopted by the Council, it continues to call for
the establishment and institutionalization of methods of
consultation between the troop-contributing countries
and the Council at all stages of formulating mandates
for peacekeeping operation and in all steps taken by the
Council to revise, review, extend or terminate these
mandates and the tasks that accompany them.

In this context, my delegation is also mindful of
the fact that the primary purpose we must all strive to
achieve must go beyond merely listening to or
exchanging views with troop-contributing countries,
even if this were to be done in the formalized and
institutionalized manner we call for. What is needed is
for the measures that we may agree on to enhance the
relationship between troop-contributing countries and
the Council involve those countries in the decision-
making process in the Council at all stages of
establishing, deploying and terminating peacekeeping
operations, especially when the matter pertains to
authorizing the use of force, as stipulated in Article 44
of the Charter.

Fifthly, the Declaration adopted by the heads of
State and Government of the Members of the Council
contained a pledge to enhance the effectiveness of the
United Nations in addressing conflicts at all stages:
from prevention to settlement to post-conflict peace-
building. We have indeed witnessed in the past
growing awareness on the part of the Council of the
fact that the resolution of various conflicts cannot
succeed without removing the root causes leading to
the emergence and continuation of those conflicts and
that peace cannot develop in an environment plagued
by poverty, unemployment, economic stagnation and
social fragmentation.

In this context, we welcome the deliberations and
resolutions emanating from the Council on these
issues, taking into account that the desired outcome
must enhance coordination and congruence among all
efforts exerted by the relevant organs and agencies of
the United Nations to avert the eruption of conflicts or
to settle them or to ensure that they don't resurface. Of
course, the required coordination of these activities
must be based on consideration of and respect for the
competence of these organs and agencies, each in its
own field and each in accordance with the legislative
mandate under which it functions.

In conclusion, allow me to address one final issue
to which the Egyptian delegation attaches great
importance, although it was not reflected in the
Declaration adopted by the Council summit, but which
received substantial attention in the summit debate. I
am referring to the issue of sanctions. At that meeting
we noticed a growing trend calling for ending the
unrestricted use of sanctions as a tool to which the
Council can resort in order to induce changes in the
behaviour or actions of a given State or regime. We
have also seen instances recently in which the Council
has imposed sanctions that included a number of
controls that should be formally institutionalized. Most
important in that regard is establishing a specific time-
frame for the duration of the sanctions and specific
mechanisms for their lifting. In this context, we hope
that the Millennium Declaration, in which the heads of
State and Government of all Member States pledged to
minimize the adverse effects of economic sanctions on
innocent, civilian populations, to subject sanctions
regimes to regular reviews and to eliminate the adverse
effects of sanctions on third parties, will be adhered to.
We particularly hope that the Security Council will
consistently adhere to the provisions of Article 50 of
the Charter and apply it without discrimination or
politicization.

