Ms. Tachco (United States of America): Like my
colleagues, I would like to offer a very special welcome
to Vice-President Naranjo. His work on the peace
process in Colombia really is part of history and we
are very honoured to have him in the Chamber with us
today. I also thank Special Representative Arnault for
his and his team's outstanding work to support a lasting
peace in Colombia.

As we enter the second year of the historic Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
stable and Long Lasting Peace, we look back at the
progress both sides have made in bringing peace to
the Colombian people. Before 2016, a majority of
Colombians had never lived in a country at peace. All of
that changed with the signing of the peace agreement,
which brought Latin America's longest war to a close.
The Peace Agreement was hailed as a huge success
and indeed it was. Colombia became the country that
defeated kidnappers and cocaine kingpins and stepped
back from the brink of becoming a failed State.

Colombia now faces the immense task of securing
the peace and consolidating these gains. In the past
year, significant progress has been achieved in one key
aspect of the peace accord: disarmament. Nearly 7,000
members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia (FARC) were relocated to United Nations-
monitored disarmament zones and the FARC has
transitioned into a political party. Rebels have turned
in their weapons and the homicide rate is at its lowest
level in four decades. These are visible and concrete
signs of progress that benefit all Colombians. But
as the past year has shown, ending the war was just
the beginning. Colombia is now working to establish
the justice that is necessary to preserve the peace.
Colombian President Santos Calderon himself has said,
"Constructing peace is more than ending the attacks
and much more difficult".

The implementation of the peace agreement has
turned to political reconciliation and reintegration.
Colombia must balance demands for justice with the
need for reconciliation to ensure that peace endures
and that means the taking on the hard work of securing
proper accountability for those responsible for
violations and building trust among a people deeply
scarred by decades of conflict.

A particular concern is the security vacuum left
by the FARC demobilization. The lack of security in
formerly FARC-controlled areas, as well as the lack
of governance, has led to an up-tick in violence that
is very worrisome. New armed groups are battling to
fill the space left by the FARC, and there have been
continuing attacks on community leaders and human
rights defenders.

We welcome the Colombian Government's efforts
to expand its presence in former conflict areas to
keep paramilitary and illicit groups from replacing
the FARC as sources of killing and violence. Effective
military and civilian agencies that provide security
and Government services in remote areas are critical
to sustaining peace. Meanwhile, the reintegration of
FARC combatants into Colombian society is also very
crucial. As a number of former FARC soldiers have left
the rural camps where they were expected to begin their
transition back to civilian life, it is urgent for Colombia
to execute a reintegration plan that provides both
security for the Colombian people and opportunities for
former combatants.
We have also seen some legislative progress, as
others have noted, including the approval of the law
regulating the Special Jurisdiction for peace, and we
hope to see the implementation of other key provisions.
The United States is fully committed to supporting
Colombia and the implementation of the peace accord.
We would also like to echo the disappointment of
others about the resumption of attacks by the Ejercito
de Liberacien Nacional, as we saw this morning, and
we hope that a new ceasefire can be concluded in the
coming days.

We will continue to be a friend and partner to
Colombia. We will continue to support security,
justice, prosperity and respect for human rights of
all Colombians. The people of Colombia know better
than most that peace is precious, but fragile. We stand
shoulder to shoulder with them in working to preserve
this peace and build a better future for Colombia.

I must join my colleagues in thanking Ambassador
Rycroft for his service on the Security Council.
Ambassador Haley asked me to present this statement
to him in front of the Council this morning. It has been
a real pleasure and an honour working with him. I think
that we all got a little bit choked up during his remarks.
We will all miss him very much.

