Ms. Power (United States): Let me begin with
aquote,

"The United States will not support the
use of any additional land for the purpose of
settlements during the transitional period. Indeed,
the immediate adoption of a settlements freeze by
Israel, more than any other action, could create
the confidence needed for wider participation in
these talks. Further settlement activity is in no
way necessary for the security of Israel and only
diminishes the confidence of the Arabs that a final
outcome can be free and fairly negotiated."

This was said in 1982 by President Ronald Reagan.
He was speaking about a new proposal that he was
launching to end the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. While
ultimately, of course, President Reagan's proposal was
not realized, his words are still illuminating in at least
two respects.

First, it is because they underscore the United States'
deep and long-standing commitment to achieving a
comprehensive and lasting peace between the Israelis
and the Palestinians. That has been the policy of every
Administration, Republican and Democrat, since
before President Reagan to the present day. Secondly, it
because President Reagan's words highlight the United
States' long-standing position that Israeli settlement
activity in territories occupied in 1967 undermines
Israel's security, harms the viability of a negotiated
two-State outcome and erodes prospects for peace and
stability in the region.
Today the Security Council reaffirmed its
established consensus that settlements have no legal
validity. The United States has been sending the message
that the settlements must stop privately and publicly
for nearly five decades through the Administrations
of Presidents Lyndon B. Johnson, Richard Nixon,
Gerald Ford, Jimmy Carter, Ronald Reagan, George
H.W. Bush, Bill Clinton, George W. Bush and currently
Barak Obama, Indeed, since 1967, the only President
who had not had at least one Israeli-Palestinian-related
resolution adopted during his tenure is Barak Obama.
Our vote today, therefore, is fully in line with the
bipartisan history of how American Presidents have
approached both the issue and the role of this body.

Given the consistency of this position across
United States Administrations, one would think that
it would be a routine vote for the United States to
allow the passage of a resolution with the elements in
resolution 2334 (2016), thereby reaffirming the long-
standing position of the United States on settlements,
condemning violence and incitement and calling for
the parties to start taking constructive steps to reverse
current trends on the ground. These are familiar, well-
articulated components of United States policy.

But in reality this vote was not straightforward for
us because of where it is taking place - at the United
Nations. For the simple truth is that for as long as Israel
has been a member ofthis institution, it has been treated
differently from other nations at the United Nations.
That has been true not only in decades past, such as the
infamous resolution that the General Assembly adopted
in 1975 with the support of the majority of member
States, officially determining that Zionism was a form
of racism, but also in 2016, this year. One need only
look at the 18 resolutions against Israel adopted during
the General Assembly in September or the 12 Israel-
specific resolutions adopted this year in the Human
Rights Council - more than those focused on Syria,
North Korea, Iran and South Sudan put together - to
see that in 2016 Israel continues to be treated differently
from other Member States.

Like United States Administrations before it, the
Obama Administration has worked tirelessly to fight
for Israel's right simply to be treated just like any
other country - from advocating for Israel to finally
be granted membership to a United Nations regional
body, something no other United Nations Member
State has been denied; to fighting to ensure that Israeli
non-governmental organizations are not denied United
Nations accreditation, simply because they are Israeli;
to getting Yom Kippur finally recognized as a United
Nations holiday; to pressing the Council to break its
indefensible silence in response to terrorist attacks on
Israelis. As the United States has said repeatedly, such
unequal treatment not only hurts Israel, it undermines
the legitimacy of the United Nations itself. The practice
of treating Israel differently at the United Nations
matters for votes like this one, for even if one believes
that today's resolution is justified or even more,
necessitated, by events on the ground, one cannot
completely separate the vote from the venue.

Member States that say that they are for the two-
State solution must ask themselves some difficult
questions. For those States that are quick to promote
resolutions condemning Israel but refuse to recognize
when innocent Israelis are the victims of terrorism, what
steps will they take to stop treating Israel differently?
For those States that passionately denounce the closures
of crossings in Gaza as exacerbating the humanitarian
situation but say nothing of the resources diverted from
helping Gaza's residents to dig tunnels into Israeli
territory, so that terrorists can attack Israelis in their
homes, what will they do to end the double standard
that undermines the legitimacy of this institution?

Member States should also ask themselves about
the double standards when it comes to the Council
taking action. Just this morning, we came together as a
Council and we were unable to muster the will to act to
stop the flow weapons going to killers in South Sudan
who are perpetrating mass atrocities that the United
Nations has said could lead to genocide. We could not
come together even to curb the flow of arms. Earlier
this month, the Council could not muster the will to
adopt the simplest of resolutions, calling for a seven-
day pause in the savage bombardment of innocent
civilians, hospitals and schools in Aleppo, yet when a
resolution on Israel comes before the Council, members
suddenly summon the will to act.

It is because this forum too often continues to be
biased against Israel, because there are important issues
that are not sufficiently addressed in the resolution and
because the United States does not agree with every
word in this text that the United States did not vote in
favour of the resolution. But it is because the resolution
reflects the facts on the ground and is consistent with

United States policy across Republican and Democratic
administrations throughout the history of the State of
Israel that the United States did not veto it.

The United States has consistently said that it would
block any resolution that it thought would undermine
Israel's security or would seek to impose a resolution
to the conflict. We would not have let the resolution
pass had it not addressed counterproductive actions
by the Palestinians, such as terrorism and incitement
to violence, which we have repeatedly condemned and
raised with the Palestinian leadership - and which of
course must be stopped.

Unlike some on the Security Council, we do not
believe that outside parties can impose a solution that
has not been negotiated by the two parties, nor can we
unilaterally recognize a future Palestinian State. But
it is precisely our commitment to Israel's security that
makes the United States believe that we cannot stand
in the way of the resolution as we seek to preserve a
chance of attaining our long-standing objective - two
States living side by side, in peace and security. Let me
briefly explain why.

The settlement problem has gotten so much worse
that it is now putting at risk the very viability of that
two-State solution. The number of settlers in the roughly
150 authorized Israeli settlements east of the 1967 lines
has increased dramatically. Since the 1993 signing of
the Oslo Accords - which launched efforts that made
a comprehensive and lasting peace possible - the
number of settlers has increased by 355,000. The total
settler population in the West Bank and East Jerusalem
now exceeds 590,000. Nearly 90,000 settlers are living
east of the separation barrier that was created by Israel
itself. And just since July 2016 - when the Middle
East Quartet issued a report highlighting international
concern about a systematic process of land seizures,
settlement expansions, and legalizations - Israel has
advanced plans for more than 2,600 new settlement
units. Yet rather than dismantling those and other settler
outposts, which are illegal even under Israeli law, now
there is new legislation advancing in the Israeli Knesset
that would legalize most of the outposts - a factor that
propelled the decision of the resolution's sponsors to
bring it before the Council.

The Israeli Prime Minister recently described his
Government as "more committed to settlements than
any in Israel's history", and one of his leading coalition
partners recently declared that "the era of the two-State
solution is over". At the same time, the Prime Minister
has said that he is still committed to pursuing a two-
State solution. But those statements are irreconcilable.
One cannot simultaneously champion expanding Israeli
settlements and champion a viable two-State solution
that would end the conflict. One has to make a choice
between settlements and separation.

In 2011, the United States vetoed a draft resolution
that focused exclusively on settlements, as if settlements
were the only factor harming the prospects of a two-
State solution. The circumstances have changed
dramatically. Since 2011, settlement growth has only
accelerated. Since 2011, multiple efforts to pursue
peace through negotiations have failed. And since 2011,
President Obama and Secretary Kerry have repeatedly
warned - publicly and privately - that the absence
of progress towards peace and continued settlement
expansion were going to put the two-State solution at
risk and threaten Israel's stated objective to remain both
a Jewish State and a democracy. Moreover, unlike in
2011, today's resolution condemns violence, terrorism
and incitement, which also pose extremely grave risks
to the two-State solution. Today's resolution reflects
trends that will permanently destroy the hope of a two-
State solution if they continue on their current course.

The United States has not taken the step of voting
in support of the resolution because it is too narrowly
focused on settlements, when we all know - or should
know - that many other factors contribute significantly
to the tensions thatperpetuate the conflict. Let us be clear.
Even if every single settlement were to be dismantled
tomorrow, peace still would not be attainable without
both sides acknowledging uncomfortable truths and
making difficult choices. That is an indisputable fact.
Yet, it is one that is too often overlooked by members
of the United Nations and by members of the Council.

For Palestinian leaders, that means recognizing the
obvious fact that in addition to taking innocent lives,
the incitement to violence, the glorification of terrorists
and the growth of violent extremism erode prospects for
peace, as the resolution makes crystal clear. The most
recent wave of Palestinian violence has seen terrorists
commit hundreds of attacks, including driving cars into
crowds of innocent civilians and stabbing mothers in
front of their children. Yet rather than condemn those
attacks, Hamas, other radical factions and even certain
members of Fatah have held up the terrorists as heroes
and used social media to incite others to follow in their
murderous footsteps. And while President Abbas and
his party's leaders have made clear their opposition to
violence, terrorism and extremism, they have too often
failed to condemn specific attacks or condemn the
praise heaped upon the perpetrators.

Our vote today does not in any way diminish the
United States' steadfast and unparalleled commitment
to the security of Israel, the only democracy in the
Middle East. We would not have let the resolution pass
had it not also addressed counterproductive actions by
Palestinians. We have to recognize that Israel faces
very serious threats in a very tough neighbourhood.
Israelis are rightly concerned about making sure that
there is not a terrorist haven next door.

President Obama and this Administration have
shown an unprecedented commitment to Israel's security
because that is what we believe in. Our commitment
to that security has never wavered and it never will.
Even with the financial crisis and budget deficits, we
repeatedly increase funding to support Israel's military.
In September, the Obama Administration signed a
memorandum of understanding to provide $38 billion
in security assistance to Israel over the next 10
years - the largest single pledge of military assistance
in the history of the United States to any country. As the
Israeli Prime Minister himself has noted, our military
and intelligence cooperation is unprecedented. We
believe, however, that continued settlement building
seriously undermines Israel's security.

Some may cast the vote of the United States as
a sign that we have finally given up on a two-State
solution. Nothing could be further from the truth. None
of us can give up on a two-State solution. We continue
to believe that that solution is the only viable path to
provide peace and security for the State of Israel and
freedom and dignity for the Palestinian people. We
continue to believe that the parties concerned can
still pursue that path if both sides are honest about the
choices and have the courage to take steps that will be
politically difficult. While we can encourage them, it
is ultimately up to the parties to choose this path, as it
always has been. We sincerely hope that they will begin
to make those choices before it is too late.

