Mr. Duale (Somalia): We thank you,
Mr. President, for giving us this opportunity to
participate in today's meeting of the Security Council.
I also wish to endorse, with thanks, the statement just
made by the Permanent Observer of the African Union,
with which we fully agree. In addition, on behalf of my
Government, I am obliged to refer to and endorse two
similar communications dated 12 February 2008 and
addressed to the President of the Security Council and
to the Secretary-General, respectively, by the Chairman
of the African Group for the month of February 2008,
His Excellency Ambassador Chungong Ayafor,
conveying the concern of the African Group about the
critical situation in Somalia and the inadequate
attention by the international community so far.

The Council may also recall the recent appeal
made by African heads of State, as referred to by the
Permanent Observer. At its tenth Ordinary Session,
held recently in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government of the African
Union appealed once again to the Security Council to
urgently take steps for the early deployment of United
Nations peacekeeping operations to further enhance
peace in Somalia, bearing in mind that the Council has
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Members will also recall that the Security
Council, in its presidential statement of 19 December
2007 (S/PRST/2007/49), reiterated its request that the
Secretary-General develop the existing contingency
plans for the possible deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation to further enhance peace in
Somalia and to support the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), as set out in resolution 1772
(2007).

In order to avoid a deterioration of the security
situation in Somalia, we urge the Security Council in
no uncertain terms to accelerate the implementation of
the aforementioned decisions referred to in the
presidential statement I have cited. For its part, my
Government stands ready to fully cooperate and work
closely with the Security Council and the Secretary-
General in that regard.

We very much hope that the decision or action
taken by the Security Council will not be confined to a
mere rollover of the authorization for AMISOM. and
the adoption of a wait-and-see policy. We - and,
indeed, the African Union and the international
08-24087
community - expect more from the Council on this
issue.

I should like to conclude by noting that the
security situation in Somalia is a real challenge to the
African region and a threat to international peace and
security. We hope that we will all rise to the occasion
and meet the challenges of the situation in Somalia
robustly and securely.
08-24087

