Mr. van Klaveren (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of Chile wishes to thank the Argentine
Republic, in particular the President of the Security
Council, Minister Jorge Taiana, for the initiative to
convene this open debate on a subject that is important
for the region and arouses the interest of the
international community. We value in particular the
presence of Mr. Rene Garcia Preval, President-elect of
Haiti, whom we recently welcomed to Chile for the
swearing-in of President Michelle Bachelet. We
express once again our sincerest congratulations to the
Haitian people on the election results of 7 February.
We also wish to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Juan Gabriel Valdes,
for his comprehensive briefing and for his efforts at the
head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH).

The holding of the elections, with the efficient
efforts and support of the Organization of American
States, attests to the commitment of the Haitian people
to the democratic political process, the establishment
of the rule of law and the promotion of national
reconciliation, which are the only means to achieve
long-term stability. If the electoral process is to
conclude successfully, it is necessary to ensure that the
second round of parliamentary elections is carried out
under equally democratic conditions and in a timely
manner. That is undoubtedly a priority objective so that
the President-elect can promptly assume his duties as
the leader of Haiti. The holding of municipal and local
elections to establish provincial governments will also
make it possible to strengthen the country's democratic
institutions.

It has now been more than two years since Chile,
aware that it was imperative to avoid a humanitarian
tragedy and responding promptly to the call made by
the Security Council, was incorporated into the
multinational interim force and immediately joined
MINUSTAH. We did so with the understanding that
only a comprehensive and multidimensional
peacekeeping operation would make possible the
country's political, social and economic rehabilitation.
Here, we wish to reaffirm that commitment in the
conviction that the Haitian people now have the
possibility of controlling their own destiny.

That depends on two basic conditions. First,
Haitian society must renounce all forms of violence,
and more forums must be created on a daily basis for
an inclusive dialogue to promote understanding among
the various political and social sectors. That is the way
to begin institutional reforms that will make it possible
to lay the foundations for good government and
sustainable economic development.

Secondly, the international community must
contribute development programmes aimed primarily
at fighting extreme poverty, chronic diseases, the lack
of infrastructure and environmental degradation. To do
that, it will be essential to disburse, with flexibility and
urgency, all the funds committed to the Interim
Cooperation Framework, as well as to increase local
and foreign investment and to generate new sources of
employment, particularly for young people. In this new
phase, MINUSTAH must continue to support the
Haitian authorities so as to maintain a safe and stable
environment in the country. It will also be essential to
continue to support actions that facilitate the
comprehensive reconstruction process.

During that entire time, Chile has focused its
cooperation on concrete development objectives. We
have contributed a corps of engineers, which includes
Ecuadorian personnel, that is working on the
installation of a mechanical bridge at Grand-Goave.

Our country has also made additional efforts to
increase the capabilities of our helicopters, equipping
them with the gear necessary for nocturnal flights in
order to improve surveillance capacity, which was a
very important factor in the electoral process. The
Chile battalion, which is assigned to Cap Haitien, has
done effective work to ensure the security of the local
population.

We consider it vital to contribute to the
improvement of the national police, so that it can be
consolidated as a professional, depoliticized entity. In
that connection, we deem it relevant to consider the
establishment of an international police academy
headquartered in Port-au-Prince, whose main goal
would be to train police officers specializing in post-
conflict work.

The reform, modernization and strengthening of
the judicial and penal system is also an urgent task that
requires technical and financial assistance to the
institutions supporting the rule of law. That is essential
in order to guarantee absolute respect for human rights,
an end to impunity and compliance with the norms of
due process.

Likewise, we urge the new Haitian authorities to
implement an effective policy for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of all armed groups.
That is, of course, dependent on the establishment of
security guarantees and on the creation of jobs that can
help to meet the basic needs of those who lay down
their arms and of their families.

The progress made in the process of achieving an
inclusive democratic transition is for us cause for
optimism. Haiti is beginning a new phase in which the
continued presence of the United Nations will play a
key role in the consolidation of the democratic regime
and of lasting peace.

Haiti offers the United Nations a symbolic
opportunity to implement the new institutions agreed to
under the reform and that seek to incorporate socio-
economic dimensions as essential elements of a
sustainable solution to the crisis. That is a response to
the demands of a modern-day and effective
multilateralism.

The case of Haiti must be among the first to be
considered by the Peacebuilding Commission. The
effort that the Haitian people are responsibly making
demands renewed solidarity. Its institutional and
economic reconstruction requires political will on the
part of an international community committed to the
challenges, dreams, and hopes of 10 million Haitians,
who aspire to live in conditions of dignity and liberty.

Chile will continue to make all the necessary
efforts in order to realize those lofty goals.

