Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
continues to condemn in the strongest terms the
activities of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
related to nuclear weapons and the launch of ballistic
missiles, which are a violation of relevant Security
Council resolutions and undermine regional and
international peace and security.

Egypt voted in favour of resolution 2397 (2017)
today, based on its commitment to maintaining the
credibility of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and of the Security Council.
Egypt is committed to seeing that all bodies of the
United Nations, international organizations and the
international community act decisively in the face of
any threat to the non-proliferation system, without
selectivity or double standards.

It is well known to everyone that Egypt attaches
great importance to the respect by all parties of binding
international consensus that the NPT is a key pillar of
the international security system. It is important for the
Security Council to address any threat to this system
and any action that may undermine the achievement
of its universality, in a consistent manner, without
discrimination or distinction. Egypt is aware of the
nature of the repeated threats by North Korea, its
violations of Security Council resolutions and the threat
it poses to regional stability in North-East Asia and
regional security in neighbouring countries, including
Japan and South Korea, with which Egypt maintains
friendly relations.

In the light ofall this, Egypt calls on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea once again to cease all
actions and activities that violate Security Council
resolutions and any provocation that could heighten
tensions and instability, which undermine regional
and international peace and security. We call on the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to rejoin the
NPT as a non-nuclear State and to adopt a comprehensive
safeguards agreement with the International Atomic
Energy Agency.

Egypt stresses once again that the Security Council
and all bodies of the United Nations must assume their
responsibilities in this respect by striving to reach
a comprehensive settlement of the very concerning
conditions and situation in the Korean peninsula. Such
a settlement should include total nuclear disarmament
and achieving sustainable peace between the two
Koreas, pursuant to the provisions of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including the revival of
negotiations and the establishment of the necessary
conditions in which to hold them so that we can break
the vicious cycle of North Korea's repeated violations
of Security Council resolutions, which compel the
Council to impose further sanctions and leave no
clear political horizon for resolving the problem. The
current situation leaves no room for anything other
than further deterioration into what could become an
international crisis.

In this respect, Egypt believes that continued
attempts to promote dialogue and diplomacy with North
Korea are important in order to maintain prospects for
relaunching dialogue and negotiations in order to reach
a settlement of this alarming crisis, which undermines
the security of all. The international community should
not lose hope of finding a peaceful settlement based
on the conditions and provisions of Security Council
resolutions on nuclear disarmament and achieving
sustainable peace on the Korean peninsula.

