Mr. Zerihoun: As the conflict in the eastern
Ukraine enters its third year, the Security Council is
meeting today with both a sense of urgency and hope.
The continued failure to fully implement the package
of measures for the implementation of the Minsk
agreements has served to underscore the crucial need
to make progress towards a political settlement of
the conflict.

Since the Security Council last considered the
situation in Ukraine, on 11 December 2015 (see S/PV.7576), some positive developments have been
registered. Not least among them was the fact that the
ceasefire was largely respected during the last weeks
of 2015. A second development was the commitment
announced at the beginning of March this year, in
the framework of the security working group, on the
implementation of additional sectorial agreements on
demining in priority areas, as well as the prohibition of
military training in proximity to the contact line - all
encouraging steps.

The meeting of the Foreign Ministers of France,
Germany, the Russian Federation and Ukraine on
3 March and the continued investment of time and
political capital by all the relevant actors have also been
instrumental in efforts to bridge prevailing differences
and keep the focus on concrete milestones towards the
full implementation of the Minsk agreements. Regular
meetings of the Trilateral Contact Group and its four
working groups - on political affairs and security,
humanitarian and economic matters - continue to be
central in that regard.

As the Council is well aware, on 14 April the
Ukrainian Parliament voted for the appointment of a
new Prime Minister, Mr. Volodymyr Groysman. The
new Government's commitment to the implementation
of the Minsk agreements has been widely welcomed.
Such commitment is expected to be converted into
further concrete actions.

Those developments are highly valuable in their
own right. However, those positive steps forward
continue to be heavily undermined to some extent by
an overall precarious and unsustainable situation in
the conflict area. The total number of conflict-related
casualties continues to increase, and now stands at
more than 30,700, including more than 9,300 killed
and almost to 21,400 injured since the beginning of the
conflict, in mid-April 2014. The latest tragic incident,
which occurred on 27 April when at least four civilians
were killed and at least eight were injured by shelling
in the village of Olenivka, near the city of Donetsk,
is a stark reminder of the high human cost of the
continued conflict.

While some of the recent civilian casualties have
been caused by indiscriminate shelling, most are caused
by landmines, booby traps and other explosive remnants
of war, which continue to represent the biggest threat
to civilian life and security, underscoring the urgent
need for extensive mine clearance and mine-awareness
actions on both sides of the contact line.

We are pleased that Ambassadors Apakan and
Sajdik are joining us, despite the late hour in Kyiv.
We look forward to hearing their assessments of the
security situation in eastern Ukraine, and wish to thank
the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission for continuing
to dutifully carry out its mandate in what is often a
challenging and dangerous environment.

The Special Monitoring Mission's role in eastern
Ukraine remains instrumental. In order to carry out its
mandate, the Mission must urgently be granted full and
unfettered access, including to the border, as stipulated
under the Minsk agreements. All efforts to hinder
such access should be condemned, and although the
restrictions are happening on both sides of the contact
line, according to statistics provided by the Special
Monitoring Mission, they seem to take place more
in rebel-held areas. Efforts to harass, intimidate and
especially to perpetrate violence against the Mission
must be deplored, and must cease immediately.

Fighting is still being reported daily, with a
sustained period of escalation witnessed over recent
weeks and months at levels not seen since the intense
phase of the conflict in August 2014. The frequent
clashes are also coupled with increased presence and
use of proscribed heavy weaponry, with more such
weapons now being reported outside of storage sites.
In addition to these sobering developments, there is a
lack of systemic mine action and reportedly high levels
of military readiness and preparedness. This precarious
situation should not be allowed to persist because it will
create fertile ground for a further deterioration of the
situation. All parties must immediately cease hostilities
and implement in earnest their commitments under the
Minsk agreements, as well as those made since then in
the Trilateral Contact Group and its Security Working
Group.

Clearly, an improvement in the security situation
would be crucial to creating an environment conducive
to progress in the political sphere. Of note are the
ongoing negotiations in Minsk and among Normandy
partners related to modalities for holding local
elections in rebel-held areas of Donetsk and Luhansk
under Ukrainian law and as per international standards.
We hope that ensuing political, technical and legal
divergences can soon be overcome. All concerned
should find common ground and take immediate steps
to live up to the commitments they have undertaken
on other bedrock political issues, including amnesty
and special-status constitutional changes, as well as on
exchange of prisoners.

The situation in Ukraine is also grave on the
humanitarian front. More than 3 million people
remain in need of humanitarian assistance, especially
those close to the contact line and in areas beyond
Government control. The ongoing suspension by the
de facto authorities in Donetsk and Luhansk provinces
of almost all operations of the United Nations and and
international non-governmental organizations since
July 2015 is of great concern. Undue bureaucratic
impediments deprive hundreds of thousands of people
access to urgently needed essential services, supplies
and other protection activities.

This is further compounded by the decision of the
Ukrainian Government to suspend social payments,
including pensions, to an estimated 600,000 displaced
people, pending verification of their status. While the
legitimate right of the Government to combat fraud
is understandable, it is important to put in place a
transparent system that provides clear information
about the criteria for any cancellation of benefits and
proper communication to those concerned. It is also
important that the freedom of movement of civilians
be ensured and that they have sustained and safe access
across the contact line. As a result of the recent closure
of and failure to open new checkpoints, many civilians
continue to queue for hours, often at night, in unsafe
locations just to access basic services or to visit families
and properties.

The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, through its
monitoring mission in Ukraine, continues to monitor
and report on the situation of human rights throughout
the country and to make recommendations to all parties
to the conflict. There are a number of pressing human
rights concerns. The question of missing persons and
the need to create a mechanism by which all parties
to the conflict exchange information and cooperate
to establish the whereabouts of those who have gone
missing in the conflict zone remains critical. In
Crimea, isolation from mainland Ukraine continues to
grow, with deepening concerns for the human rights
situation in the peninsula. The recent decision to ban
the activities of the Mejlis, the representative body of
the Crimean Tatars, are of particular concern.

On a positive note, on 29 December 2015, the
Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine published a national
human rights action plan. This is a welcome step, as
the document is a road map for addressing systemic
human rights challenges and conflict-related matters,
and envisages a list of actions to be taken by different
State institutions pursuant to the national human rights
strategy. It is of paramount importance that the plan
be implemented. However, nearly four months after its
adoption, not all activities envisaged during that period
have been implemented.
The Secretariat continues to cooperate closely
with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and remains ready to support, as requested and
deemed helpful, the complex and challenging mandate
entrusted to OSCE in Ukraine. We commend the vital
contributions ofthe OSCE Special Monitoring Mission,
the Trilateral Contact Group and its four working
groups, and the Normandy four leaders, as well as other
diplomatic partners, for their efforts towards a peaceful
resolution of the conflict in eastern Ukraine.

In coordination with local and regional
organizations, the United Nations also continues to
carry out critical and effective work in the humanitarian,
human rights, reconstruction and reconciliation
spheres, aimed at responding to the urgent and longer-
term needs of the affected population in Ukraine.
Ultimately, however, progress in the peace process
will depend on the political will of the parties and
on their readiness and willingness to find a peaceful
resolution to the conflict through tangible deeds, both
on the ground and at the negotiating table. The United
Nations remains committed to supporting a peaceful
resolution of the conflict in a manner that fully upholds
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence
of Ukraine.

