Mr. Pascoe: As you know, the Secretary-General
will be here to make a broader statement in a few
minutes. At this point, I would only like to very briefly
08-30672

introduce two important, recent reports of the
Secretary-General that go to the heart of the issues
being discussed today at this high-level meeting on
peace and security in Africa.

First, there is the report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of Security Council resolution
1625 (2005) on conflict prevention, particularly in
Africa (S/2008/ 18), which reviews the recent efforts to
develop more multifaceted approaches to dealing with
conflicts, particularly in Africa. It emphasizes the need
for a broad strategy that helps to build national and
regional capacities for preventive action. Although
conflict prevention is not always highly visible, it
remains the most cost-effective and efficient way to
promote international peace and security.

In order to enhance United Nations capacity for
early warning, conflict prevention and mediation in
Africa - and elsewhere - the Secretary-General has
proposed the strengthening of the Department of
Political Affairs to work in this area. Successfully
preventing conflict in the field will require additional
resources that can be provided only by Member States.

The Secretary-General's report makes a number
of suggestions on how the Security Council can
implement resolution 1625 (2005) and therefore
improve and sustain the ability of the United Nations to
avert negative developments and prevent crises from
escalating into armed conflict. The Council is called
upon, for example, to dispatch missions to the field on
a timely basis to assess situations on the ground and to
increase its use of the Arria Formula, or similar
arrangements, for broad informal discussions. It is
urged to use reports of groups of experts to carry out
lessons-learned exercises to motivate parties to resolve
conflicts. The Council is also called upon to develop a
stronger and more structured relationship with the
African Union Peace and Security Council.

The report calls for continued efforts to combat
cross-border and transnational threats to stability,
including efforts to control the arms trade. It urges
continued efforts against gender-based violence. The
report also calls for full cooperation in developing the
capacities of African regional organizations to deploy
both civil and military assets quickly when needed,
including for developing an African standby force.

The Secretary-General has instructed the United
Nations system to strengthen current levels of
collaboration, to maintain efforts to deploy expertise
3
on prevention and to ensure that it continues to work
closely with and support the African Peace and
Security Architecture, including the Panel of the Wise.
This will help build the long-term capacity of the
African Union. It is thus in support of the Framework
for the Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme for the
African Union.

Secondly, there is the report of the Secretary-
General on the relationship between the United Nations
and regional organizations, in particular the African
Union, in the maintenance of international peace and
security (S/2008/186). The report describes the many
facets of United Nations cooperation with regional
organizations in peace and security activities under
Chapter VIII. It identifies the challenges facing these
partnerships, particularly in Africa, and focuses on the
opportunities that could be seized to ensure more
functional and effective cooperation and coordination.
This would be based on a clear division of labour that
would recognize the comparative advantage that each
organization may have in dealing with a particular
conflict.

The Secretary-General proposes better support
arrangements for further cooperation with regional
organizations. He recommends specific actions in the
areas of conflict prevention, mediation, disarmament,
non-proliferation, peacebuilding, human rights and
humanitarian action. He suggests setting up a panel of
distinguished persons from the United Nations and the
African Union within the next three months to make
concrete recommendations on how to help finance
peacekeeping operations undertaken by regional
organizations.

I hope that this open debate will help forge a
consensus on these vital questions, while reaffirming
the centrality of early warning, conflict prevention and
mediation among the main responsibilities of Member
States and the Security Council.

