Mr. Musyoka (Kenya): My delegation and I regard
this special meeting of the Security Council on Africa as
opportune and merited, because African issues constitute
65 per cent of the current work of the Security Council.
I take this opportunity to express our gratitude to you,
Madam President, for initiating this very useful idea.

The situation in Africa today is characterized by
political conflicts, on the one hand, and serious economic
problems, on the other. These two problems invariably
affect each other and a comprehensive and integrated
approach must be found to resolve the situation. There
can be no development without peace. Indeed, the
experience of my country in peacemaking efforts in our
region clearly reflects this understanding. Africa's
problems will be overcome through the determination and
resilience of the peoples of the continent themselves with
the support of the international community and, in
particular, the United Nations.

The scourge of conflicts in Africa constitutes
perhaps the most urgent socio-political problem facing the
continent. Over the last three decades, Africa has
witnessed no less than 20 full-fledged conflicts, which
have generated immeasurable suffering. Some of these
conflicts have been resolved, while others remain
intractable. Yet others are emerging that need our urgent
attention to contain, such as the current one in the
Republic of Congo. African Governments have recognized
the dangers of these conflicts and are making efforts to
resolve them. Towards this end, they have taken
collective measures in the search for solutions to the
conflicts and, in so doing, they recognize the important

 

role that the international community must play in this
difficult task.

In 1990, the Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) adopted the
Declaration on the Political and Socio-Economic Situation
in Africa and the Fundamental Changes Taking Place in the
World. By this Declaration, the leaders recognized the need
to reform their political systems for the benefit of their
people and committed their countries to further
democratization. Since then, many countries have
abandoned military and authoritarian regimes and are now
holding free and fair elections.

In 1993, the African Heads of State and Government
established the OAU Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution to deal with conflicts on the
continent. Today, there are many regional initiatives that are
under way to try and resolve some of these conflicts.

In our subregion, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) has been actively involved in
conflict-resolution, particularly in the Sudan and in Somalia.
In the Sudan, under the chairmanship of His Excellency
President Daniel Toroitich arap Moi, the negotiation
process, which had been quiet, was re-energized at a
meeting held on 16 September 1997 in Nairobi, during
which agreement was reached on a date for the resumed
meeting, which is scheduled for 28 October this year. For
this process to be successful, the parties to the conflict in
the Sudan must have the courage and political will to
negotiate in good faith. Equally important is the active
support of the international community, which must come
in the form of financial resources to sustain the process and
of pressure on all the parties. We must not be seen to be
encouraging a proliferation of efforts, but must continue to
build on the positive achievements made so far.

The involvement of IGAD in Somalia, under the
chairmanship of Ethiopia, has produced encouraging results,
which have received support from organizations and
countries alike. We in the subregion look to the Bossaso
conference scheduled for November 1997 for additional
impetus for the process of national reconciliation and
reconstruction in Somalia.

In our View, the success in Liberia is an example
where African efforts have achieved some measure of
success, thanks to the support and cooperation of the
international community. Africa will continue to rely on the
support of the Security Council, which has the primary
responsibility in matters of international peace and security.
It must be seen to be playing the leading role assigned to
it in resolving conflicts the world over. We would like to
see the Security Council adopt the same standard of
urgency in reacting to conflicts in Africa as it does in
other parts of the world.

The socio-economic situation in Africa has remained
precarious for many years, despite the many efforts made
by African countries to improve their people's lives.
Many African countries appear on the list of the world's
poorest nations. Africa remains marginalized in current
international economic relations. A host of factors has for
many decades been responsible. These include low-level
commodity prices, a heavy debt burden, unequal trading
relations, declining resource transfers, and unpredictable
and conditional relations with the international financial
system. As a result, the situation in Africa is characterized
by generalized poverty and underdevelopment by all
indicators. Per-capita incomes are the lowest in the world
and they continue to fall year by year. The rate of
development has stagnated and has in some cases been
negative. Today, Africa is the only continent that is
unable to feed its rising population without support from
outside.

Despite these problems, African countries are
making serious efforts to lay a solid foundation for their
development. At the regional level, a treaty for the
economic integration of African economies has entered
into force, and the integration process is underway. At the
same time, many Governments are in the final stages of
implementing far-reaching economic reforms. These
worthy efforts require the support of the international
community.

Urgent and comprehensive action by the
international community must be taken to address the
serious socio-economic issues affecting Africa. There is
a need to redefine Africa's relationship with the key
players in the current economic world order, including the
Bretton Woods institutions, which should re-examine their
policies on Africa.

Kenya reiterates the importance of the United
Nations as the central forum for dialogue and negotiations
in matters of international peace and security, as well as
for cooperation towards economic and social
development. We attach high political importance to the
strengthening of the United Nations with a View to
enhancing its effectiveness in international affairs.

 

The relevance of the implementation of important
decisions previously taken at United Nations conferences
cannot be overemphasized. We are concerned at the lack of
compliance by developed countries with commitments
previously made. At the same time, any attempts to
implement the outcome of those commitments selectively
or outside the framework within which they were agreed
should be avoided.

Kenya attaches considerable importance to the
cooperation that exists between the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity. We think that this
cooperation could be enhanced for the benefit of Africa. A
re-examination needs to be made of the resolutions that the
General Assembly adopts every year on cooperation
between the two organizations, with a View to improving
their implementation. Resolutions of the OAU on African
issues need to be respected by the Security Council. In this
connection, Kenya associates itself with the statement made
by His Excellency President Robert G. Mugabe in his
capacity as the current Chairman of the OAU.

In conclusion, it is my delegation's hope that when the
Secretary-General makes his report on the situation in
Africa, these and other issues will be addressed. Similarly,
it is our hope that his proposals will herald a new era in
which important decisions on Africa are taken seriously and
implemented fully. We look forward to that report.

