Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda): Allow us to join other
delegations in congratulating China on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
also thank you, Sir, for convening this open debate,
which is very important to most delegations. We recall
the statement made by the State Councillor and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of China during the general debate
during the high-level week in September (see A/73/ PV.12) when he emphasized the importance and the
necessity of multilateralism. Therefore, it comes as no
surprise, Sir, that you chose to hold this debate during
the earliest days of your presidency, and my delegation
joins others to voice their concerns in defence of
multilateralism. The Security Council is the right place
for us to do just that. We also thank the Secretary-
General for his statement and his commitment to
ensuring that the United Nations continues to play its
central role in facilitating multilateralism. We also
thank the other briefers for their contributions to
today's debate.

Global governance is characterized by political
and security interdependence. Most contemporary

challenges 4 whether terrorism, climate change,
migration or transnational organized crime, among
many others, - cannot be effectively addressed

without multilateral cooperation. The formation and
evolution of the United Nations over the years have
shown us that multilateralism is an essential ingredient
for a peaceful world. The authors of the Charter of the
United Nations were not mistaken when they set out
in that great document by recalling the horrors and
pains of the scourge of war, which we unfortunately
so easily forget. They did not envisage how much the
international system would evolve, and they did not
have to. Their bitter experience convinced them that
multilateralism was the only way to save humankind
from destruction.

And they were right. That is the true spirit of the
Organization. The purposes and principles ofthe Charter
enhance that vision and the practice of multilateralism
by encouraging States to pursue cooperation over
isolation, the peaceful settlement of disputes over war
and a common vision whereby Member States relate
as equals. However, the world is a dynamic place, and
history is always on the move. New challenges have
emerged over the years and require us to adapt to them.
I am reminded of the words of the legendary Nigerian
author Chinua Achebe:

"Eneke the bird says that since men have learned
to shoot without missing, he has learned to fly
without perching."

We too, as the nations of the world, must learn to adapt
and address evolving challenges. In no way are we
saying that multilateralism is perfect. The question
is, how do we make multilateralism work for us in our
context? In that regard, I will make three brief points.

First, while we are all pursuing our national interests,
at the core of it all we need to build on the fact that the
people we serve have common aspirations. They want
to live in a peaceful, sustainable and dignified world.
Let us build on those shared aspirations rather than
focus on myopic goals. In that regard, Rwanda calls for
continued cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations. For instance, the recently signed
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for an
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security is a good
example of effective cooperation. The African Union
(AU) is rooted in our belief that regional organizations
can demonstrate how multilateralism continues to be
relevant and beneficial for people all over the world.

Secondly, let us move ahead with reforming the
Organization, which belongs to us all. The Secretary-
General needs our continued support. Africa has made
its position clear on key issues, such as reforming

the Council. Given the amount of time that the same
arguments have been made, surely it is reasonable that
we address these issues conclusively. The Security
Council is one of the United Nations organs that
contribute much to global peace and security. It needs
to expand its scope of representation and extend the
power of the veto to other Member States. Security
challenges are multiplying in number and complexity;
they need an inclusive decision-making process.

Thirdly, it is vital that the United Nations
continues its support to the regional peace and security
arrangements and mechanisms that have demonstrated
gains in conflict mediation and peace restoration.
For example, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development conflict-resolution mechanism, which
led the peace process in South Sudan, and the United
Nations-AU partnership aimed at ending the crisis
in the Sahel region and the Lake Chad basin are
good examples of initiatives that are successfully
embracing and putting into practice the principles of
multilateralism.

In conclusion, we have all that it takes to resolve
our contemporary challenges. Nothing is new or alien
to us. There is no unbridled force that we are dealing
with. As States Members of the United Nations, we
all have the prerogative to do what we can to create a
better world for future generations. I reaffirm Rwanda's
commitment to multilateralism and the equality of
States. We believe that, with the reforms that are being
pursued here at the United Nations, we can breathe new
life into the Organization and make it fit for purpose.

