Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Allow me, at the outset, to thank Under-Secretary-
General Jean Pierre Lacroix and the Special Envoy of
the Secretary- General for the Horn of Africa, Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, for their enlightening briefings.

We are aware of the current political situation in
the Sudan and South Sudan, and the issue of Abyei is
inextricably linked to it. Belgium continues to follow
developments very closely.

We wish the new Sudanese authorities every
success in the essential tasks that they will have to
carry out, as set out in the Constitutional Declaration
of 17 August. We welcome the priorities outlined by
the Prime Minister, Mr. Abdalla Hamdok, during
his interventions here in New York during the high-
level week.

In South Sudan, we urge stakeholders to make
rapid progress on key issues in the implementation
of the peace process, in particular the establishment
of security arrangements, the status of Juba, the
finalization ofinternal boundaries and the full release of
implementation funds announced by the Government.

We note that the security situation in the Abyei
area remains fragile, with intercommunal tensions,
an increase in criminal incidents, and the presence
of armed groups in the region. Widespread poverty,
unemployment, insecurity in the surrounding areas of
the Abyei region and the lack of functional governance
and rule of law institutions only exacerbate the
situation. Some 200,000 vulnerable people continue to
need humanitarian assistance.

We share the Secretary-General's assessment that
the continued presence of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) remains crucial. We
take note of the two options proposed by the Secretary-
General in his report (S/2019/817) and look forward to
a fruitful discussion in the Council.

I would like to highlight two points: the need for a
political solution and the role ofUNISFA in that respect.

Stability in the Abyei region remains our
key objective. The main responsibility for the
implementation of the 2011 and 2012 agreements rests
with the Governments of both countries. However, it
must be noted that only very little progress has been
made in fulfilling the commitments agreed by the
parties since last April. The Security Council should
encourage the Governments of the Sudan and South
Sudan to continue the dialogue and, in the longer term,
develop a political solution that would allow for the
settlement of the final status of the Abyei area and other
border disputes.

As the name of the mission indicates, UNISFA
was established as an interim security force in 2011.
The Council must ensure that the dispute between the
Sudan and South Sudan with regard to Abyei and the
border region does not become another deadlocked
conflict. We therefore call on the parties to facilitate
the mission's operations, including the issuance of visas
and the strengthening of the civilian component of the
mission, with a View to facilitating the revitalization of
the political process in order to be able to work towards
an exit-strategy framework in a timely manner.

There is no option other than dialogue to resolve
the Abyei issue. The presence of UNISFA remains
crucial but it cannot replace the role of the State. The
Council must ensure that the mission has the necessary
resources to help address the causes of the conflict
and ensure the long-term stability of the Sudan and
South Sudan.

