Mr. Dangue Rewaka (Gabon) (spoke in French): On
5 May 1999 in New York, an overall Agreement was
reached that, inter alia, called on the Secretary-General of
the United Nations to organize a popular consultation in
East Timor. In signing that Agreement, the Indonesian and
Portuguese Governments demonstrated their resolve to
find a peaceful settlement to the question of East Timor.
We sincerely thank the Secretary-General for his work to
persuade those two Governments to sign that Agreement.

The consultation was held on 30 August 1999 and
gave the East Timorese the option to choose or reject a
proposed constitutional framework providing for a special
autonomy for East Timor within the unitary Republic of
Indonesia. We know the results of the consultation. An
East Timorese majority rejected special autonomy. The
Indonesian Government accepted that decision of the
people of East Timor. The Gabonese delegation
welcomed this and paid tribute to the Indonesian
authorities for their cooperation, without which the ballot
could not have been held.

We were therefore surprised by the Violence
currently in most cities of East Timor. We know that the
Indonesian authorities decreed martial law in order to
control that violence. That decision, however, has not in
any way changed the situation of terror that has reigned
over East Timor for several days now.

We would encourage the Indonesian Government to
give favourable consideration to the assistance it has been
offered by the international community so as to bring the
soonest possible halt to this dangerous situation and to
allow the Secretary-General to maintain an adequate
United Nations presence in East Timor, in accordance
with article 7 of the 5 May 1999 Agreement.

Indonesia is a great country. It plays an important
role in maintaining stability and security not only in Asia,
but also in the rest of the world. The most unfortunate
events that have engulfed it over the past few months are
a further indication of that role. It is our most ardent wish
that Indonesia continue in unity and concord the major
reforms that it has undertaken.

My delegation eagerly awaits the report which the
Security Council mission sent to Indonesia will make next
week on the situation in East Timor.

