Mr. Ikouebe (Congo) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the 11 countries members of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) -
Angola, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Chad, Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Rwanda and Sao Tome and
Principe - I would first like to express our pride in
seeing you, Sir, presiding over the Security Council for
this month. I would also like to thank you for including
in the agenda of the Council the sensitive issue of
small arms, which is at the heart of the greatest
concerns of Central Africa.

For, as everyone knows, Central Africa has for
some years faced a grave situation of armed conflict,
destabilization and insecurity. It was not long ago that
of the 11 members of ECCAS, seven were in a
situation of war or instability. Simply consulting the
agenda of the Security Council, one can see that the
situation in Angola, Burundi, the Great Lakes, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic is routinely the subject of intense
debates in the Chamber.

It is therefore an opportunity for me to thank the
Council for all the interest that it has constantly
attached to the evolution of this highly sensitive
geopolitical and security situation in the subregion.

But this is also an opportunity to announce to the
entire international community that, for the first time in
a long time, prospects for a return to peace are
emerging today in the majority of the States concerned.
The Security Council is therefore especially requested
to take all the necessary measures to encourage, assist,
accelerate and strengthen those positive developments
in order to make the peace process irreversible. That is
particularly the case with the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, where the strengthening of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) is crucial.

If I chose to refer to those situations, it was to
underline that, as is often the case with conflicts in the
Third World, the wars afflicting Central Africa are
principally fuelled by light weapons, the subject of
today's debate.

To deal with this situation, the leaders of Central
Africa have adopted an entire series of measures to
build confidence among States, to prevent conflicts and
to resolve them when they erupt. They have done so in
order to establish lasting peace and security in a region
which can offer a great deal more to Africa and the
world.

Therefore, numerous initiatives, recommendations
and specific measures were adopted in the framework
of ECCAS and through the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa, a working tool that the United Nations has put
at our disposition to assist us in the highly sensitive
domain of peace, security and preventive diplomacy.

In July 1999, at Yaounde, Cameroon, there was a
high-level subregional seminar on the examination and
implementation of the recommendations contained in
the report of the Secretary-General on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of lasting peace and
development in Africa. At that seminar, the member
countries of ECCAS adopted measures and
recommended the implementation of the following
mechanisms in the fight against the trafficking in and
proliferation of small arms: the establishment of
national commissions to combat the proliferation of
light arms; approaching the Secretary-General of the
United Nations to create an advisory mission on
monitoring and collecting arms in the subregion of
Central Africa; implementation of a community charter
on investments foreseeing coercive measures in dealing
with companies maintaining armed militias; the
creation of a subregional register of conventional
weapons; and a review and harmonization of national
laws concerning carrying arms.

Those measures and mechanisms were reaffirmed
during the subregional conference on the proliferation
and illicit circulation of small arms and light weapons
in Central Africa, held in N 'Djamena, Chad from 25 to
27 October 1999. During that conference, ECCAS
member countries adopted the following
recommendations: the harmonization of the national
legislations of Central African States in the fight
against the illicit proliferation and circulation of small
arms and light weapons; the creation of a uniform arms
register at the national and subregional levels and a
databank on the existing stocks of each country, arms
dealers and transport agents; a request for the
Secretary-General's support of programmes for
disarmament, demobilization and the reintegration of
ex-combatants; a request for the assistance of the
Secretary-General for the countries in the subregion in
their efforts to restructure their armed forces and
police; the examination of regional projects to collect
arms, in cooperation with international institutions and
financial backers, as well as small-scale development
projects to promote the economic and social
reintegration of those possessing illegal weapons of
war; and the creation of a subregional office in Central
Africa of the International Criminal Police
Organization (Interpol) and a more active cooperation
between that body and the countries of Central Africa.

Within the framework of the programme of work
of the Advisory Committee during the period 2002 to
2003, the member countries of ECCAS also envisaged
the organization of a subregional seminar on the
implementation in Central Africa of the Programme of
Action adopted at the United Nations Conference on
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, which was held here last year.

Also foreseen is the organization of a workshop
on the participation of ECCAS member States in the
creation of a United Nations Conventional Arms
Register and a United Nations register on military
spending.

As can be seen, the ECCAS member States are
fully conscious of the real danger posed by small arms
in an area that is attempting to end a very sad page in
its history.

Today, the presence on Angolan soil of thousands
of anti-personnel mines is sufficient to remind us that
the fight against that category of arms is a question of
day-to-day survival for populations anxious to recover
the happiness of a normal life.

For the leaders of Central Africa, now that most
of the States concerned can entertain real hopes for
peace and security, the problem is finding the human,
material and financial means to implement peace-
building policies. Once all the peace agreements have
been signed; once the foreign troops have withdrawn;
and once national reconciliation has been achieved, we
will have to support all these developments with
measures to collect arms and to disarm, demobilize and
reintegrate ex-combatants as soon as possible. The
States members of ECCAS are committed to devoting a
substantial share of their resources to such
programmes. They expect the international community
to assist them in establishing a definitive peace in their
subregion.

In conclusion, I congratulate the Secretary-
General on his excellent report on small arms, which
Mr. Dhanapala introduced with great eloquence this
morning, and assure him of the full cooperation of the
countries of Central Africa in the implementation of its
relevant recommendations, the majority of which mesh
perfectly with the initiatives and actions undertaken by
ECCAS.

