The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

At the outset, I would like to express my sincere
appreciation to all the Member States participating
in this open debate, and to welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Romania and the Deputy Foreign
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Estonia. I also welcome
Ms. Karin Landgren and Mr. James Cockayne and
thank them for their valuable briefings.

We fully align ourselves with the statement
delivered by the representative of South Africa on
behalf of the non-permanent members of the Council,
so I will not repeat the points he made.

It has been a year and a half since the State ofKuwait
assumed the chairmanship of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions. We listened to many proposals by Member
States during the first open debate (S/PV.8175) on the
subject, held during our presidency of the Council in
February 2018, which sought to improve the efficiency
and transparency of the Council's work. During
that time, the Working Group has held 15 formal
and informal meetings at which we have discussed
a number of issues and matters pertaining to the
working methods of the Council, including on many of
those proposals from Member States during the first
open debate, aimed at distributing the burden of the
responsibilities of penholders and the chairmanships
of the Council's subsidiary organs more fairly, and
improving our due process and monthly wrap-up
sessions, as well as proposals on visits to missions, the
Council's programme of work and the preparation of
newly elected members.

The proposals were very important to the members
of the United Nation, and we hope that the members
of the Council can reach an agreement on the draft
note changes. I would like to take this opportunity to
express my sincere appreciation to all members of the
Council for their cooperation and active participation
in the negotiation process. In that regard, I want to
express my deep appreciation to the many States that
are not members of the Council that have supported the
work of the Informal Working Group since we assumed
the chairmanship, particularly former non-permanent
members and the groups interested in the Council's
working methods, especially the Accountability,
Cohesion and Transparency group (ACT).

The improvement and development of the
Council's working methods are decisive factors in its
ability to fulfil its responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. There has been
much improvement in the working procedures and
methods of the Council in the course of the past
25 years, particularly since the end of the Cold War.
Communication has improved between the Council and
non-members as well as between the Council and other
United Nations organs such as the General Assembly.
In addition, information has flowed both into and out
of the Council, and there has been a marked increase
in formal and thematic meetings, and in other meetings
in which non-governmental organizations and civil-
society organizations take part, as well as in efforts
to provide non-Council members with the results
of Council consultations before they are adopted as
resolutions. Those are all improvements that should not
be overlooked or underestimated and that redound to the
credit of the Council, particularly the non-permanent
members, in addition to other initiatives launched
by groups and States within the intergovernmental
negotiations on Security Council reform.

I would like to point out that the State of Kuwait
is one of the countries that have signed the code of
conduct launched by ACT whereby Council members
pledge not to vote against draft resolutions that address
crimes against humanity, genocide and war crimes, in
addition to the French-Mexican initiative that calls for
refraining voluntarily from using the veto power with
regard to crimes against humanity. We hope that an
agreement will be reached on refraining from the use
of the veto on humanitarian issues, for example, so as
to allow for assistance to reach civilians in urgent need,
medical evacuations and humanitarian truce.

Despite the importance of recent improvements
in making the work of the Council transparent, we
see that they are not sufficient. There is still room
for improvement towards enhancing the role of the
Council in carrying out its tasks and shouldering its
responsibilities in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I would like to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.

I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Romania.

