The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of February, I should
like to take the opportunity to pay tribute on behalf of
the Council to Mr. Vitaly Churkin, Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation, for his
service as President of the Security Council for the
month of January 2007. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Council in expressing my deep
appreciation to Ambassador Churkin for the great
diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council's
business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Timor-Leste

Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(S/2007/50)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Brazil, Germany, Japan,
New Zealand, the Philippines, Portugal, Singapore and
Timor-Leste, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Security Council, I extend a
warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Jose Ramos-
Horta, Prime Minister of Timor-Leste.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ramos-
Horta (Timor-Leste) took a seat at the Council
table; the representatives of the other
a orementioned countries took the seats reserved
for them at the side ofthe Council Chamber


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the course of the Council's
prior consultations, I shall take it that the Security
2

Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Atul Khare,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Timor-Leste and head of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Khare to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/50, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Atul Khare, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste and head of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste, to
whom I give the floor.


