Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Foreign Minister Klimkin for chairing this important
and timely open debate. I would also like to thank
Secretary-General Guterres, Secretary General
Zannier and Secretary General Schmid for their
comprehensive briefings.

It can be tempting to take Europe's peace and
security for granted. Europe is a continent of strong,
stable democracies. Europe is a continent of flourishing
economies that benefit from close cooperation.
However, Europe faces serious challenges, most
acute of which are Russia's attempts to destabilize
Ukraine and infringe upon Ukraine's sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

The United States is committed to the institutions
that help keep Europe safe. We will not waver in our
support for NATO, which is the strongest alliance in
history. We are working to make NATO even more
effective, deepening cooperation among existing
members and keeping the door open to new allies
who fulfill the requirements for membership, all
while seeking to increase burden-sharing. In addition,
NATO is providing training and assistance to build the
defensive capabilities okaraine, Georgia and Moldova.

The United States also supports the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which
helps to resolve Europe's conflicts. Right now, for
example, the OSCE is playing a crucial role: observing
and monitoring the situation in eastern Ukraine. The
bonds of the United States with NATO and the OSCE
have stood the test of time. They are institutions that
bring together partners on both sides of the Atlantic
Ocean in order to defend our shared ideals.

The partnership of the United States with the
European Union (EU) is deep and enduring. The EU
binds together countries that believe deeply in the cause
of democracy, human rights and economic freedom. It
has made Europe more prosperous and more peaceful.
The United States looks forward to improving our
cooperation with the EU. The United States may, from
time to time, disagree with the perspectives of the EU,
as friends do. However, it remains an important partner.
At the end of the day, no one should misinterpret
occasional policy differences and debates as a signal of
anything less than total commitment to our alliances in
Europe. That commitment is strong.

More than three years ago, the Ukrainian people
took to the streets to speak out against political
oppression and corruption. Those protestors demanded
freedom, democracy and respect for the rule of law
and they succeeded in creating a new Ukraine. The
United States continues to stand with the Ukrainian
people. But Russia has tried to prevent the change
that the Ukrainian people demanded. Russia occupied
Crimea and attempted to annex that piece of Ukrainian
territory, an act that the United States does not
recognize. Russia then armed, financed and organized
separatist forces in eastern Ukraine, leading to a
devastating and senseless conflict that has cost more
than 10,000 lives. The scenes of destruction in the town
of Avdiivka in recent weeks show the consequences
of Russia's ongoing interference in Ukraine. Russia's
recognition in recent days of purported passports and
other illegitimate documents distributed by Russian-
backed separatists in Ukraine's Donetsk and Luhansk
regions is another direct challenge to efforts to bring
peace to eastern Ukraine.

The United States believes that it is possible to
have a better relationship with Russia - after all,
we confront many of the same threats - but greater
cooperation with Russia cannot come at the expense of
the security of our European friends and allies. That
is why the United States calls on Russia to respect
Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity. That is
why we continue to urge Russia to show a commitment
to peace by fully implementing the commitments made
under the Minsk agreements and ending its occupation
of Crimea. The United States and the EU remain
united in that approach, keeping sanctions in place
until Moscow fully honours its Minsk commitments.
Our separate, Crimea-related sanctions will remain in
place until Russia returns control over the peninsula to
Ukraine.

Elsewhere in Europe, there are still significant
political and development challenges to overcome.
Georgia's sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders
must be affirmed and respected. In Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the country's people are still waiting
for their leaders to stop playing politics with ethnic
divisions and to focus instead on rooting out corruption
and building a more stable future. In Cyprus, leaders
are working to end the long-standing division of the
island in order to achieve a settlement, which the United
States strongly supports.

With regard to the Nagorno Karabakh conflict, the
United States remains committed to the Minsk Group
process for advancing a peaceful and lasting settlement,
and we call on the sides to respect the ceasefire,
implement agreed-on confidence-building measures
and resume negotiations. In Moldova, the United States
also continues to support a comprehensive settlement
of the Transnistria conflict that affirms Moldova's
sovereignty and territorial integrity while providing
special status for Transnistria. And in Kosovo, while
more must be done to strengthen governance and the rule
of law, the United States believes that the international
community must recognize the great strides that Kosovo
has made since it became independent. It deserves to
take its rightful place in the international community
of nations, including as a full member of the United
Nations.

The United States will remain Europe's strongest
partner in promoting peace and prosperity. We will
stand by the institutions and alliances that make us all
more secure, and the deep ties that connect the United
States and Europe will enable us to rise to the challenges
we face today and to overcome them together.

