Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, let me at the outset thank Mr. Charles
Nqakula for his briefing on the state of progress in the
peace process in Burundi and specifically with respect
to implementation of the Comprehensive Ceasefire
Agreement with the Forces nationales de liberation
(FNL). My delegation believes that it is crucial for the
building of peace in Burundi that this Agreement be
effectively implemented. Belgium therefore would like
to express its full appreciation for the efforts of the
Regional Initiative and of the Facilitator that are aimed
at reinvigorating the peace process, which, as we know,
has been in an impasse for some time.

My delegation fears that if the process is not
properly concluded, that situation could lead to yet
another cycle of tensions and, indeed, violence, in
Burundi. We fear the negative security and
humanitarian consequences should there be an
extended stalemate. For that, the FNL must
immediately resume its place in the Joint Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism. The FNL needs to be
reinvolved in the peace process. We believe that a
military solution is neither possible nor desirable. The
solution will be political one; it will not be a military
one.

We sincerely encourage the Facilitator to robustly
continue his efforts that are aimed at relaunching
implementation of the Agreement. Belgium expresses
its full support for and confidence in him. We need to

know how we are to proceed in order to safeguard the
Agreement and its implementation mechanisms. Like
the Secretary-General in his latest report on Burundi,
Belgium is also of the opinion that this relaunching of
the process needs to be done in a comprehensive
political framework that would make it possible to
meet certain legitimate concerns, both in the
Government and among the FNL. Without challenging
the process under way, such a comprehensive
framework would make it possible to address issues of
a political nature, namely, issues related to security
guarantees that have been called for by the FNL and
defining the political future of that movement, or the
granting of certain high posts to FNL members.

To that end, we call upon the leadership of the
FNL to renew direct contacts with the Government, in
order to address these issues. A slight adaptation of the
modalities for implementation of the Agreement would
make it possible without any doubt to better deal with
some of these issues, such as the strengthening the role
of the Steering Committee to which Mr. Nqakula has
referred. The suggestion of the Secretary-General that
the parties work out a road map could also, we believe,
contribute to reinvigorating the peace process.

Lastly, Belgium is prepared to respond to the
invitation of the Facilitator to visit the camps in order
to take account of the situation as described by the
Minister.

