We would like to welcome today's briefers, who this morning enlightened the Security Council on such an important topic. The Dominican Republic strongly supports any action, policy or strategy designed to protect human rights, as protecting people from human rights violations is directly linked to preserving human dignity. Accordingly, as a nation, we will always promote the recognition and safeguarding of human rights. It is undeniable that human rights are key to the maintenance of international peace and security. Where human rights are not protected, there is no peace and no progress in a society. Furthermore, as tools to effectively protect human rights have been developed, particularly in places where there is armed conflict, the undeniable link between human rights protection, accountability and reconciliation has been key to eradicating conflict and attaining sustainable peace. Those are not easy tasks. Great challenges persist in the absence of our full commitment and cooperation. We recognize the commendable work done by the human rights components of peace operations in monitoring human rights violations, investigating perpetrators, assisting victims and providing for conflict management and reconciliation. We would like to highlight the paramount role United Nations peacekeeping plays in protecting civilians in armed conflict. In this regard, it is important that each peace mission rely on child protection advisers, women protection advisers and gender protection advisers, both civilian and military, and that those advisers be well equipped, adequately funded and accorded the level of seniority needed to carry out their work. Not only is their work essential to the maintenance of international peace and security but it also personally and individually touches the lives of victims who find in these components a light in the dark. We would like to especially highlight the Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative, launched in 2018. As a direct result of the A4P initiative, the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations was put forward. We commend the more than 150 States Members of the United Nations that have now joined us in endorsing it and shown their strong dedication to a set of key priorities that build on both new commitments and existing workstreams. The Dominican Republic would like to underscore the importance of appropriate training as a central element of the human rights components in peacekeeping operations. We believe that training is a stepping stone towards greater efficiency in peace operations, and an aspect that must not be sidelined. We need to tailor training to specific missions and integrate practical training needs that have previously been identified on the ground. Absent this basic principle, we are concerned that the deployment of peace operations could be hampered by inexperience and a lack of preparedness. Accordingly, we firmly believe that appropriate funding should be allocated for training, predeployment preparations and the equipment needed to meet the constant threats that peacekeepers face. Against the backdrop of the coronavirus disease pandemic, human rights principles, including those touching upon economic and social rights and civil and political rights, must prevail and be respected across the spectrum, for they will be fundamental to the success of the public-health response. International cooperation is now more relevant than ever. We must come together despite all challenges to ensure the continuity of the good and necessary work of the human rights components of United Nations peace operations and to build a lasting peace.
