Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First and
foremost, I would like to thank Tribunal Presidents
Fausto Pocar and Dennis Byron and Prosecutors Carla
Del Ponte and Hassan Bubacar Jallow for briefing us
on the activities of the International Tribunals for the
former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda. I want to thank
them not only for their undeniably comprehensive
reports, but also for the sterling work that they carry
out in their respective courts. The trials they are
conducting are an extremely important part of the
enforcement of international law, and we must not
underestimate the great contribution that they have
made to the international community and - on a
somewhat more elevated level - to humanity itself.

The crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia
and in Rwanda form part of the two darkest chapters in
the story of the twentieth century; on the other hand,
the establishment of the Tribunals to try those accused
of the crimes committed in those conflicts and to
render justice to the thousands of victims and their
families has been one of the Security Council's
outstanding successes in the maintenance of
international peace and security. The work of these
Tribunals, in particular the convictions of important
perpetrators, sends to all guilty of crimes against
humanity the unequivocal message that they cannot
expect impunity.

Yet the mission of the Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and for Rwanda has still not been
completed. Although the Tribunals were not created as
permanent institutions, and although their mandates
cannot be extended indefinitely, their work must be
completed in its entirety. Part of their legacy and
contribution will depend on that. For that reason, we
must address urgently and seriously the so-called
residual functions of the Tribunals. It is most important
that they have the infrastructure and the administrative
and legal staff they need to ensure that the residual
functions can be completed with the same degree of
diligence that the Tribunals have shown in their work
until now.

In that respect, I read carefully the joint
document that has been submitted. I understand the
sensitivity of the proposal made to extend the functions
of the current Tribunals, perhaps with a reduced
structure. However, we cannot ignore this comment
from that very document:

(spoke in English)

"The only permanent international criminal
institution that could theoretically provide the
range of functions required is the International
Criminal Court. However, there are obvious
differences in terms of the jurisdictional basis,
substantive law and procedures applicable before
the ICC and the Tribunals. The ICC's relationship
to the United Nations, including the Security
Council, also differs markedly from the ad hoc
Tribunals. Transferring the civil functions of the
Tribunals to the ICC might accordingly require an
amendment of the ICC statute.

"Although not insurmountable, the hurdles,
coupled with the complicated amendment
procedure of the ICC Statute, suggest that
transferring the residual functions of the
Tribunals to the ICC might not be a realistic
option."

In that regard, I was reminded of a phrase from a
law professor of mine who used to tell us, "Difficult
things should be done and accomplished right away;
impossible things should take us a little bit longer".

(spoke in Spanish)

Recently, the Security Council approved the entry
into force of an agreement between the United Nations
and Lebanon to create a tribunal to address
international crimes of the most serious nature. It did
that with the aim of promoting international justice. I
would venture to suggest that in the process of
completing the work of the international Tribunals we
should keep a broader view in mind, namely, how we
can cooperate better in promoting international justice.
I suggest that serious consideration must be given to
the difficult proposal that has been made: to give those
tasks to the International Criminal Court. I am certain
that the Council can be sufficiently creative - and
that, if necessary, it could turn to the States parties. We
must also pursue that option. The option of having the
International Criminal Court complete these trials
should be seriously considered by the Council.

