Mexico would like to thank Indonesia for convening this debate. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is, without a doubt, one of the greatest challenges the international community has faced since the founding of the United Nations 75 years ago. The devastation resulting from the pandemic is a global challenge that requires global solutions. It is not only a health crisis, but also an economic, political and social challenge that has challenged progress towards poverty eradication, food security, gender equality and many other Sustainable Development Goals. We face unprecedented multidimensional disruption, which is exacerbated in conflict and post-conflict situations. We reiterate Mexico's unequivocal support for the Secretary-General's call and for resolution 2532 (2020), on a general and immediate cessation of hostilities. The humanitarian truce is essential to addressing the pandemic. Effectively addressing the pandemic is imperative in order to preserve the peacebuilding and development gains in transition and post-conflict countries. The effects of the pandemic are likely to magnify existing challenges in the areas of violence, inequality, poverty, unemployment, health services, human rights and democratic governance systems, among others. We also face a misinformation challenge, which may hinder strategies to respond adequately to the pandemic. In addition to the health consequences, the pandemic affects social, economic and security aspects, and the relevant bodies and specialized agencies must provide a timely and coordinated response based on their respective mandates. The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) is the United Nations body best positioned to assist in addressing some of those challenges, as its action as a hinge between United Nations bodies and its convening capacity has been helpful in promoting dialogue between key actors in countries emerging from conflict. That dialogue, in turn, strengthens the relationship between the Security Council and the General Assembly, thus contributing to the legitimacy of the former. Mexico urges the Security Council to continue to take advantage of the advisory role of the PBC. In order for the United Nations system to overcome the present crisis as a matter of priority, it must contemplate inclusive and universal access to an eventual vaccine. We must make vaccines, medicines, preventive instruments, laboratory tests, reagents, support materials, essential medical supplies and new diagnostics available to all, since no one is safe until everyone is safe. Vaccines should be a global public good and - as the Secretary-General said - should be the people's vaccine, because the most effective solution lies in the development, production and distribution of an effective vaccine. In that regard, we must ensure strict implementation of General Assembly resolution 74/274, submitted by Mexico and co-sponsored by 179 countries. The Security Council should maintain its support for the measures that the Organization has taken to ensure that peace operations can effectively carry out their mandate under current conditions and remain alert to the impact that the pandemic may have on the conflict situations under its agenda. Flexibility and speed of action in a changing context must also be ensured. In Mexico's view, it is important that, in addressing the links between public health and international security, the Security Council carefully consider the following questions. How can coordination with the World Health Organization, other regional bodies and non-governmental organizations be strengthened to address pandemics and other health challenges in conflict areas? What steps can be taken to facilitate humanitarian access and ensure the safety of medical personnel in conflict areas? What measures should be taken to combat radicalization, violent extremism leading to terrorism and the actions of terrorist groups in the context of the current pandemic? How can we best use the specialized tools available to the international community, such as the International Health Regulations, to ensure that decisions are made on the basis of technical and scientific considerations and that this agenda is not politicized? In the face of this multifaceted global health emergency, we must generate effective multilateral solutions that consider the structural causes of conflict and include the entire peace continuum, incorporating the concept of sustainable peace as a guiding thread of United Nations preventive action.
