Mr. Miranda (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate you, Madam, on behalf of my
Government and on my own behalf, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. I
also send greetings to your predecessor for the dynamic
and brilliant manner in which he conducted the
activities of this Council during his term.

You and your Government, Madam President, are
paying great attention and according great importance
to major contemporary issues in Africa. We were here
last Friday to discuss the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Now the Security Council is
once again discussing the peace process in my country.

We are sincerely grateful to you, Madam, to your
predecessors and to all the members of the Security
Council for the attention devoted by the Council to
peace in Central Africa, particularly in Angola and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his continuing efforts
in helping to bring peace to Angola. His Special
Adviser for Assignments in Africa will be visiting
Angola in the coming year.

My Government has been working hard, and its
efforts have resulted in the creation of an environment
of tranquillity throughout practically the whole of our
nation. As a result, the political and military situation
has gradually and substantially improved, allowing for
some circulation of people and goods between different
points in our country.

This reflects an increasingly broad
implementation of an agenda of peace, based on a
combination of political, social and military initiatives,
with a view to bringing the Lusaka Protocol to
completion.

In the political arena, the Government has given
priority to national dialogue. Indeed, the Intersectoral
Commission, created to coordinate all efforts aimed at
bringing lasting peace, has been meeting with political
parties and civil society, including churches, non-
governmental organizations and civic associations, as
well as with representatives of the international
community - the troika of observers for the peace
process, the diplomatic corps and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

The purpose of these meetings is to put together a
large number of initiatives, all aimed at promoting a
culture of peace, tolerance and national reconciliation.
In the social arena, the Fund for National Peace and
Reconciliation has supported citizens who have
recently been reintegrated into civil society, providing
for their basic needs and thereby making it possible for
them to participate in the economic and social life of
the country. In our Government's view, the
international community has an important role to play,
through the United Nations, in the implementation of
these social reintegration programmes.

In the military arena, the Angolan Government
has taken extraordinary and forceful measures to
complete the unfinished tasks under the Lusaka
Protocol, particularly the disarmament of UNITA
military forces and the extension of the State authority
throughout the national territory, preserving the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation and
creating conditions for the restoration of order. The
Government has done its utmost to fill the vacuum in
good governance that UNITA, in an attempt to cause
chaos and facilitate the seizure of power by bullets,
rather than ballots, tried to create. In accordance with
those principles, the Government liberated all the
counties previously controlled by rebels, thereby
bringing life back to normal there.

The Government of Angola will continue to strive
for peace. Accordingly, we once again reaffirm the
validity of the Lusaka Protocol. As the President of the
Republic, His Excellency Jose Eduardo dos Santos said
on the occasion of the commemoration of our National
Day on 11 November,

"The Government is ready to discuss the
means, forms and guarantees to bring under its
responsibility and authority all the citizens of
UNITA's military wing, led by Jonas Savimbi".

History has demonstrated in a very clear fashion
that Jonas Savimbi has never negotiated an agreement
in good faith. He has taken advantage of periods of
relative peace to rearm and prepare for new military
campaigns, with the sole purpose of taking power
through force. For that reason, it is difficult to count on
him for a reconciliation that we want to be genuine and
lasting; he has always declined any offers extended to
him by the Government, including by the vice-
presidency of the country.

The increasingly peaceful environment of Angola
would not be possible without the support of the
international community, which has made a distinction
between those who have always opted for peace and
democracy and those who have chosen war. As a
consequence, the Security Council imposed binding
sanctions against UNITA's military wing, led by Jonas
Savimbi. The most obvious effect of the sanctions has
been the significant reduction of his capacity to wage
war and, hence, a growing number of UNITA members
who have been persuaded to lay down their weapons
andjoin the path of peace.

This outcome clearly demonstrates the efficacy of
the sanctions as a means, not as an end in themselves.
This fact leads my Government to call on the
international community to stay the course and tighten
the sanctions, particularly in the area of
telecommunications, as recommended by the Southern
African Development Community, until peace becomes
irreversible in Angola. Nevertheless, my Government
is concerned with findings in the Security Council's
sanctions Committee report, according to which some
United Nations Member States are not fully complying
with the sanctions resolutions.

Some countries are continuing, under various
pretexts, to allow movement by elements of UNITA's
military wing, for whom travel abroad has been banned
by the Security Council. The capitals of some countries
became propaganda bases, inciting war in Angola and
rebellion against its sovereign institutions. The
authorities of those countries have not shown enough
commitment to freezing the bank accounts supporting
such activities. UNITA's offices abroad, which should
have been closed as a result of the sanctions, are
continuing to operate in those countries, now under the
cover of non-governmental organizations.

The Security Council resolutions on sanctions
against UNITA were adopted in accordance with the
powers given to the Council by the United Nations
Charter. All Member States are legally obligated to
abide by and implement these resolutions. The
obligations resulting from the Security Council
resolutions prevail over any other obligation to which
United Nations Member States might be subject by
virtue of any treaty or international agreement to which
they are or may become party. This principle should
also be applied regarding sanctions against UNITA.

This principle should be applied with regard to
sanctions on representation, travel and finances of
UNITA leaders and adult members of their immediate
families. We must seriously consider the question of
the non-governmental organizations used as fronts to
perpetuate former UNITA representation offices. It is
equally important to prevent the use of electronic
means of communication, which have become essential
tools in UNITA's propaganda campaign.

Therefore, my Government issues a strong appeal
to all United Nations Member States to faithfully
observe the pertinent resolutions adopted by the
Council, which represent a valuable contribution to the
establishment of peace in my country.

In addition, the recommendations made in the
Monitoring Mechanism reports should be urgently
considered by the Security Council.
The dynamics of this process have led thousands
of people, tired of war, to accept voluntarily the peace
initiatives taken by my Government. To date, more
than 100,000 people, both civilians and members of
UNITA's military wing, who were living outside the
law have now been reintegrated into our society.

This massive influx of people from the jungle
raised to 4 million the number of people in need of
assistance, and this has made even more complex an
already difficult humanitarian situation.

Allow me to take this opportunity to issue an
appeal to the international community to continue
providing its incalculable support in order that my
Government can, as soon as possible, alleviate the
suffering of millions of Angolan citizens in dire need
of food, health and medical assistance.

