Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I would first like to
commend warmly the outgoing members of the
Council - Argentina, Canada, Malaysia, Namibia and
the Netherlands - for their excellent contribution to
the work of the Council over the past two years. As an
incoming member of the Council, Ireland is fully
committed to carrying out the tasks with which the
Member States have entrusted us.

We warmly welcome today's debate under your
presidency, Mr. Minister, and we particularly support
the format. As was noted by many speakers this
morning, this is a very timely initiative of the
Singaporean presidency which responds to the
concerns of many troop-contributing countries (TCCS)
that the Security Council must do more to take into
account the views of TCCs.
Ireland associates itself with, and supports, the
statement made this morning by Sweden on behalf of
the European Union. To those comments, I would like
to add the following points in my national capacity.

While the order in which I take the floor today
reflects Ireland's current status as a member of the
Security Council, that position is a temporary one. This
is in contrast to our position as a significant troop
contributor, which, over the last 40 years, can
reasonably be described as permanent. My remarks
reflect, therefore, the interests of both a member of the
Security Council and a committed troop contributor.

It is entirely appropriate for the Security Council
to discuss in this way with TCCs how their concerns
can best be taken on board by the Council. It is vital
that the Council engage with and listen to TCCs before
taking any decisions affecting the mandate of a
peacekeeping operation.

Under Article 24 of the Charter, Member States
confer on the Security Council the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international

peace and security and for carrying this function out on
their behalf.

The Security Council has certain obligations
under the Charter in this regard. The creation of
peacekeeping operations is among the most important
of its responsibilities. But, in fulfilling its obligations,
the Council also has a responsibility to take into
account the views of the countries which contribute
troops to those missions.

Troop contributors have a particular concern to
ensure that the mandates adopted by the Security
Council are clear, credible and achievable. This point
should be readily understood by all, including by those
Members of the Organization which commit their
troops to United Nations command and those which are
sometimes reluctant to do so.

The point made earlier by India about the high
rate of peacekeepers provided by developing countries
is a telling one which should give rise to reflection.

As a contributor to many United Nations missions
over the years, Ireland is convinced that we, and other
TCCs, can provide essential, practical input into the
work of the Council when it is considering the mandate
of a mission.

We agree with the Brahimi report that TCCs
should be consulted at the very initial stages, and at all
stages throughout an operation, most particularly where
a change of mandate is involved.

Resolution 1327 (2000) is the most significant
element to date in the framework for consultations
between the Security Council, the Secretariat and troop
contributors.

We take a practical approach to what needs to be
done. We look at the useful mechanisms which are
already in place, ask how they can be used more
effectively and then question what more needs to be
done.

It is important to register that consultations have
improved dramatically over the past two years. The
new Military Adviser, General Ford, has made a
particular contribution since his appointment. The
Secretariat must be commended for this effort.

The Military Adviser must continue to brief the
Security Council on military matters. The Council
needs to have at its disposal the best information
available to it when making decisions, and the presence
of the Military Adviser is crucial to this requirement.

The Military Adviser should also be available to
brief TCCs. Indeed, we welcome the openness and the
receptiveness expressed earlier today by Deputy
Secretary-General Frechette on behalf of the
Secretariat in this regard.

The Secretariat now circulates their briefing notes
to contributors. This is a positive development. We ask
that both military and political briefing notes be made
available to troop contributors well in advance of
consultations and that every effort be made to ensure
that briefings are as comprehensive as possible.

We, the States Members of the United Nations
and the Secretariat, rnust draw on lessons learned from
recent experiences. We suggest, as a matter of course,
that when a mandate is completed, there should be
routine discussion with troop contributors, the Council
and the Secretariat on lessons learned. The President of
the Security Council, representatives of the Secretariat
and, importantly, all members of the Council should be
present at a senior level at all consultations with troop
contributors. This requirement is very usefully
reaffirmed in resolution 1327 (2000). I wish to
underline the importance that we attach to this.

This requires troop contributors to take the
consultations seriously, to be present at an appropriate
level and to participate actively. For useful interaction
to occur, all sides must become and remain involved.
All of this involves resources. The Secretariat requires
manpower to respond to all of these demands.
My delegation has been disappointed at the
response of the membership to the request of the
Secretary-General for resources to implement the
recommendations of the Brahimi Panel. During the
main segment of this session of the General Assembly,
less than half of the posts requested by the Secretary-
General were approved. Many of those posts would
have improved the quality of service which the
Secretariat provides troop contributors and which we
demand of the Secretariat. If we are serious about
improving United Nations peacekeeping and the
manner in which troop contributors are engaged in the
system, it follows that we must be prepared to finance
the necessary posts. If we are not prepared to accept
the recommendations of the Secretary-General as to
what he requires to do a better job, there is something
hollow in those demands we hear for a greater
contribution from the Secretariat.

My delegation has listened very carefully to the
debate so far. We have heard several delegations call
for the creation of a permanent structure which would
allow troop contributors to remain in ongoing dialogue
with the Security Council about the preparation,
amendment and implementation of peacekeeping
mandates in which their troops are involved. We
support such a concept and look forward to discussing
specific proposals, such as that which Canada intends
to bring forward and that which the United Kingdom
has proposed.

For our part, we feel that a useful purpose would
be served if the Security Council were to put in place a
structure for ongoing dialogue with significant troop
contributors. This arrangement could operate both
vertically, in relation to individual peacekeeping
missions, and horizontally, in relation to cross-cutting
issues applying to peacekeeping more generally.
Picking up the point made by Australia this morning,
these new structures should not be burdensome, nor
should they affect the ability of the Council to make
timely decisions. However, we would not, for the
moment, wish to see this mechanism replace the
current provisions under which the Council has a
formal consultation with troop contributors prior to
each mandate renewal.

Many other interesting proposals have been put
forward during today's discussions. We look forward to
discussing these in more detail with troop contributors
and within the Security Council.

