Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): Italy associates itself with
the statement made earlier by the observer of the
European Union. I would like to add a few remarks in
my national capacity.

Climate change is widely recognized as a serious
global threat. Since 2007, when the first debate on the
security implications of climate change took place in
the Security Council (see S/PV.5663), the situation has
certainly not improved, as has been underlined in
previous interventions. Climate change continues to act
as a threat multiplier and risks triggering or
exacerbating conflicts stemming from the
consequences of sea-level rise, the depletion of natural
resources, desertification, climate-induced migration

 

and the crucial question of sustainable energy supply,
just to mention some of the main challenges.

Yet the international community has not fully
activated the threat minimizers that could lower the
risk of climate-related insecurity, such as an efficient
and globally shared climate mitigation and adaptation
mechanism or an effective system of strengthened
international cooperation, preventive diplomacy and
mediation. That is why Italy welcomes today's debate
as an opportunity to further discuss the security
implications of climate change, while being mindful
and respectful of the prerogatives of the relevant
bodies, processes and instruments that already address
this issue.

Sea-level rise is one of the most dramatic and
tangible climate-related insecurity factors, as it
threatens the very survival of several Member States
and seriously threatens the living conditions of
millions of people throughout the world. For obvious
reasons, small island developing States are potentially
the most affected, with those of the Pacific having
unique features of vulnerability. While the international
community aims at a global agreement on climate
change, those States cannot be expected to face the
consequences of sea-level rise by themselves. They
need to be adequately supported in their efforts at
adaptation and disaster preparedness, while also being
assisted in drafting and implementing sustainable
development policies. Those considerations are the
basis of Italy's bilateral cooperation policy in the
region and motivate our support for the further
enhancement of the European-Pacific development
partnership.

While small island developing States deserve
priority attention, careful consideration also has to be
given to other situations, especially in vulnerable
regions in which sea-level rise threatens to
significantly alter the coastline, impacting on territorial
borders and the division of maritime zones and causing
humanitarian crises and the exodus of populations.
Another important issue is how to effectively manage
new opportunities deriving from global warming and
sea-level rise, such as the availability of newly
accessible natural resource deposits and transportation
routes across the Arctic. The capacity of the United
Nations system to effectively address these new
challenges cannot be taken for granted and may need to
be strengthened and improved.

 

Let me also briefly touch upon the issue of food
security. Unlike sea-level rise, food insecurity is not a
direct consequence of climate change, but it may be
aggravated by the pernicious effects of global warming
and extreme weather. Although the impact may vary in
different areas of the world, the global toll of climate
change on food production is considered negative. This
increases the challenge of ensuring food security for
the world's growing population, creating the conditions
for greater social tensions, unrest and open conflicts.
The only way to address such a situation is to redouble
our collective efforts to increase the food supply and
ensure the stability of food prices.

Italy directly contributed to the adoption of the
L'Aquila Food Security Initiative at the Group of Eight
(G-8) Summit in 2009. Italy places food security at the
centre of its humanitarian and development
cooperation agendas and fully supports the
commitment of the European Union and the G-8 and
the Group of 20 to tackle world hunger and
malnutrition.

In conclusion, let me underline that action on
security-related aspects alone will be in vain unless the
international community renews and intensifies its
initiative to address the root causes of climate change.
Without an effective global agreement in the context of
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, the human and economic costs of climate
change and its impact on security will only grow and
be perpetuated indefinitely.

Likewise, it is essential to boost the international
community's efforts to advance sustainable
development, without which confronting climate
change and its security-related consequences will be
far more difficult. All Member States should bear this
in mind as we approach the crucial final stage of the
preparations for the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development to be held in Rio de Janeiro
in 2012.

