Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): I am grateful to Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello for
his very comprehensive briefing to us.

We would like to confirm our support for the
humanitarian activities of the United Nations, including the
work of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs. Russia provides political and practical support in
this sphere and participates in many humanitarian
operations coordinated by the United Nations in various
countries.

We also believe that the Security Council is today
being increasingly asked for active political support for the
work of humanitarian organizations and that humanitarian
work as a whole should not only be strengthened, but
should also be protected by the authority of the Security
Council. At the same time, however, we are not equating
the functions of the Security Council with those of a
humanitarian agency. Each of them has its own
responsibilities. The Security Council is responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, while
humanitarian agencies have their own mandates and must
deal with specific tasks that are different from the functions
of peacekeeping contingents - although, in fact, the tasks
are very closely related in practice.

Coordinating the work of humanitarian agencies and
peacekeeping contingents is therefore essential. In doing
so it is necessary to maintain functional separation. But,
as I said, coordination is extremely important, primarily
between the military/political components of peacekeeping
operations and humanitarian operations. One of the
methods of establishing such cooperation is, in fact,
applied in practice and has to do with ensuring the actual
separation of duties - distinguishing the duties of the
special representatives of the Secretary-General from
those of the humanitarian coordinators. When a
peacekeeping operation has a humanitarian element -
something that is happening with increasing frequency -
the humanitarian tasks must be clearly defined in the
mandates. Those tasks must be feasible and supported by
the appropriate human and financial resources.

The broadening of consultations and cooperation
between the Security Council and humanitarian agencies
and organizations is playing a useful role in efforts to find
the optimal means of coordination. Here I am thinking of
the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the International
Committee of the Red Cross, the United Nations
Children's Fund and other organizations. Moreover, we
think it is important to develop this cooperation even at
the stage of planning and preparing peacekeeping
operations that will involve humanitarian tasks.

I will not revisit all of the aspects of humanitarian
activities. Mr. Vieira de Mello and my colleagues who
have spoken before me have shed sufficient light on all of
these matters. I would just like to comment on a few
additional points.

I would like to highlight the task of curbing arms
flows into conflict areas, because this relates directly to
better enabling humanitarian agencies to do their work,
inter alia, to help refugees. We should not take lightly
any violations of arms embargoes imposed by the
Security Council, because if an arms embargo is declared
and then not respected, this simply exacerbates the
confrontation between the warring parties and makes it
more difficult to carry out humanitarian tasks - not to
mention the fact that it also undermines the authority of
the Security Council.

Much has been said here about the need to ensure
the safety and security of United Nations personnel,
including humanitarian personnel. We agree that this is
one of the most important tasks at this time. Of course,

 

one of the most important means of resolving the problem
of security is the deployment of military contingents to
safeguard humanitarian deliveries. Nonetheless, as regards
such provisions of assistance, the importance of basing
humanitarian work on the principle of impartiality should
not be forgotten. Humanitarian assistance cannot be used as
an instrument for bringing political pressure to bear on any
party to a conflict or for supporting just one side to the
detriment of the other. This principle fully applies both to
the activities of international humanitarian organizations and
to the work of non-governmental organizations.

Perhaps I might give one example that illustrates
clearly the situation. This is something the Security Council
has already discussed during its consultations. It concerns
the work of two non- governmental organizations in northern
Iraq. They operate there not only without the consent of the
Government of Iraq but also despite that Government's
protests. These two non-governmental organizations in
northern Iraq have no visas whatsoever; for all intents and
purposes they have crossed the border illegally and
established themselves in northern Iraq illegally. This
directly undermines our efforts to uphold the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Iraq, a goal that the Security
Council has mentioned on several occasions.

Incidentally, this is all happening in northern Iraq,
where a so-called no-flight zone was unilaterally declared.
The Security Council has never in any of its resolutions
taken a decision regarding a no-flight zone, security zone
or anything similar to that in the northern or southern part
of Iraq. The attempt by certain parties, who invoke
resolution 688 (1991), to unilaterally declare or create a no-
flight zone is illegal, as can be confirmed simply by reading
the resolution, which does not make the least mention of
no-flight zones and was not even adopted under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations.

My last comment concerns how to take up questions
involving the use of force or coercion exclusively on the
solid foundation of the Charter of the United Nations. We
cannot fully exclude the possible effectiveness of coercion
to ensure the security of humanitarian personnel and the
delivery of humanitarian assistance. However, various
concepts currently under discussion, such as humanitarian
intervention, raise a number of questions of principle and
a number of quite practical questions. We believe that the
Charter of the United Nations establishes the functions and
prerogatives of the Security Council, and these functions
and prerogatives are sacrosanct, and any coercive operations
require the authorization of the Council. This includes
coercive operations relating to humanitarian assistance.

We are very concerned about the attempts that some
are making to promote an approach by which the
existence of a humanitarian crisis in any particular
country would be in itself sufficient grounds for unilateral
armed intervention without any decision by the Security
Council whatsoever. This approach is absolutely
unacceptable. It runs counter to all of the very
foundations of the existing system of international
relations and the Charter of the United Nations. Only the
Security Council can determine whether a given situation,
including one involving a humanitarian crisis, is a threat
to peace and security, and only the Security Council can
take a decision, if one is necessary, to authorize the use
of force in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations.

Perhaps at some point international law will be
different from what it is now and will rely on unilateral
regional positions, but for now international law is
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, by which
all of us must be guided, inter alia, in making decisions
about humanitarian-assistance questions. It is hardly
possible to provide humanitarian assistance while
violating the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States
or, for the sake of humanitarian work, to violate the
fundamental principles of international law as enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations.

In conclusion, I would like to ask Mr. Vieira de
Mello to convey to all of his colleagues our appreciation
for their efforts to carry out the humanitarian work of the
Organization. We stress our personal appreciation for
Under-Secretary-General Vieira de Mello's efforts to
improve the coordination and effectiveness of the United
Nations humanitarian programmes.

