At the outset, allow me to thank you, Sir, for your invitation to participate in this Security Council meeting to discuss the current situation in the Gulf region and to thank the Russian Federation for convening the meeting. The United Nations and the Security Council, which is hosting our debate today, constitute the international authority that has adopted the principles of security, peace and a secure life for all the peoples of the world. Those two bodies are responsible for maintaining the international order, upholding the basic principles of the Charter of the United Nations and implementing Security Council resolutions on the basis of international law, good-neighbourliness, non-interference in the internal affairs of States and mutual respect for their sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. They uphold the principles of the use of peaceful means to resolve differences, refraining from the threat or use of force, and rejection of all forms of terrorism, extremism and violence. The participation of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) is an affirmation of its total commitment to those principles, its unshakeable faith in the role of the United Nations and the Security Council, and its ongoing support and appreciation for their efforts to promote security and stability around the world. Since its founding in 1981, the GCC has believed in these principles and taken care to incorporate them into its statute. It has engaged proactively with the international community and cooperated in the pursuit of just causes. It has extended the hand of cooperation to all peace-loving countries, United Nations agencies and other international groups and organizations to promote the principles of tolerance and coexistence among nations and peoples, achieve stability and well-being for all, and reinforce regional and global peace and security. Over the past 40 years, the Council's trajectory has reflected the success of cooperation among the GCC States to maintain peace and security in the region in the face of challenges. The peoples of the GCC States have also achieved comprehensive development and been highly ranked in indices of economic, social, educational and health development. They have done their part to maintain global energy supplies. The GCC countries have fulfilled their commitments to the international community to supporting counter-terrorism efforts, repudiating extremism and drying up sources of terrorist financing. The GCC States have also been quick to offer economic and humanitarian assistance to their neighbours and countries in need, and provide support to United Nations agencies and relief committees to ensure that they carry out to the fullest their role in serving those in need and helping them overcome the scourges of war, natural disaster and poverty. The response to the current coronavirus disease pandemic shows how quick the GCC States have been to provide assistance to States and peoples around the world. The Council's successful proactive cooperation with the international community and responsible engagement with comprehensive development issues have garnered it a highly regarded place on the world stage. The events and activities hosted by GCC States bear witness to that success on the ground. Saudi Arabia has served as Chair of the Group of Twenty. The city of Dubai in the United Arab Emirates is organizing activities for Expo 2020-2021. Qatar will host the World Cup in 2022. All these international activities reflect the faith of the GCC in cooperating and working with the States of the world that love peace and stability to serve all humankind in all fields. The GCC believes in the right of peoples to live in security, prosperity and stability. The Council has worked to translate that faith into reality for the benefit of all and to build a regional stability that creates an environment conducive to comprehensive development, growth and progress. At the same time, the GCC has striven to maintain its gains and achievements and the stability of its States and peoples, which are the cornerstone of security and stability as a whole in the Gulf region, which is in turn so important, vital and pivotal to regional and global peace and security. Unfortunately, that has not always been the case. The Gulf region today, despite the ties of neighbourliness and history shared by the countries of the region, is a hot spot that suffers from constant tensions brought about by non-compliance with the principles of international law, the Charter of the United Nations and Security Council resolutions. The result has been intervention in the internal affairs of GCC States, failure to respect their sovereignty, and destabilization. It is regrettable that the Islamic Republic of Iran, particularly since 2011, has adopted an approach of hostility, violence and destabilization to achieve its political objectives in the region. Some GCC States have been repeatedly attacked by Iran and its proxies in the region. That includes ballistic-missile and drone attacks on civilians and civilian targets in Saudi Arabia, and terrorist acts - which Iran has been proven to support - against a number of GCC States. Iran has supported violent acts in a number of countries in the region. It has trained, financed and armed terrorist and sectarian organizations, causing widespread violence and instability in countries of the region such as Iraq, Syria, Lebanon and Yemen, which we wish had been invited to take part in our session today. Every day, humanitarian suffering is taking place in those areas before the eyes and ears of the international community and the Security Council. We are grateful to the Secretary-General for what he said regarding Yemen. What Yemen is going through today is entirely to be expected. We must shine a clear light on the factors that brought Yemen to where it is today. The GCC affirms that the security of the GCC countries is an indivisible whole. It also completely rejects continued interventions by Iran in the internal affairs of GCC States, or any other States in the region. It stresses that an end must be put to support by Iran for terrorist and sectarian militias, which is the primary factor in igniting and prolonging conflicts. The GCC also stresses that it categorically rejects efforts to impose hegemony on Gulf States and their peoples. With regard to the threat of nuclear proliferation in the Gulf region, the GCC stresses the need for a comprehensive international agreement to make sure that Iran is prevented from obtaining nuclear weapons of any kind. It calls on Iran to fulfil all its commitments to the International Atomic Energy Agency and cooperate fully with the Agency's inspectors. The Gulf Cooperation Council also emphasizes the right of all States in the region to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. It calls for compliance with all precautionary measures to ensure the safety of nuclear facilities. The continued occupation by Iran of the three islands Greater Tunb, Lesser Tunb and Abu Musa, which belong to the United Arab Emirates, threatens the security and stability of the Gulf. The GCC has called on Iran to respond to the efforts of the United Arab Emirates to resolve the issue through direct negotiations or recourse to the International Court of Justice. Unfortunately, Iran has not responded to those efforts and continues to occupy those islands. Achieving, reinforcing and maintaining the security we seek in the Gulf region requires full adherence to the basic principles on which the Organization was founded, as outlined in the Charter of the United Nations and affirmed by Security Council and General Assembly resolutions. That would restore trust among all the countries of the region. There must also be an end to the use of force, violence and destabilization as a means of resolving disputes. To that end, the GCC has on more than one occasion proposed to Iran clear and unhesitating compliance with the principles of good neighbourliness, respect for the national sovereignty of States, non-interference in their internal affairs and respect for their political systems, territorial integrity and national unity, along with the renunciation of violence, terrorism and sectarianism These principles are drawn from the Charter of the United Nations and Security Council resolutions. The ball is now in Iran's court. It must demonstrate its desire to achieve peace and stability in the region by actions rather than words, through concrete and convincing measures to build trust with its neighbours with a view to realizing security and stability for the region and its peoples, and in support of global stability. The GCC, the Gulf region and the world recently bid farewell to His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, the departed Amir of Kuwait. He was present at the inception and helped to create the region. He worked for peace, believed in dialogue and was quick to try to reconcile differing viewpoints and resolve disputes. He believed in a better tomorrow for the region and its peoples. Working to reinforce those ideas and translate them into reality under the aegis of the United Nations and the Security Council is perhaps the best tribute we can offer to the departed Amir and his message of security, peace, dialogue, development and cooperation. That is what we call for today, and that is what we will continue to pursue.
