Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and the Japanese
delegation for the effective presidency this month and
welcoming the adoption of resolution 2303 (2016),
which is an important prevention resolution. We would
like to express our gratitude to the French delegation
for its hard work on the draft and for taking on board a
number of suggestions, including ours.

Our delegation, recognizing the continued
violations of human rights and the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in Burundi, strongly supports
the deployment of a United Nations police component in
the country. In our opinion, sending 228 police officers
is the bare minimum for the moment. We strongly
condemn the extra-judicial executions and torture
perpetrated by the Burundian security forces from the
onset of the crisis. Unfortunately, the latest report from
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights documents an increase in the number
of cases of forced disappearances and acts of torture in
the country. All of this happened after our own visit to
Burundi.

In this regard, we urge the Burundian authorities
to return to respecting, protecting and guaranteeing
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all and to
bring to justice all responsible for such crimes.

Since only 32 human rights observers and 15
military experts out of the 200 previously agreed on
were deployed from the African Union in Burundi, we
call upon the Government of Burundi to ensure the full
implementation of the resolution without delay and to
reconsider its position regarding the deployment of the
police component.

We consider sanctions to be an effective enforcement
tool and fully support the Council's intention to pursue
targeted measures against all actors that threaten peace
and security in Burundi.

At the same time, Ukraine is convinced that the
peaceful resolution of the Burundian crisis will be
possible only through an inclusive political dialogue.
We would like also to emphasize the need to strengthen
coordination between all relevant international and
regional stakeholders so as to find solutions to stabilize
the situation in Burundi.

