Mr. Larrain (Chile)(interpretati0n from Spanish):
Just six months ago, in April, the Security Council held
a formal meeting in which many delegations participated
in an orientation debate over the grave crisis in
Afghanistan.

At that time the international community expressed
its serious concern at the continuation of the Afghan
conflict and evidenced a real desire to give new impetus
to negotiations and to help factions overcome their
internal differences so that they could resume their
progress towards reconstruction as soon as possible.

In conjunction with that, the Secretary-General took
important steps aimed at strengthening and rationalizing
the United Nations political presence in Afghanistan. The
new head of the Special Mission to Afghanistan, Mr.
Norbert H011, to whom my delegation wishes to express
its appreciation and reiterate its full support, has made
enormous efforts in recent months to bring about a
cessation of hostilities and a negotiated transfer of power
in Kabul through the establishment of a fully
representative and broad-based council of State.

My delegation strongly believes that the parties
involved cannot continue indefinitely to ignore the
international community's appeal to halt the armed
conflict, set aside their differences and undertake to join
in a broad political negotiating process.

 

My delegation believes that the measures adopted by
the General Assembly in February of this year could lead
to an immediate start of national reconciliation and the
resurgence of Afghanistan. The establishment of a broad-
based transitional Government acceptable to all Afghans is
a necessary first step to establishing the bases for peace and
national reconstruction.

The dynamic events of the past few weeks should
encourage us to devise a clear means of reaching the first
stages of reconciliation and agreement among all the
Afghan factions. Their leaders must realize that victory by
force of arms is illusory and can lead only to continued
suffering for the entire population, which, already weakened
by war, truly desires reconciliation and peace.

Along with the appeal to the leaders of the factions to
support political negotiations over armed conflict, we must
also urge that, without further delay, an end he put to
foreign intervention in the Afghan conflict. The people of
Afghanistan have suffered enormous losses because of that
phenomenon. Full respect for Afghanistan's sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity, as well as the right of
the people to determine their own future, cannot continue
to be mere rhetorical figures. The international community,
including neighbouring States and others of the region,
must contribute to ensuring respect for this principle, which
is enshrined in the United Nations Charter.

Illicit arms trafficking and the flow of arms to parties
to the conflict, for whatever motive, provide support to
those who advocate the military solution to the conflict over
negotiated agreements. We believe that it is time to put an
end to such trafficking and that the United Nations should
encourage a process of disarmament for all the factions,
using the positive experience acquired in other regions in
this regard.
Consideration of a possible arms embargo, an initiative
already proposed in the Security Council, is one possibility
my delegation believes deserving of thorough consideration,
and we would support it. Linked to the problem of
armaments is the serious scourge of drug trafficking, which
we believe must also be dealt with decisively, since it
clearly poses a threat to any effort to bring about the
country's social and economic reconstruction.

We appeal to the international community to lend its
support and generous assistance to the stage of
reconstruction, which, we hope, will begin very soon.
However, we must bear in mind that it is Afghan people
themselves who must do everything in their power to bind

 

the wounds of war and re-establish their institutions,
rebuild the social fabric and reconstruct a State that has
fallen apart after long years of war and suffering.

Another aspect of the conflict that is of serious
concern to my delegation are the recent violations of
international humanitarian law. No Afghan faction, on the
pretext of respecting cultural or religious tradition, can
trample on the human rights of the population or limit
basic freedoms.

We therefore call for a repeal of the excessive
measures that have been taken against the people by the
Taliban leaders about which the press has written to
extensively this week. These are particularly
discriminatory against women, and they are not only a
serious violation of international humanitarian law but
also create greater hardships for Afghan families and slow
down the economic recovery so vital today.

Lastly, we would like to express our pleasure at
seeing the neighbouring countries of Central Asia
participating in the debate today. We believe that they
have a great deal to contribute in the form of needed
regional cooperation to help restore peace and stability in
Afghanistan.

We cannot allow fear, insecurity and tragedy to
continue to threaten the stability of this strategic region,
which, as this century draws to a close and a new
millennium dawns, should have a better future.

