Mr. Giorgio (Eritrea): I would like to thank you,
Sir, for giving my delegation this opportunity to address
the Security Council. Allow me to also congratulate
Senegal on assuming the presidency of the Council for
the month of November.

Eritrea believes that, once again, the Security
Council has committed a grave injustice against the
people of Eritrea by extending the unjustified sanctions.
There is no reason to maintain sanctions against Eritrea,
as the justification for them being imposed has long
been proved non-existent, a fact that has been asserted
by the Somalia/Eritrea Monitoring Group. In four of
its reports, including during its present mandate, the
Monitoring Group affirmed that there is no evidence of
Eritrean support to Al-Shabaab in Somalia.

With regard to Djibouti, Eritrea remains committed
to the mediation by the State of Qatar, which resulted
in the release of all Djiboutian prisoners of war last
March. The report (see S/2016/920) of the Monitoring
Group makes it clear that all its interlocutors mention
only seven prisoners of war in Eritrea, who are all
accounted for. For its part, Eritrea has confirmed that
there are no more Djiboutian prisoners on its hands. In
the light of the reports of the Monitoring Group and
serious developments in the region, it is incumbent
upon the Security Council to lift the unfair, unjust
and counterproductive sanctions on Eritrea without
further delay.

Eritrea is keenly aware that, failing to find any
substantive argument to continue the sanctions, some
members of the Council have resorted to procedural
matters, such as, in particular, the inability of the
Monitoring Group to visit Eritrea. Truth be told, that is
not the real reason for their determination to keep the
sanctions in place. In fact, some of them have made it
clear that even if the Group were to visit Eritrea, they
would still not support the lifting of the sanctions.

The sanctions, which have been in place for the
past seven years, have been detrimental not only to
Eritrea but also to the Horn of Africa region. It has
encouraged zero-sum approaches and imparted a sense
of impunity to some countries and emboldened them to
violate international law as well as to externalize their
problems instead of cooperating with their neighbours
to address the serious challenges of regional peace
and security. Unfortunately, once again, the Security
Council has missed an opportunity to contribute
positively to regional peace, stability and amity, by
maintaining the sanctions on Eritrea. For its part,
Eritrea will continue making its positive contribution
to regional peace, stability and security in the Horn of
Africa and the Red Sea regions.

In conclusion, Eritrea wishes to sincerely thank
those delegations that advocated for the immediate
lifting of the sanctions and those who have dissociated
themselves from today's unfair and unwarranted
resolution 2017 (2016).

