Mr. Kogda (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and your country on assuming the presidency of the
Council for this month, and to thank you for holding
this public debate on the situation in Mali.

My delegation associates itself with the statements
made by the observer of the African Union Commission
and the representative of the Chairman of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS).

The crisis that has struck Mali in recent months
unfortunately took a dramatic turn a few weeks ago
with an outbreak of attacks by armed groups seeking
to conquer the southern part of the territory, in spite
of warnings by the international community and a call
for dialogue for a peaceful settlement of the crisis.
The ECOWAS mediator for Mali, President Blaise
Compaore of Burkina Faso, deplored the violation of
the commitments made by the Malian parties as a result
of their meeting on 4 December 2012 in Ouagadougou,
and condemned the resumption of hostilities. The armed
group Ansar Dine, in deciding to join terrorist and
extremist forces in attacking Malian units in Konna,
has seriously violated the declaration of cessation
of hostilities and repudiated its public rejection of
terrorism, thereby compromising the possibility of a
negotiated exit to the crisis.

There is no need to dwell on the tireless efforts of
the countries of the region and ECOWAS to broker a
dialogue between the Government of Mali and the rebel
movements in the north that had pledged to break all
ties with the terrorist groups. Throughout the process of
political dialogue, the ECOWAS mediator and associate
mediator, Mr. Goodluck Ebele Jonathan, President of
the Federal Republic of Nigeria, patiently and firmly
indicated to the different protagonists, including Ansar
Dine and the Mouvement national pour la liberation
de l'Azawad (MNLA), the benefits conducting frank
negotiations on the basis of objective grievances, which
would preserve the unity and territorial integrity of
Mali and obviate the use of force.

Unfortunately, the unilateral breakdown of the
dialogue and the rejection of the commitments by
some protagonists, particularly Ansar Dine, has left
ECOWAS and the international community with no
choice but to use force against the extremist groups,
which have revealed the limits of their good faith.

My delegation takes this opportunity to thank
France for its diligent response to Mali's requests to
contain the advance of terrorist groups. Burkina Faso
welcomes the courageous decision of French President
Francois Hollande to provide prompt and critical support
for the restoration of peace and stability in Mali and
therefore throughout the entire region. Burkina Faso
calls on the international community to immediately
implement resolution 2085 (2012) authorizing the
deployment of the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali by supporting France's action on the
ground, particularly by providing military logistics and
the speedy establishment of the trust fund.

With respect to Burkina Faso, the announced
deployment ofa battalion of 500 men to Mali, alongside
the ECOWAS troops, is being implemented. Moreover,
a force of 1,000 men has been deployed along the border

with Mali to stave off infiltrations by fleeing terrorist
groups.

In conclusion, Burkina Faso will spare no effort
in supporting the struggle against terrorism in all its
forms and in restoring the territorial integrity of Mali.
Burkina Faso affirms its readiness, once the situation
has been stabilized, to work to promote a dialogue and
the effective conduct of the political process in order
to reach national reconciliation and to establish lasting
peace in Mali.

