Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of this meeting, and to
Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock for their comprehensive
briefings, in which they described to us a situation that
requires the special attention of the Security Council.
We would like to acknowledges the valuable efforts that
they and their teams are making to end the devastating
conflict in Yemen and alleviate human suffering.

Implementing the important and concrete
agreements reached in Sweden will clearly be very
complex, considering that the acute distrust between the
parties is the major stumbling block to that end. In that
regard, we are encouraged by the recent developments
in the Redeployment Coordination Committee under
the able leadership of General Lollesgaard, aimed
at redeploying the military presences in the ports of
Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Issa, We welcome the
willingness and commitment shown by the Yemeni
parties with regard to that critical aspect of the political
process launched by the United Nations and which, if
implemented, will lay the foundations for effectively
extending the ceasefire to other problem areas of
Yemen. We look forward to further and sustained
progress with regard to that issue, particularly as it
pertains to the second phase of the agreement, on which
there are already preliminary understandings.

We also urge the Houthi authorities to provide
the facilities needed for deploying the United Nations
Mission in support of the Hudaydah Agreement,
including, among other things, the speedy issuance of
visas for its personnel and guarantees for their security.
In that regard, it is essential that the Yemeni parties
continue to develop confidence-building measures,
particularly for the exchange of prisoners, with the
valuable assistance of the International Committee of
the Red Cross. We also encourage them to abandon the
notion of a military response and to work to address
all differences through diplomatic dialogue. The
confrontational rhetoric and mutual accusations of
each side's authorities and other actors involved in the
conflict must cease.

The emphasis on developing the political process in
Yemen should not overshadow the urgent need to deal
immediately and simultaneously with the country's
humanitarian crisis, especially since it appears to be
worsening on the ground. Mr. Lowcock's statistics on
the numbers of people suffering from food insecurity
and famine are alarming. The population's extreme
vulnerability, which has been exacerbated by the
collapse of the country's public services and economy,
has resulted in greater losses of life than the military
campaigns, and helps to lay the groundwork for violent
extremism, which in turn leads to terrorism. In such
tragic circumstances, we fully support the humanitarian
work of the United Nations and other agencies in Yemen
and emphasize the moral and legal duty of all parties to
allow them full access to the people in need.
The Yemeni parties must ensure the unrestricted
flow of commercial goods, especially food, medicine
and fuel, which among other things requires the full
opening of the ports of Aden, Al-Hudaydah and Saleef.
Priority must be given to the situation of women
and children, owing to their greater vulnerability to
psychological, physical and sexual violence, which is a
particular problem in the camps for internally displaced
persons. It is also vital to ensure that the international
community increases its contributions aimed at
stabilizing the local economy, since factors such as the
devaluation of the currency, inflation and the failure to
pay Civil servants are significantly increasing the risk
of famine. The Geneva pledging conference is an ideal
venue for that purpose.

Lastly, we must also underscore that it is important
to ensure that the Council remains united in fulfilling
its responsibility to protect Yemen's civilian population,
while demanding that the parties strictly abide by their
obligations under international humanitarian law for
the protection of civilians, and that they commit in
good faith and without preconditions to the inclusive
political solution that Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General Martin Griffiths has proposed, which is the
only viable way we can end the conflict and achieve
reconciliation for the people of Yemen.

