Ms. King (Ausralia): Ithank the Secretary-General
for his briefing this morning.

The major escalation in hostilities between Israel
and militant groups in Gaza in recent days is of course
deeply troubling and reminds us of the urgency of all
the efforts that are currenty directed towards stopping
the violence.

We are seriously concerned about the growing
number of casualties on both sides, including many
Palestinian civilians, a significant number of Israeli
soldiers and several Israeli civilians. Everything
possible should be done to prevent civilian casualties
and to limit the suffering of innocent people, including
those displaced by the fighting. All sides must respect
international humanitarian law.

We strongly condemn Hamas and other militants'
continued rocket attacks on Israel, with the total number
of such rocket launches now numbering over 1,850.
The decision of Hamas to reject the Egyptian-brokered
ceasefire proposals, and its use of civilian facilities
such as United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
schools to launch attacks on Israel, are inexcusable. We
recognize the increased burden on UNRWA as a result
of the current crisis.

We support Israel's right to defend itself in the face
of such attacks. No country can be expected to stand by
and tolerate such sustained attacks directed at civilian
areas. In doing so, Israel needs to take all the necessary
steps to prevent civilian casualties.

Australia strongly supports efforts to secure an
immediate ceasefire. We endorse and welcom the
personal efforts of the Secretary-General in travelling
to the region and seeking an end to the violence. We
also welcome the efforts of United States Secretary of
State Kerry in seeking to broker a ceasefire, as well
as the efforts of French Foreign Minister Fabius and
others. The sustained high-level engagement reflects
the international community's deep distress at the
violence, its absolute determination to assist in ending
it and to build the conditions for a sustainable peace.
Hamas must engage with those international efforts
to resolve the crisis. Once a ceasefire is achieved, the
international community needs to find a way to help
the Israelis and the Palestinians return to negotiations
on the two-State solution. The absence of a political
dialogue runs the serious risk of further deterioration
in security conditions in future.

Australia welcomes the Council's adoption last
week of resolution 2165 (2014), on the worsening
humanitarian crisis in Syria. That outcome reflects the
extent of the Council's determination to alleviate the
human suffering in Syria despite the political obstacles
that have hampered the Council's ability to act decisively
to prevent the crisis. By making it clear that United
Nations agencies and their partners are authorized
to deliver humanitarian assistance across the four
nominated border crossings, and across conflict lines,
we hope the estimated additional 2.9 million people can
be reached with life-saving assistance. We commend
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the United Nations system for their quick action
in operationalizing resolution 2165 (2014), in difficult
circumstances. All parties are obliged to respect and
protect the safety and security of humanitarian workers
in accordance with the resolution.

That resolution was necessary, however, only
because of the immeasurable failure of the parties
to the Syrian conflict - and the Assad regime in
particular - to adhere to the decisions of the Council,
to uphold their obligations under international
humanitarian law and to protect the lives of Syrian
civilians. The continued violations of human rights
by regime forces and terrorist groups like the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), are abhorrent. The
international community's determination to see this
turned around was expressed in resolution 2165 (2014).
There can be no excuses for continued non-compliance.

This month the last of Syria's declared precursor
chemicals were removed for destruction. We applaud
the efforts of the United Nations-Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) monitoring
mission and those States that have contributed to that
outcome. We urge the Syrian regime to complete its
declaration and finalize plans for the destruction of its
chemical facilities with the OPCW.

A political solution to the crisis is urgently needed.
The presidential elections in June, from which many
Syrians citizens were excluded, lacked credibility and,
as former Joint Special Representative Brahimi told us,
have taken us further away from a political solution
to the crisis. That is a significant challenge that the
Secretary-General's new Special Envoy, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, will need to address. Australia welcomes
Mr. de Mistura's appointment, along with that of
Deputy Special Envoy Ramzy Ezzeldin Ramzy, and
looks forward to supporting their efforts to find a way
to end the violence in Syria. We urge States in the
region to offer them their full support, which will be
crucial to the success of any future political track.

It is deeply concerning that large parts of Syria and
Iraq are now ungoverned and controlled by a terrorist
organization, namely, the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant. That will continue to be a major security and
political challenge for the international community
as well as for the peoples of Syria and Iraq, who have
suffered appalling atrocities at the hands of those
terrorists. All United Nations States Members must
adhere to their obligations under resolution 1267 (1999),
which established the Al-Qaida sanctions regime, and
must cut off funding and weapons to ISIL.

The displacement of close to 1 million Iraqis, in
addition to those fleeing from Syria as a result of the
conflict, represents a significant humanitarian crisis.
In order to respond effectively to those challenges, it
is important that a new Iraqi Government be formed
as soon as possible and that it adopt a unified, national
approach. Australia welcomes the nomination of a
Speaker of the Iraqi Council of Representatives, a
constructive first step towards that objective. The
United Nations is uniquely placed to provide assistance
to Iraq's political leaders as they work towards the
formation of an inclusive new national Government.
We strongly support the Secretary-General and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mladenov in
their efforts to assist Iraqis in addressing their current
security and political challenges and building a unified
and secure country.

