Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I extend a huge
thank you to our briefers Mr. Zenenga, Mr. Madeira
and the Assistant Secretary-General. It is very good to
have them, as those are the first briefings that we have
had since the mandate renewal of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) (see S/PV.8494).

I would like to start by saying that when we had
the last meeting, many of us noted that 2019 would be
a very important year for Somalia. I might even go as
far as to say that it could set the trend for Somalia's
development for years to come. I think an important
signifier of that is the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, and we hope that he can assume
his post soon. We also hope that, in turn, that becomes
an opportunity to reset the United Nations-Somalia
relationship and to find a way forward on the Panel
of Experts.

The restoration of cooperation with the United
Nations and the international community is very
important. I know that the Somali Government has been
thinking about that as well, and that is very welcome.
The Assistant Secretary-General's last point shows
why that is so critical. Somalia needs the guidance and
technical capability of the United Nations to help it with
some of the detailed issues that the Assistant Secretary-
General mentioned. I would like to thank Mr. Zenenga
for standing in and holding the fort down in the
interregnum between the two Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General.

It is important that, on an occasion like this,
something be said about the bravery of AMISOM
in Somalia, as well as the great efforts made by the
African Union, which we appreciate. The United
Nations, Somalia and international partners there
need to work in tandem to deliver the transition plan.
Working in tandem, in cooperation and coherently
together is a Vital part of the prospects for success, and
we all want to get to a stage where Somalia leads on
providing security for its people. The United Kingdom
therefore really welcomes efforts to build the impetus
in the AMISOM. mandate renewal that is currently
ongoing. But I wouldjust stress that, in my experience,
those things work best when troop numbers are aligned
to the tasks that the troops must do, and not the other
way around.

As I said, 2019 is important. In fact, the next 12
months are probably going to be critical to making
progress on political, economic and security reforms
ahead of the elections in 2020-2021. We all know that
political agreements between the Federal Government
and the federal member states are going to be at the
heart of Somalia's stability and prosperity. In order
to bring that about, it is very important that there be
regular and constructive dialogue between the Federal
Government and the federal member states, particularly
on the constitutional review, the electoral law, the
implementation of the security pact and the delivery of
the transition plan.

I was interested to see the prospects for the Somalia
Partnership Forum, which will meet this summer. I
believe that the Council would find it useful to have
regular meetings and briefings so that we can help
chart progress. It is important that we think about
how we can support all sides being able to fulfil the
agreed partnership principles in the Forum. It would be
very good to have a sense of where the United Nations
sees the key priorities there and how they relate to the
national development plan.

I would like to say a few words on the humanitarian
situation. We wanted to have a humanitarian briefing
because of the deterioration resulting from the drought.
In some ways, the early warning indicators we see are
worse than those we witnessed two years ago. We are
about to announce additional support; we hope that
others might be able to do likewise.

We all know that there is a real opportunity here
to help Somalia get back on track, but it has many
components, one of which is cooperation with the
United Nations. Obviously, the transition plan is
important - in fact, critical. Anything AMISOM. can
do to support transition priorities is also very critical.

