Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Allow me at
the outset to express our appreciation to you, Sir, and
your delegation for organizing today's meeting.

We also offer our thanks to the Secretary-
General; the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Mr. Antonio Guterres; the Director-General
of the World Health Organization, Ms. Margaret Chan;
and the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov. I also
note with appreciation the presence of Ministers from
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil and Colombia.

The United Nations was established in the
aftermath of the chaos created by the two world wars,
with the avowed aim of saving "succeeding generations
from the scourge of war". In 1945, the international
community decided to entrust the Security Council
with the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

The United Nations Charter itself prescribed the
trigger mechanism for collective action by the Security
Council. The departure point for such action is
contained in Article 39, which states that the Council
"shall determine the existence of any threat to the
peace, breach of the peace, or act of aggression". In
other words, the fundamental preoccupation of the
Security Council was the management of war and
peace essentially within the paradigm of inter-State
relations.

The United Nations Charter was signed 66 years
ago. Like all living documents, the Charter provides
circumscribing limits, but encourages Member States
to undertake sufficient innovations to deal with
emerging situations. The evolution of the United
Nations peacekeeping agenda and its transformation
over the years in response to the changing international
environment are testimony to the Organization's
versatility.

Peacekeeping has fleshed out the essence of
multilateralism by pooling the resources of the many
for the benefit of the whole. The fact that, in time,
United Nations peacekeepers found their mandates
expanding to include protection agendas in intra-State

conflicts only speaks volumes of their utility and
resilience. While such roles are critically important,
they do not and cannot detract from the fact that the
essential function of the Council is to address matters
of imminent threat to international peace and security.

Mr. President, your delegation has circulated a
concept note in preparation of this meeting
(S/2011/698, annex). The note lists several areas of
possible threats to the maintenance of international
peace and security. One of the areas mentioned is
climate change and the possible impacts of migration
on peace and security. The United Nations has a
Framework Convention with a toolbox of ways and
means of addressing climate change, none of which is
available to the Security Council. In fact, the real
requirement for addressing climate change is rooted in
the need for collaboration and not through the
imposition of punitive measures. That, in and of itself,
makes it imperative that discussions on climate change
be carried out where the necessary wherewithal rests.
In fact, major negotiations have been under way for
several years under the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, and we should not
seek to either duplicate or in any way detract from
them. Another area mentioned is that of global
pandemics. Those, too, like climate change, demand
collaborative approaches and not finger-pointing or
punitive action.

The sad reality, however, is that we, as the
international community, have shown little appetite for
collaboration and sharing. Instead, not only are we
unwilling to share the benefits of technological
developments, such as drugs at affordable prices, but
we have also seen hindrances being placed on
developing countries sharing their own know-how and
products among themselves.

It is imperative that the Council remain strong in
its fight against terrorism. Transnational organized
crime and its veritable nexus with drug, human and
arms trafficking are well established. Their strong
operational linkages with terrorists groups have
become symbiotic in nature. Terrorist financing, illicit
money-laundering and illegal arms sales remain
intertwined in a complex web of toxic relationships.
Further, the risk of weapons of mass destruction falling
into the hands of terrorists presents a grave security
challenge to the international community. Another area
in which we need to be extremely careful involves the
possibilities that emanate from the misuse of
cyberspace and related technologies by terrorists and
their supporters.

In recent months, we have seen concerted
attempts to enlarge the scope of work and
responsibility of the Security Council. We do not
favour this discordant trend, as a matter both of
propriety and of pragmatism. The United Nations
Charter gives clear responsibility to the Security
Council on matters of international peace and security,
but makes it amply clear that issues of social and
economic significance are to be dealt by the General
Assembly. An unequivocal distinction between these
two sets of functions has so far helped in the smooth
functioning of the United Nations system. Any
digression from the Charter rules is likely to create
dysfunction. From the functional point of view as well,
burdening the Council with an increasing number of
global challenges, premised on their perceived
interconnectedness with threat to peace and security, is
self-defeating. It also distracts the Council from its
core mandate and from attending to matters that are its
primary responsibility.

More than three-fourths of the agenda of the
Security Council - actually more than four-fifths - is
dominated by African issues. In Africa, we now see the
African Union (AU) evolving into a mature
organization whose leadership is willing to take on
increased responsibility for managing Africa's affairs.
In addition, there are also regional groupings in Africa.
The challenge before us is to learn to work in real
collaboration with the AU and the regional
organizations in Africa in the furtherance of peace and
security on the continent. This real collaboration
requires us to listen to our colleagues from Africa, to
dialogue with them and to be there to assist them, as
per their requirement, in resolving conflicts, and not
just when it is convenient or fashionable. It also does
not mean imposing our world view on them.

In this connection, it is worth noting that piracy
off the coast of Somalia is a major new threat to
international peace and security. The Council must
encourage an enhanced degree of international
cooperation to counter this threat and seriously act on
the recommendations of the African Union in this
regard.

Today, we live in an intensely interconnected
world defined by profound changes in science and
revolutions in communications, information

technologies, warfare techniques and globalization. In
our View, the most important challenge to international
peace and security and conflict prevention is that our
platform for global governance in this area, namely the
Security Council, is no longer reflective of
contemporary reality. A composition rooted in 1945
detracts from its abilities to fully harness the
capabilities of United Nations Member States as of
today and leads to its continued application of methods
of coercion from an era gone by, rather than looking
for newer approaches involving collaborative action.

