Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and the
important information provided by Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo. We particularly welcome the presence of the
high-ranking officials who are with us this morning.

It is important that the Security Council discuss the
situation in Venezuela, in accordance with Article 34
of the Charter of the United Nations, which authorizes
it to address any situation that is likely to endanger the
maintenance of international peace and security, as
well as our commitment to the preventive diplomacy
efforts that the Council must undertake.

Peru notes with alarm that the rupture of
constitutional order in Venezuela has given way to a
serious political, economic and humanitarian crisis,
which represents a threat to regional peace and security.
The policy of repression instituted by the illegitimate
regime of Nicolas Maduro Moros against his own people
fuels the prospects of renewed escalations of violence,
the consequences of which the Council must prevent
and address, in line with its great responsibilities.

Reality for the Venezuelan people, which some
countries seek to qualify as an internal matter, is
reflected in a massive and historic exodus of around
3.3 million people resulting from the anti-democratic,
oppressive and dictatorial acts and policies of the
Maduro regime. Conservative projections point to an
increase of 2 million in this figure in the short term in
the light of the escalation of violence and the ongoing
humanitarian crisis in the country. We note that the
pace and complexity of that phenomenon are creating
a situation of crisis and regional tension, which some
countries must urgently address in order to meet the
most basic needs of the diaspora. Peru alone has to
date received some 700,000 Venezuelan refugees and
migrants, whom we have welcomed and supported.
The humanitarian crisis and political repression in
Venezuela are not recent. The General Secretariat of the
Organization of American States, the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
have determined that there is evidence pointing to the
systematic and strategic use of murder, incarceration,
torture, rape and other forms of sexual violence in
order to terrorize the Venezuelan people and crush the
opposition to the regime. Before the commission of
those serious crimes, in September Peru, together with
Argentina, Canada, Chile, Colombia and Paraguay,
under Article 14 of the Rome Statute, asked the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court to initiate
an investigation into the crimes against humanity
committed by the Maduro regime in Venezuela since
12 February 2014.

The political and security crisis has continued to
deteriorate since the illegitimate inauguration of Nicolas
Maduro, which was based on an electoral process that
did not meet international minimum standards in terms
of participation, justice, transparency and international
observation to be considered democratic, free, fair and
credible. For that reason, the Lima Group, a mechanism
made up of States in the region whose objective is to
seek a peaceful solution to the situation in Venezuela,
did not recognize the legitimacy of the 20 May 2018
electoral process.

The illegitimacy of the regime is also the result of
a continuous process of the dismantling of democracy
and fundamental freedoms, accompanied by the
regime's systematic and proven lack of commitment to
the promotion of peaceful solutions through dialogue
with the opposition. We must condemn the fact that the
response of the dictatorial regime of Nicolas Maduro
to the demonstrations of the Venezuelan people in this
crisis has been the disproportionate use of violence,
political persecution and repression. We therefore
reiterate our call for an immediate end to the violence
and for the release of all political prisoners in Venezuela.

In that regard, the High Commissioner for Human
Rights stated that there 180 popular demonstrations
were held this week, leading to the loss of human lives
and large-scale arrests by security forces and pro-
Government armed groups. We demand an independent
investigation to bring those responsible to justice. In
that regard, we highlight the resolution adopted by the
Permanent Council of the Organization of American
States, dated 10 January, in which it resolved not to
recognize the new regime of Nicolas Maduro and in
which its member States are urged to adopt measures
that contribute to the prompt restoration of the
democratic order. That regional position coincides with
the declaration issued on 4 January by the Lima Group,
in which Nicolas Maduro was urged to provisionally
transfer the executive power to the National Assembly
until new elections could be held in Venezuela.

Peru, as well as other countries of Latin America
and other regions, has recognized the President of the
National Assembly, Juan Guaido, as interim President
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in strict
adherence to the provisions of the Constitution of
that country. Likewise, we affirm the constitutional
authority of the National Assembly of Venezuela,
the sole democratically elected body, and strongly
support the actions it has undertaken, including the
authorization of international humanitarian aid.

Peru is of the view that a democratic transition
process must be initiated immediately under the
leadership of President Guaido. That is the only way
for Venezuela to overcome this severe crisis. That
requires the holding of new, credible and transparent
democratic elections that are protected by the rule
of law, that respect the constitutional guarantees and
fundamental rights of all Venezuelans, and that allow
for unrestricted participation, under observation and
consistent with international standards.

Finally, I reaffirm our commitment to and
solidarity with the brotherly Venezuelan people and
reiterate our willingness to contribute to the restoration
of democracy in that country.

