The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Burundi, Rwanda and Zaire, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bakuramutsa
(Rwanda) took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Nsanze
(Burundi) and Mr. Lukabu Khabouji N'zaji (Zaire)
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them a letter
dated 13 March 1996 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council, transmitting the
final report of the International Commission of Inquiry
established under resolution 1013 (1995), document
S/ 1996/ 195. Members of the Council also have before them
document 5/1996/298, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents: S/1996/202,
letter dated 14 March 1996 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council;
S/ 1996/222, letter dated 27 March 1996 from the Permanent
Representative of Rwanda to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council; and S/ 1996/241,
letter dated 3 April 1996 from the Charge d'affaires ad
interim of the Permanent Mission of Zaire to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

The first speaker is the representative of Rwanda, on
whom I now call.


