Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): Let me thank
the Chairs of the Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001),
and 1540 (2004), Ambassadors Wittig, Puri and Sangqu,
for their comprehensive briefings today and for their
effective leadership of those Committees.

Let me start with the Al-Qaida sanctions regime. I
would like to focus on two issues here: on the role of
the Ombudsperson and on the importance of robustly
implementing the sanctions.

The United Kingdom strongly supports the Office
of the Ombudsperson. Ensuring that the Ombudsperson
has access to all possible sources of information,
including classified information, is crucial to the
process. The United Kingdom is among those States
that have concluded an arrangement with the
Ombudsperson through which to share confidential
information relevant to de-listing requests. Such
agreements reinforce our collective endeavour to
ensure that the sanctions remain effective, responsive
and fair. We encourage all Member States to enter into
their own agreements with the Ombudsperson.

We must not be complacent about the global
terrorist threat posed by Al-Qaida. We encourage the
Sanctions Committee to continue its work to ensure
that sanctions are implemented robustly. We welcome
the effective work of the Monitoring Team to that end.

The Al-Qaida sanctions remain highly relevant.
They play a vital role in disrupting groups and
individuals, making it more difficult for them to
operate. The United Kingdom will continue to work
actively to ensure that the list of those designated best
represents the threat we face today.

The United Nations remains the cornerstone of
the international community's counter-terrorism efforts.
We know that terrorism can be defeated only when
Member States meet their obligations under the
relevant United Nations resolutions and cooperate fully
to contest the terrorists' narrative and to prevent their
activities. In that context, we condemn today's bomb
attacks in Damascus, which have claimed over 40 lives
and injured more than 300 people, most of them
civilians. As the British Foreign Secretary said today,
"[y]et again it is the people of Syria who are suffering
as a result of the repression and violence, which must
come to an end".

We commend the valuable work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
under the leadership of Mr. Mike Smith. CTED's work
with Member States to help build capacity to combat
terrorism remains essential. Greater coherence between
the various parts of the United Nations counter-
terrorism apparatus will further reinforce our efforts.
That will require CTED and Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF) and all relevant
United Nations agencies and offices to work together
in a cooperative and mutually supportive way. That is
why the United Kingdom supports the Secretary-
General's announcement that he will seek to appoint a
counter-terrorism coordinator. We look forward to
working with all Member States, through the Security
Council and the General Assembly, to make that a
reality.

In that context, we also welcome the initial
meetings following the creation of the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre, generously funded by the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The Centre can provide
much needed support to the CTITF's activities.

As we work together in combating terrorism, we
do not forget the particular challenges posed to our
collective security by proliferation. We encourage
States to provide updates as they make progress in
implementing resolution 1540 (2004). States should
recognize that action undertaken, for example, to
improve the security of information relevant to
weapons of mass destruction is relevant to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Making
such linkages will enable more effective reporting to
the Committee.

The United Kingdom encourages all States,
where appropriate, to engage with the international
nuclear security initiatives and conventions and, for
those that have yet to ratify the International Atomic
Energy Agency's amended Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material and the International
Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
Terrorism, to do so.

Finally, we hope that the composition of the 1540
expert group can be quickly resolved to ensure that the
Committee will continue to benefit from its valuable
support.
