The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Guinea.

The eyes of the international community are
today on the Security Council, whose fundamental
mission is the preservation of international peace and
security. It is in that context that for the past several
months the Security Council has continued to
undertake initiatives, with a view to disarming Iraq, the
most significant of which were the unanimous adoption
of resolution 1441 (2002); the holding of several
ministerial meetings; the convening of public debates
open to all Member States; and many private
consultations. My delegation deeply regrets that, in
spite of those efforts, the Council was not able to arrive
at a common position on this question.

In this regard, we take note of the work
programme just submitted by Mr. Blix and the
representative of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, setting out, inter
alia, the key remaining disarmament tasks for Iraq. We
thank them for that. We also note the decision of the
Secretary-General to withdraw inspectors from Iraq for
reasons of security. This new situation, of course,
makes the mission inoperative for the time being.

But must we conclude that there is no room for
hope? Guinea, for its part, ventures to believe in the
possibility of safeguarding peace and attaining our
common objective: the complete disarmament of Iraq.
My delegation believes that if armed conflict is
inevitable, it would be desirable for appropriate steps
to be taken to spare the civilian population and limit
the destruction of the economic and social
infrastructure. Similarly, humanitarian questions should
be of concern to us all. In this connection, my
delegation agrees in advance to any proposal to be
made by the Secretary-General on action to be
undertaken in order to cope with the humanitarian
needs of the Iraqi people.

My delegation understands the moral necessity of
considering, pursuant to international treaties and
disarmament programmes, the need to rid the world of
the uncontrolled use of weapons of mass destruction.
History provides sufficient evidence that such action
will preserve our collective security.

At this particularly difficult moment, my country
renews its determination to work together with other
members to continue dialogue, which is the only way
to restore the unity of our body. Such unity is the very
basis of the credibility of the Security Council. It is
more than ever necessary in order to enable it
effectively to carry out its mission of preserving
international peace and security.

I resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I call on the representative of Iraq.

