Mr. Lamani (Organization of the Islamic Conference) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would
like to express our sincere congratulations to you,
Mr. President, and through you to your country, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October. We are confident
that the work of the Council will be successfully
steered under your wise leadership. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his
statement this morning, and Ambassador Jeremy
Greenstock, the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), for his eloquent explanation of the
important achievements of the Committee he chairs.

Today, we believe that the convening of this open
meeting of the Council is a further step within the
framework of the tireless international efforts being
undertaken by the Council in combating the scourge of
terrorism.

The Organization of the Islamic Conference
(OIC) has constantly condemned terrorism on the basis
of the noble ethical and humanitarian principles that
are adhered to by its member States, and which stem
from its religious and cultural heritage, proscribing all
forms of injustice, aggression and intolerance, as well
as the organization's adherence to international
consensus and agreement on combating terrorism in all
its forms and eliminating its causes.

Based upon this - and after the Eighth Islamic
Summit Conference held in Tehran in 1997, which
reaffirmed Islam's condemnation of terrorism - the
OIC Convention on Combating International Terrorism
was drafted and later adopted at the twenty-sixth
session of the Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers,
held in Burkina Faso in 1999.

Successive OIC Ministerial Conferences have
reiterated their commitment to this Convention, in
particular those articles stressing the commitment to
refrain from initiating, participating in, financing or
instigating support for terrorist action in any form, and
to those other articles that require the member States
not to use their territories as a basis for masterminding
or organizing terrorist acts.
The Ministers for Foreign Affairs of member
States of the OIC held two extraordinary meetings. The
first was in Doha on 10 October 2001, in the aftermath
of the 11 September 2001 terrorist acts, and it stressed
that these acts run counter to the tolerant teachings of
Islam and called for the convening of an international
conference under the auspices of the United Nations to
formulate a plan of action to combat terrorism.

The second meeting was held in Kuala Lumpur in
April 2002. The Ministers stressed the urgent need to
reach an international consensus on a definition of
terrorism. They also decided to establish a l4-member
open-ended ministerial-level committee on
international terrorism. During the annual coordination
meeting in New York, held on 17 September 2002, the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the OIC member States
finalized the composition of this committee with the
following States: Malaysia, Qatar, Iran, the Sudan,
Saudi Arabia, Algeria, Pakistan, Syria, Egypt,
Morocco, Palestine, Djibouti, Tunisia and Indonesia.
The Government of Algeria has gracefully offered to
host the first meeting in February 2003.

Both the Security Council and the General
Assembly have adopted a number of important
resolutions calling for the elimination of terrorism and
for the establishment of serious rules for collective
international effort, under the auspices of the United
Nations, to take a unified stand against international
terrorism.

The spread of acts of terrorism all over the world
and the expansion of the phenomenon of extremism in
all mankind's beliefs confirms that the phenomenon of
terrorism is one and is not restricted to one people or
ethnic group or religion.

The international community stands on the pillars
of cultural, religious, scholarly and philosophical
diversity, and such diversity should not be allowed to
adversely affect the unity of this international
community. In this regard, perhaps the best example
would be a quotation from a statement delivered by
French President Mr. Jacques Chirac at UNESCO on
15 October 2001 on the role of cultures and the
different courses of their evolution:

(spoke in French)

"To be sure, cultures do not all develop at
the same pace. They reach their zenith, then
decline; they experience periods of influence and
expansion, as well as times of silence and
contraction. And yet, they all continue to live in
the present in our collective memory. They
fashion our identity and our raison d'etre. They
bring light and pleasure to our existence, the
marvels of poetry and the fine arts, they open the
door to knowledge and transcendence. They also
ponder the dark side of things, questioning
mysteries and riddles. Together, in equal shares,
they have brought light, progress and ethical
rigour to humanity."

(spoke in Arabic)

It is important to state that when we condemn
terrorism, we should, at the same time, also condemn
attempts to abolish the distinction between terrorism
and the legitimate struggle of peoples against colonial
domination or foreign occupation.

The determination of our member States in their
call for the convening of an international conference
under the auspices of the United Nations to define
terrorism and to differentiate between it and the right
of peoples to resist occupation, and to take all
necessary measures to completely eliminate
international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, stems from the fact that they suffered
during the nineteenth century and the beginning of the
twentieth century from foreign occupation and
achieved their independence and freedom after long
and bitter struggles for which they paid a high price.
Many areas of our world are still suffering from the
consequences of the preceding colonial era with regard
to the demarcation of their boundaries. Therefore, we
do not want any legitimate struggle to end occupation
to be labelled as terrorism.

In conclusion, it is imperative for all of us as
members of the international community to continue
our efforts against terrorism. We must refrain from
applying double standards in dealing with this grave
phenomenon. Our endeavours in this direction should
be undertaken along with the effort to continue our
support for dialogue among civilizations, in order to
shoulder our responsibility to stand against the
attempts to create distances by feeding the feelings of
hatred and abhorrence. We must all support the
foundations of coexistence - respect and cooperation
among all peoples - to achieve peace and
development.

