Mr. Ballard: On behalf of the Director-General,
I wish to thank you, Sir, for inviting the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to
address the Security Council today. We firmly believe
that the Chemical Weapons Convention and resolution
1540 (2004) are mutually reinforcing, and meetings
such as this provide valuable opportunities to engage
with each other and reflect on how to further deepen
our cooperation.

This year, the OPCW is commemorating its
twentieth anniversary. As we reflect on the challenges
that we have overcome and that we continue to face, we
are also using the opportunity provided by our twentieth
anniversary to look ahead, and what we can see is that our
environment is changing. The rising threat of non-State
actors, the pace of economic development and the
evolution of science and technology are all shaping the
future of the global disarmament and non-proliferation
regimes, including the Chemical Weapons Convention
and the OPCW. The use by non-State actors of chemical
weapons is no longer a threat but a chilling reality.

As an organization, we recognize that we must be
prepared to respond to these changes, to shift our focus
to preventing the re-emergence of chemical weapons,
and to adjust our resources and programmes when the
need arises. As an international community, we must
work even more closely together to confront our common
challenges. Preventing non-State actors from acquiring
dual-use materials, equipment and technologies is of
critical importance to the maintenance of the global
norm against chemical weapons, as it is to international
peace and security more broadly. To that end, the OPCW
is intensively engaged across a number of programme
areas that all spring from the singular objective of
completely uprooting both the incentive and the means
for producing or using chemical weapons.

As recently reconfirmed through resolution 2325
(2016), domestic implementation of international
counter-proliferation commitments is of critical
importance to the fight against terrorism using
weapons of mass destruction (WMDs). The Chemical
Weapons Convention also requires comprehensive
national implementation of its provisions, and the
OPCW dedicates considerable effort and resources to
assist our States parties in fulfilling these obligations.
As the Group of Experts of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) knows, this is not
an easy task, and it relates not only to ensuring that
legislation is drafted but also that it is implemented and
enforced. We also work with our States parties, through
our Open-Ended Working Group on Terrorism, to
coordinate the sharing of best practices when it comes
to national implementation, particularly in the light of
emerging threats to the Convention. Again, this ties
in with the encouragement to United Nations Member
States, as expressed in resolution 2325 (2016), to review
their implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in light
of new and evolving security risks.

One of the key areas of focus identified through
the recent review of resolution 1540 (2004) was
transboundary movements of dual-use materials and
technologies. The OPCW focuses considerable energy
in this area. A recent memorandum of understanding
between the OPCW and the World Customs Organization
is aimed at reinforcing our efforts and at enhancing the
security of the global supply chain. Similarly, our work
with the global chemical industry is more important
than ever. Collaboration and transparency in ensuring
that toxic chemicals do not fall into the wrong hands are
essential to preserving chemical security and ensuring
the use of chemical science towards peaceful ends.

The OPCW is also working to improve coordination
within the United Nations system on WMD-related
issues. We have an active partnership with the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force. Together with the International Atomic Energy
Agency, the OPCW co-chairs the working group on
preventing and responding to WMD terrorist attacks
with chemical or biological weapons. In January, the
OPCW hosted a table-top exercise with the participation
of 15 different organizations to test an inter-agency
mechanism to respond to a chemical terrorist attack.
That mechanism will enhance the interoperability of
the relevant organizations for an effective, coordinated
response. We believe that the newly established OCPW
Rapid Response and Assistance Mission will provide
an important capability to the mechanism.

The international community must continuously
work to respond to the challenge of WMD terrorism. In
that regard, the OPCW is committed to playing its part,
in close cooperation with the Security Council, through
its 1540 Committee, and with the range of stakeholders
that are so critical to our collective goals.

