Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): France
would like, in advance, to associate itself with the
statement to be made on behalf of the European Union
by the Permanent Representative of Spain.

Speaking as the representative of France, I would
like at the outset to express my warmest
congratulations and gratitude to Ambassador Sir
Jeremy Greenstock and all those who are working with
him in the British Mission, as well as to the Vice-
Chairmen who are assisting him, for the utterly
remarkable work accomplished by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee since it was set up. In setting up
the Committee, the Council endowed itself with an
essential instrument to play its full role in the fight
against terrorism. Success was not guaranteed in
advance: the task seemed so enormous and, at the
beginning, the Council appeared so poorly equipped for
facing up to its responsibilities. It is truly one man -
Sir Jeremy Greenstock - who, through his capacity
for hard work and his dynamism, as well as his concern
for transparency, has made all the difference. I believe
that we should pay a very warm tribute to him today.

France attaches the highest importance to the
Committee and its work, because we are convinced that
the international community will be able, progressively
and gradually, to eradicate the scourge of terrorism
only if it works in unison within the United Nations. In
that respect, I subscribe entirely to the judgement of
the representative of Singapore: the Council has
embarked on a long-term, marathon task, which will
involve convincing all the States within the
international community to equip themselves with a
legislative and administrative arsenal that can gradually
enable all of them to be effective in fighting this
scourge together.

Today, 143 States have submitted their national
reports. It could be said that that is a kind of record;
but it is also an opportunity to address a message of
encouragement to the 46 States that have not yet sent in
their reports. It is high time that they took part in that
collective endeavour so that the Committee can, in the
time that it has allocated, complete its an inventory.
The ongoing, exhaustive and unprecedented exercise of
making an inventory on which the Committee has
embarked is a kind of global audit of the state of the
world's capacity to fight against the scourge of
terrorism. The importance of this inventory - this
global audit - must be understood by all, and every
State must contribute to it.

I would also like to pay tribute to the Secretariat
and the independent experts for the role they are
playing. As Ambassador Greenstock told us, it is the
combined efforts of all, including the Secretariat and
the experts, that make it possible for the Committee to
continue its work without wavering.

The fact that some 60 evaluation letters have
already been sent to Governments through their
representatives is testimony to compliance with the
time frame that was established. If all goes well,
towards the end of the month of May that first stage
will have been successfully completed. In June the next
stage will begin: the examination of the second round
of reports, which are now being awaited.

Like the Ambassador of Singapore, I would like
to underline a second aspect of the work of the
Committee that we believe to be absolutely essential:
its dialogue with regional organizations. Ambassador
Greenstock was right to underscore the significance of
that work, because regional organizations are clearly
better placed than the United Nations to facilitate
assessment among peers - among neighbouring
countries - of the state of their legislation. I believe
that we must encourage such regional work so as to
ensure that, in addition to the work that we do here in
New York, a process is under way in various parts of
the world that contributes to the general mobilization
against terrorism. The Committee should also act as a
kind of umbrella under which all the technical
organizations concerned - and there are a great many
of them - can work together. I believe that they have
clearly understood Ambassador Greenstock's appeal to
them to avoid duplication. The Committee should
remain a central body. Its purpose is not to replace the
competent technical bodies, but to help to bring a
coherent approach to the counter-terrorism effort as a
whole.

Finally, I agree absolutely with the comment
made by Ambassador Francois Fall with regard to one
major area - that of technical and financial assistance.
The Committee has set up a directory with the purpose
of listing offers of technical or financial assistance
from both States and regional or technical
organizations. France will make its contribution by
sending a detailed letter so that our offer can be duly
recorded in the directory.

I also agree with Ambassador Fall's comments
about the need to ensure broad geographical
distribution in the provision of expertise. I would like
to underline the importance of appointing an
independent expert specifically to follow up technical
assistance, so that it can be deployed for the benefit of
the countries that need it. It seems to us that the time
has now come to strengthen that aspect of the work of
the Committee. We are moving from a world audit to
action on the ground, and the appointment of a
competent expert could certainly contribute to the
effectiveness of the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee in this new sphere of activity.

In conclusion, here we have a model Committee.
I think that this has to be emphasized, and once again
we warmly thank Ambassador Greenstock.

