Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): At
the outset, I would like to express my delegation's
appreciation to the Russian presidency for convening
this important event. I would also like to express
my gratitude to all the briefers and their respective
organizations.

The maintenance of international peace and
security is currently much more challenging than ever
before, and therefore requires a much more shared
and collective response at the national, regional and
international levels. That is why greater cooperation is
now needed between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations that seek to maintain
peace and security.

Regional organizations are better positioned to
grasp the essence of the issues at hand in a realistic
way and provide a better understanding of the facts
on the ground. In many cases, they are also equipped
with preventive mechanisms adapted to local realities
and needs. They can act to defuse tension in emerging
conflicts and seek peaceful political solutions.

To that end, the Security Council regularly holds
meetings with regional organizations such as the African
Union, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and the European Union (EU) to
discuss cooperation, but this is the first time that the
Council holds such a debate on cooperations with the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) and the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS). These are
relatively young emerging organizations and unions,
operating in vast regions, from Eastern Europe to the
Far East, with huge political influence in the world and
significant contributions to strengthening regional and
international security.

Counter-terrorism, drug trafficking, organized
crime, peacekeeping and peacebuilding are some of
the areas for potential interaction between the United
Nations and CSTO, SCO and CIS.

The General Assembly, through its biennial
resolutions, endorses cooperation between the United
Nations and the CSTO, under agenda item 126,
"Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and other organizations". CSTO's structure allows it to
actively contribute to international efforts by developing
its own regional peacekeeping capacities or by helping
national Governments with post-conflict development.

The Joint Declaration on Cooperation between the
Secretariats of the United Nations and SCO, signed in
2010, has laid the foundation for active cooperation

between the two organizations in various fields.
The threat of Da'esh and its offshoots continues to
be significant and widespread, turning parts of the
region, such as Afghanistan, into hotbeds for terrorists
and extremist groups, thus increasing the need for
increased cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations.

As an organization that the Islamic Republic of
Iran has already expressed interest in joining as a
full member, the SCO actively supports efforts by the
international community and the United Nations in
fields such as the prevention and resolution of conflicts,
the fight against terrorism - through SCO's regional
counter-terrorism structure - the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, countering transnational
crime and illegal drugs and providing international
information security, among others. It also supports
peace, development and stability in Afghanistan.

The CIS too has sought to facilitate cooperation
and interaction among its member States and to advise
them on security in the face of emerging challenges and
threats in the region.

The United Nations should continue its efforts
to foster coordination and interaction with such
organizations on the basis of Chapter VIII ofthe Charter
of the United Nations, and those organizations should
also try to harmonize their aims with the purposes and
principles of the Charter.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations such as the CSTO, the SCO and
the IS can enhance interlinked, mutually reinforcing
security and development. Achieving security,
development and stability in such a macro-region as
Eurasia will readily serve as the basis for economic
growth and nation-building in this important and
immense region.

We hope that the holding of this debate will
further improve and deepen the cooperation between
the United Nations and these organizations and help
develop collective, innovative approaches to peace,
development and stability in vulnerable parts of Eurasia
that can also be applied to other parts of the globe.

