The President: I will now make a statement in my

capacity as the representative of the United States.

I thank Special Representative Keating for his
briefing and his dedicated work over the past three
weeks to advance our shared goals in Somalia. I also
thank Ambassador Madeira for his remarks, and I want
to say a special thank-you to Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka for
being here today and for her work in improving the
lives of women.

Somalia finds itself at a defining moment. For
the first time in more than two decades, it has a real
opportunity to move towards protecting itself and
securing its own country. That opportunity has not
come without a price. The progress that we have seen
towards peace and stability over the past 10 years
is due in large part to the sacrifices of the countries
contributing troops to the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), as well as the contributions of
international partners and donors. The United States
honours and appreciates the sacrifices and investments
that those countries have made, and we pay special
tribute to the soldiers and family members of those who
have been killed or injured while operating in Somalia.

For Somalia to capitalize on the opportunity of
this moment, there must be progress in strengthening
AMISOM's performance and accountability. There
must be progress on the meaningful participation of
women. We call on all partners to make progress in
enforcing a zero-tolerance policy for sexual exploitation
and abuse and, most importantly, progress towards
transitioning responsibility for security to the Somali
security forces. That can happen only through a smart,
deliberate drawdown of AMISOM. forces to reflect the
conditions on the ground.

Progress on the political track is equally important
in the coming months. Like the Secretary-General,
the United States is concerned about tensions between
federal member states and the Federal Government
of Somalia. Such tensions threaten Somalia's hard-
won progress. What is needed instead is the spirit of
reconciliation. We call on Federal and state leadership
to engage constructively and work to de-escalate these
tensions. Furthermore, we need to see progress on the
constitutional review process to lay the groundwork for
universal elections in 2020 and 2021.

Something Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka said during her
recent visit to Somalia should guide us. She said that a
chance to improve a nation's Constitution is extremely
rare - a once-in-a-generation opportunity. This is in
fact a once-in-a-generation opportunity to improve and
lift up the lives of all Somalis. The country's leadership
and all parties in the region must seize this opportunity.
It is up to the Security Council to support that progress
with AMISOM, the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia and the Government of Somalia.

A secure, inclusive and corruption-free Somalia
is possible. Political and security challenges will
occur; that is a given. But if we remain unified in our
commitment to progress, I sincerely believe we will
ultimately see a prosperous Somalia where all citizens
can thrive in stability and freedom.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Somalia.

