Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
leg of the Security Council visit in Nairobi was jointly
chaired by Ambassador Sangqu and myself. We also
worked very cooperatively, but we both have
statements to make on this occasion. I will brief
colleagues on the meetings that the Council held with
the Transitional Federal Institutions, the
representatives of Galmudug, Puntland and
Somaliland, and members of Somali civil society.
Ambassador Sangqu will then brief on the meetings
that the Council had with African Union and
Intergovernmental Authority on Development
colleagues and with the Kenyan Government.

I would first like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Mahiga and the staff of the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia and the
United Nations Support Office for the African Union
Mission in Somalia, as well as the members of the
United Nations country team, for welcoming the
Council and supporting our visit. We are very
appreciative of the work that they are doing under
difficult circumstances.

On 25 May, the Security Council held discussions
with the Transitional Federal President, the Prime
Minister and the Speaker of Parliament on the political
transition in Somalia. The Security Council mission
urged the Transitional Federal Government and the
Transitional Federal Parliament to engage fully,
constructively and without further delay in the
consultative process facilitated by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mahiga,
including the forthcoming meeting to be held in
Mogadishu; to focus on implementing reforms to build
their legitimacy, representativeness and credibility; and
to deliver tangible results on the completion of core
transitional tasks.

The Security Council mission underlined that it
was vital that the progress made by the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and Somali national
security forces in consolidating security and stability in
Mogadishu were reinforced by progress on the political

transition. President Ahmed and Speaker Aden
expressed their views on the political transition, in
particular on the timing of elections - on which issue
they continued to differ. The Security Council mission
expressed grave concern about the impact that the
discord between the Transitional Federal Institutions
was having on the political process and the security
situation. It also underlined, in very clear and very
strong terms, that it expected the Government and
Parliament to reach agreement on the issue of elections
rapidly, and no later than the forthcoming consultative
meeting in Mogadishu.

Later that day, the Security Council met the
Presidents of Galmudug and Puntland and
representatives of Somaliland to discuss issues of
regional security. All highlighted the progress that their
Governments had made on security and development,
but stressed the threats that their people faced from
piracy and terrorism. They outlined the measures that
they had taken in response to those threats, including
the passing of an anti-piracy law in Puntland and the
conviction of 90 pirates in Somaliland. All called for
greater international assistance for their efforts in that
regard. The Security Council mission recognized the
need for the international community to support further
stabilization, peacebuilding and socio-economic
reconstruction in Somalia, in particular in areas of
relative stability, and stressed the need for a
comprehensive response to tackle piracy and its
underlying causes.

In its final meeting on 25 May, the Security
Council discussed a range of issues, including the
political transition and the security and humanitarian
situation in Somalia, with representatives of Somali
civil society. In setting out their priorities, the civil
society representatives highlighted the need for a new
constitution to be developed through an inclusive
process, for AMISOM. to receive greater international
support, for humanitarian assistance to be delivered
more effectively and for Somalia to receive more long-
term development assistance. Several speakers
stressed, however, that security was key, as the Somali
private sector could develop quickly in conditions of
greater security and political stability.

Ambassador Sangqu will now brief on the further
meetings that the Security Council held in Nairobi.

