Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): 1 start by vehemently
condemning the terrrorist attack in New York and
expressing solidarity with the United States.

As this is the first meeting of the month, I would
like to congratulate Italy on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and to pledge the
fullest support of my delegation. I also wish to express
our appreciation to France for its very successful
presidency last month, and in particular for the very
timely initiative to try to shine a light on the security
and other related challenges facing the member States
of the Group of Five for the Sahel.

We thank the Italian presidency for organizing
this important briefing on the issue of refugees, which
has become one of the most pressing challenges of our
time. We are very pleased to see the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, Filippo Grandi,
and we appreciate his briefing on the challenges and
the way forward regarding international protection
for refugees and other forcibly displaced persons. We
appreciate the work he has done since assuming the
heavy responsibility of leading that critical agency,
all the more so today when the challenge has become
so enormous.

Reports of the unprecedented levels of global
forced displacement, which have surpassed the
number of persons forcibly displaced as a result of the
Second World War, are indeed very alarming. Even
more worrying is that there is no encouraging trend,
neither with respect to the conditions causing such
displacement nor the response at the global level to
address the challenge.

The number of forcibly displaced persons in
Africa continues to increase, primarily due to conflict,
persecution and a lack ofdurable solutions. The Security
Council missions to the Lake Chad basin and the Sahel
region certainly helped to enhance our understanding
of the enormity of the challenge. In our subregion, with
nearly 1 million refugees and 1.5 million internally
displaced persons, Somalia has remained one of the
most protracted displacement situations in the world.

However, with the ongoing conflict in neighbouring
South Sudan, Ethiopia, as well as other neighbouring
countries, is receiving large numbers of South Sudanese
refugees. The recent surge in the number ofrefugees and
internally displaced persons has created unprecedented
challenges, and the burden on countries hosting
large numbers of refugees is constantly increasing,
something that is often overlooked. The great deficit
in burden-sharing must be recognized - I am more
or less repeating here what the High Commissioner
already stressed. I also agree with what he said about
the need for a speedy resolution of the political problem
in South Sudan.

The matter of burden-sharing and enhanced
cooperation in the search for international protection
and a durable solution - that is, local integration,
resettlement and voluntary repatriation and
reintegration for refugees - is more urgent than ever
before. Countries hosting large numbers of refugees,
such as mine, continue to open up their borders to
refugees and to provide international protection
through the provision of employment opportunities,
out-of-camp policies and self-reliance schemes. That
is also in line with the commitment that we made at
the United Nations Global Compact Leaders Summit in
2016. However, we continue to face serious challenges
in funding programmes that support refugees - for
instance, Ethiopia's refugee response plan for the year
2017 has a funding gap of 75 per cent, which will impact
the integrity of humanitarian assistance and has so far
resulted in food cuts of 19 per cent.

While commending the generosity of countries
that offer resettlement for refugees, which remains
indispensable in terms of sharing the burden with
countries that host large numbers of refugees, the
number of resettlement opportunities remains
minimal. As such, with the difficulty in financing
refugee response plans in such countries, and with
limited resettlement opportunity at the global level,
the voluntary repatriation and reintegration of refugees
continues to be the preferred solution in the majority of
refugee situations.

We believe it is important to create favourable
conditions for the sustainable, voluntary return of
refugees to their countries of origin and to ensure
the safety and security of returnees. In that regard,
tackling the root causes of some of the protracted
refugee situations, and thereby facilitating conditions
for voluntary repatriation and return, as well as the
reintegration of refugees, is absolutely imperative. That
serves to underscore the need to find durable political
solutions to conflicts so as to ensure that people are
not compelled to flee their countries of origin in the
first place in order to find safety as a result of conflict,
terrorism and violent extremism.

Furthermore, countries emerging from conflicts
certainly need sustained international support; for
instance, reports from the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees during this session of the
General Assembly indicate that approximately 34,000
Somali refugees have returned to Somalia in 2016,
while the fragility, instability and insecurity of the
country continue to affect its reabsorption capacity and
to hamper further voluntary returns.

In our view, the voluntary return of Somali refugees
will be sustainable only with the continued support of
the international community in maintaining peace and
security in the country, particularly with sustained
support to the Federal Government of Somalia and in
fighting Al-Shabaab. That will be critical in creating
conditions that are conducive to further repatriation
and reintegration of Somali refugees in Somalia.

At the end of the day, there is no better approach
than prevention, as well as sustaining peace and
addressing root causes to ensure that meaningful
progress is made to tackle the vexing challenge of
refugees, and the displacement of people in general.
The High Commissioner is right in highlighting that
aspect of the challenge we face and in his emphasis on
prevention. Of course, no meaningful progress can be
made when the issue is politicized, as often happens.
Our region has not been entirely free from that, which
only complicates matters. Part of the remedy is for the
Council to maintain unity in the initiative it takes to
address displacement issues.

I would like to conclude by affirming Ethiopia's
commitment to working with all the relevant parties
in addressing some of the root causes of forced
displacement in our subregion, as well as to continue
providing international protection to refugees in
Ethiopia and maintaining an open-door policy
towards refugees.

