Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I thank
the President of the Security Council for having
taken the initiative to organize this open debate on
the theme, "Post-conflict peacebuilding, review of
the peacebuilding architecture", and for also having
provided a valuable concept note (S/2016/ 104, annex) to
guide our discussion.

Allow me also to thank and congratulate the Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), Ambassador
Macharia Kamau; his predecessor in that eminent
endeavour, Ambassador Olof Skoog; the Chair of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and former Chair of the PBC, Ambassador
Antonio de Aguiar Patriota; as well as the Chair of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of
the Peacebuilding Architecture, Ambassador Gert
Rosenthal, for their significant contributions.

My delegation is pleased that this review has
coincided with the full review of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations, as well as the review of the
implementation of the Security Council resolution
on women and peace and security. The Organization
must fully draw upon the singular opportunity offered
by those reviews, which are so closely linked, so
as to reorient our actions and strategies for a more
coordinated and consistent approach and effectively
tackle the numerous challenges to international peace
and security.

The prevention of any return to war and the
commitment to building peace in the long term so as to
lastingly rehabilitate societies emerging from conflict
were the basis for the concept and goal of creating the
United Nations peacekeeping architecture. As early
as in 1992, in "An Agenda for Peace", Mr. Boutros
Boutros-Ghali - at that time Secretary-General of
the United Nations - who has recently left us and to
whom we would like to once again pay heartfelt tribute,
defined post-conflict peacebuilding as

"action to identify and support structures which
will tend to strengthen and solidify peace in order
to avoid a relapse into conflict" (S/24IJI, para. 21).

Although at that time peacebuilding was understood
first and foremost in terms of military demobilization
and political transition, the peacebuilding agenda
and activities have continued to grow increasingly
important and complex since then, with, in particular,
the 1995 publication of Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali's
supplement to "An Agenda for Peace" (S/1995/1) and,
more significantly, with the implementation in 2005 of
the Peacebuilding Commission architecture.

Those tools have certainly allowed us, inter
alia, to integrate the development dimension into the
management of post-conflict situations. Nonetheless,
we note that such United Nations endeavours to assist
the countries in need to extricate themselves from war
and move towards lasting peace have not yet reached
their full potential. That is why Senegal welcomes
with great interest the report of the Advisory Group
of Experts (see S/2015/490), which sheds light on the
challenges as well as the measures to be taken to fill
the gaps. One of the salient points of the report of
the Advisory Group of Experts is that peacebuilding
has been relegated to a peripheral activity. It does not
enjoy sufficient financing and comes in only after the
fact and in a fragmented manner. That is symptomatic
of the gap between the declared ambition and the
actual interest that we accord to peacebuilding. That
is the reason that the delegation of Senegal calls for
the development of a more voluntary, consistent and
comprehensive approach, so as to break up the silos that
have led to fragmentation in United Nations system's
actions and efforts.

The efforts to ensure better coordination and
consistency in our actions should go hand in hand
with more dynamic interaction among the PBC, the
main bodies of the United Nations and the funds and
programmes, as well as with international, regional
and local partners. It is only in that manner that we
will manage to strengthen synergies and ensure that
there is better impact on the ground. In that regard,
my delegation would particularly like to emphasize
the importance of providing greater impetus to the
interaction between the Security Council and the
PBC. We are of the view that the Council should allow
the PBC to play its advisory role in a more extensive
manner through more frequent recourse to its services,
in particular in the areas of advice, awareness-raising
and resource mobilization. Such a comprehensive
approach should also result in the development of
an integrated strategy that combines several fields,
including security, sustainable development, human
rights, including gender equality, and the rule of law.

To address the existing gaps in the area of
peacebuilding, three fundamental aspects within
the framework of the review - namely, financing,
national ownership and cooperation with regional
organizations - should capture our attention. While
countries emerging from conflict are in need of long-
term and considerable financing, we have found
that such financing remains limited, unpredictable
and difficult to mobilize.In order to ensure that
peace is lasting, security must go hand in hand with
development. Lessons drawn from the peacebuilding
processes in Africa, in particular in Guinea-Bissau,
give us a full idea of how important that is. Countries in
the process of peacebuilding need resources to finance
projects that can create wealth and jobs, in particular for
young people and women, who have a key role to play
in the economic and social recovery of the impacted
countries.

According to the report of the Advisory Group
of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture, the Peacebuilding Fund is simply
insufficient to create, by itself, the necessary impact
and is far from achieving its goal of being a catalyst
for the flow of more significant resources from other
sources. Furthermore, my delegation supports the
recommendation of the Advisory Group of Experts that
the General Assembly consider adopting measures to
ensure that basic financing amounting to $100 million,
which symbolically represents about 1 per cent of
the entire United Nations budget for peacekeeping
operations, be earmarked for peacebuilding on an
annual basis. It would be drawn from contributions
under the Organization's regular budget.

The experience of Guinea-Bissau also demonstrates
the need to rebuild confidence among various national
stakeholders and make the restoration of confidence one
of the national priorities in the peacebuilding process.

The principle of national ownership should guide
all peacebuilding efforts, so as to ensure that there is
better harmony among the offers of assistance and the
goals in national peacebuilding plans, because it is up to
the country concerned itself to define its priorities. The
Peacebuilding Commission cannot do it for countries.

We must also attach due importance to
strengthening cooperation between the Peacebuilding
Commission and regional organizations, in particular
the African Union. Given that all of the six countries on
the Commission's agenda are in Africa, it would only
be logical to strengthen the partnership between the
African Union and the Peacebuilding Commission, in
particular with regard to development, by considering
the nature and challenges of peacebuilding in Africa
and by ensuring a rational sharing of the tasks and roles
involved in providing support to the relevant countries
and a better structured dialogue on the best way for the
PBC to support the countries already receiving support
from the Organization in that regard.

In conclusion, I would like to launch an appeal
for better implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
which reaffirms the crucial role played by women
in peacebuilding as active participants in all stages
of conflict prevention, the settlement of disputes,
peacebuilding and development. Women are an asset
for peace and reconciliation and should be better
integrated into peacebuilding processes. The success
achieved in bringing women on board in the rebuilding
processes in Sierra Leone, Liberia and Rwanda should
guide us to mainstream and strengthen those practices
in all countries. In an effort to integrate the women and
peace and security agenda, and in recognition of the
importance of the presence of some of the countries
of West Africa on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the countries of the region, with the
support of the United Nations, adopted in 2010 the
Dakar Declaration on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) in West Africa, as well as a related regional
plan of action.

