Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I have the
honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the member
States of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC).

At the outset, I would like to congratulate Germany
and France on their successful and innovative joint
presidencies of the Security Council over the past two
months. I would also like to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, and the other briefers for their
comprehensive and interesting briefing this morning.

I would like to strongly condemn, on behalf of the
OIC, the recent attacks against worshippers of the three
Abrahamic faiths in New Zealand and Sri Lanka and,
in just the past two days, against a synagogue in San
Diego and a Protestant Church in Burkina Faso, which
demonstrate the need to promote greater tolerance
among all communities and faiths. We mourn the
incomprehensible loss of innocent life.
What is clear is that the situation on the ground in the
Palestinian territories is fragile and cannot be neglected
any longer. The conflict has critically destabilized the
Middle East, paving the way for extremist groups to
spread their messages of terrorism and violence. The
international community must take united, practical
measures to save the prospects for peace and the two-
State solution, on which we are all agreed.

The OIC is committed to an outcome that sees
the establishment of an independent Palestinian State,
based on the June 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem
as its capital, according to the relevant resolutions,
the Arab Peace Initiative and the Madrid principles.
To reach such a just resolution, with Palestine and
Israel living side by side in peace, security and mutual
recognition, the OIC calls on the Security Council and
Member States to take the following steps as a priority.

First, we must urgently address the dire
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem. Today's discussion
serves to highlight the ongoing humanitarian, political
and economic crisis in the Palestinian territories,
while recent reports about the grave conditions in
the Gaza Strip are cause for serious concern. The
international community has a duty to act to avert a
humanitarian catastrophe.

Israel's near total closure ofthe Gaza Strip continues
to harm the nearly 2 million Palestinians living in the
41 by 11 kilometre territory. For more than a decade,
Israel has maintained a generalized travel ban, limiting
travel to exceptional humanitarian cases. The result
is that travel out of Gaza today is at about 1 per cent
of its level 20 years ago. Even in those exceptional
humanitarian cases, including those involving medical
patients, applicants often face difficulties in obtaining
travel permits.

There are also severe restrictions on the entry and
exit of goods in Gaza, with significant consequences for
Palestinians' access to essential services. The limited
supply of electricity often compromises the local
water supply, sewage treatment services and hospital
operations, as we heard in this morning's briefing.
Shortages of fuel have led to a partial shutdown
of several hospitals for extended periods. Gaza's
unemployment rate today is well over 50 per cent, and
is even higher for women and youth, while 80 per cent
of the population relies on basic humanitarian aid.

We must therefore act to support the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA), which provides aid to the
majority of Gaza's population and to refugees in need
throughout the region. As we have heard, at the forty-
sixth session ofits Council ofForeign Ministers, held in
the United Arab Emirates in March, the OIC announced
the establishment of an endowment fund for Palestine
refugees, which will bolster the financial position of
UNRWA and enable it to sustainably deliver relief
and humanitarian, educational and health services to
Palestinian refugees. However, further mobilization
is truly needed to provide UNRWA with sufficient,
predictable and sustainable funding. The OIC calls for
the continued generous support of Member States to
that end.

Secondly, we must all collectively drive
international momentum to break the deadlock in the
political process. The international community and the
Security Council have a crucial role to play in reaching
a just and comprehensive solution to the conflict.
We must intensify our efforts to launch credible
negotiations on all final-status issues in the Middle
East peace process, in accordance with the established
terms of reference. In that regard, the OIC reiterates
that the only viable solution to the conflict is the two-
State solution. The OIC reaffirms that safeguarding the
prospect for peace requires halting unilateral measures
that undermine peace and security. To that end, Israel
must stop its illegal settlement activities, in accordance
with resolution 2334 (2016), as they pose a major
obstacle to the two-State solution.

We reiterate our deep concerns about Israeli
control over, and restrictions to, access to Islamic
and Christian holy sites. Furthermore, any unlawful
attempts to change the legal status of Jerusalem
seriously jeopardize international security and must
end. The OIC emphasizes that international consensus
must be respected and the agreements that underpin the
international order enforced. The Charter of the United
Nations applies to all without exception.

We reaffirm that our efforts to achieve international
peace and security will not succeed without an end
to the Israeli occupation of Palestinian and Arab
territories. In that regard, the OIC reiterates that the
recent recognition by the United States of Israeli
sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan does not
alter the legal status of the Syrian Golan Heights under
international law.

Finally, we must provide the necessary assistance
and support for Palestinians to achieve economic
and social development in line with the Sustainable
Development Goals, to which we have all made a
commitment. The international community must
ensure that Palestinians are not left behind and are able
to build a self-sustaining national economy.

In conclusion, we affirm that the OIC will spare
no effort to advance international peace and security
through the promotion of a two-State solution whereby
Palestine and Israel live side by side in understanding,
peace and prosperity.

