Mr. O'Brien: This is my tenth statement on
Yemen to the Chamber since I took up my post in June
2015, only a few months after the crisis in Yemen had
escalated. I have Visited the country three times during
my tenure i Aden twice, Ibb, Sana'a, by mountainous
road to to Hudaydah city and port, Amran, and in an
attempt to get to Taiz, which was aborted after being
caught up in gunfire. Wherever and whatever side of
this horrific fight, and above all for those of neither
side caught up in this maelstrom of fear, death and
destruction, I have been deeply moved by the terrible
human suffering everywhere in Yemen.

It grieves me that in these past two years, and despite
my and my team's best efforts, I have been unable to
report any significant improvement in the deplorable,
avoidable and completely man-made catastrophe that
is ravaging the country. On the contrary, the Yemeni
people's suffering has relentlessly intensified. Today,
millions of people in Yemen are facing a triple tragedy:
the spectre of famine, the world's largest ever single-year
cholera outbreak, and the daily deprivation and injustice
of a brutal conflict that the world is allowing to drag
on and on - all totally preventable, avoidable and
treatable. This human tragedy is deliberate and wanton;
it is political tragedy, but with will and with courage,
which are both in short supply, it is stoppable.

The impact of this conflict on the basic needs and
dignity of ordinary Yemenis every day is clear. We have
been over the harrowing figures time and again in the
Chamber. Seventeen million Yemenis do not know if
or where they will get their next meal; nearly 7 million
are facing the threat of famine; and nearly 16 million
lack access to water or sanitation. With numbers of this
scale, there is a pernicious risk that we may become
mired in a statistical fog or that we may begin to take an
overly technical view of this crisis, almost as if it were
a natural phenomenon. It is not.

We must remember that these figures represent
human faces and enormous suffering - parents
unable to feed their families, children succumbing to
malnutrition or disease, and countless other tragedies.
They represent the heart-breaking story of a six-year-
old girl - and her only dignity left is that I have been
asked not to give her name - whose family spent six
months sleeping in a hole in the ground at night in order
to avoid air strikes near their home. This little girl was
already suffering from malnutrition, and her condition
became severe while hiding with her family. After
several rounds of treatment she was recovering, only to
contract and die of acute watery diarrhoea shortly after
her release from hospital.

For the sake of that innocent child and countless
others, the appalling statistics of this crisis must not
obscure the central fact that Yemen's catastrophe
is completely man-made. It is a direct result of the
deliberate policies, tactics and actions of the parties
and their powerful proxies to the conflict, and it is
completely preventable.

Before the escalation ofconflict, Yemen was making
progress against its long-standing challenges, not least
the kleptocracy under which it was ruled and its people
exploited for so long. In 2014, fewer people were going
hungry than three years earlier. Nutrition was improving
with fewer children stunted or underweight. School
enrolment was rising. All of that has now been sharply
reversed, and with that reversal has come the near total
collapse of public institutions that would otherwise
help Yemenis to cope. Today, only 45 per cent of health
facilities are fully functioning. Sanitation systems have
mostly ground to a halt. Approximately 1.2 million
public employees, including 30,000 health workers and
193,000 teachers, have been paid erratically or not at
all since October 2016, thereby accelerating the decline
in essential services and depriving nearly a quarter of
the population - civil servants and their families - of
a reliable income. We see the consequences of that
collapse in people's rising needs across all sectors,
and perhaps most dramatically in the current cholera
outbreak, which has spread rapidly across Yemen in
the wake of degraded sanitation systems and shattered
health facilities.

The conduct of the war continues to be really
vicious and brutal, with frequent complete disregard for
international humanitarian law, principles or just the
basic norms of human behaviour. Even wars have rules,
and even wars have their limits, or at least they should
have. Earlier this month, reported air strikes in Sa'dah
killed 12 civilians and injured 10 others. The death
toll included six children killed in their family home.
Investigations continue, although we know already
that only the Saudi-led coalition has the means to
carry out aerial attacks. In Taiz indiscriminate shelling
into populated areas continues as a grotesque feature
of the conflict, mostly by forces affiliated with the
Houthis or former President Saleh. Over the past two
years, those incidents have reportedly killed or injured
dozens of civilians, including children, and damaged
civilian infrastructure.

In the absence of accountability mechanisms
or a concerted push by Member States for a political
settlement, the violence is intensifying. During 2017,
the number of air strikes per month has been three
times higher than it was the previous year, and monthly
reports of armed clashes have increased by more than
50 per cent. All that has been said and the outrage
that has been expressed here around the Security
Council table have only produced a dramatically worse
situation perpetrated by the stubborn, brutal parties
and their proxies to this cynical and inhuman man-
made catastrophe.

Parties to the conflict and their proxies also
continue to restrict the flow of essential commercial
and humanitarian supplies and staff. Yemen imports
more than 90 per cent of its staple food and nearly all
medicine and fuel, which is urgently needed to pump
clean drinking water and run hospital generators. The
United Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism
(UNVIM) was established in May 2016 to facilitate
critical commercial imports, yet the Government of
Yemen and the coalition at times bypass UNVIM. by
unilaterally denying or excessively delaying entry to
vessels carrying essential cargo. Member States must
determinedly do more to champion that mechanism. It
is simply wrong to insist that those cargos go to Aden
and not to Hudaydah.

The cruel and baseless closure of Sana'a airport
to civilian traffic by the Saudi-led coalition is another
restriction blocking thousands of Yemenis from
travelling abroad for medical care. Commercial flights
served Sana'a in the first year of the conflict, and I do
not see why they should not immediately resume, at the
very least, for humanitarian cases. It was said recently
that the Yemen Government could see no raison why
Sana'a airport should open as there were flights to
Aden and road access to Sana'a.

I flew on the first United Nations Humanitarian Air
Service flight to Aden. I have been talking to the truck
drivers on that route. That is not a real solution with
regard to the quantities and urgency even approaching
the scale of the human emergency that we are trying
to overcome despite such nasty, cynical machinations
supported by parties to the conflict and their proxies
where there is complete lock-down control of the
airspace. Let us be clear that it is a fact that most of
the need is in the northern and not the southern part of
Yemen. It is a fact that Sana'a and Hudaydah and not
Aden best serve the north.

I therefore also call on all parties to the conflict
and their proxies to ensure that humanitarian staff can
quickly enter Yemen and to avoid any bureaucratic or
administrative requirements that may unduly hinder
the rapid delivery of assistance or delay the deployment
of aid workers. Once in Yemen, critical commercial or
humanitarian supplies and staffmust be able to move to
their destination nearest to the human needs of the most
vulnerable without interference. Too often, the de facto
authorities in Sana'a or local officials in areas under
their control block, delay or otherwise interfere with
humanitarian action. Those restrictions are especially
prevalent in front-line areas, thereby preventing or
delaying partners from reaching the most vulnerable.
Local officials in areas controlled by Sana'a de facto
authorities, at times, also seek to influence the selection
of beneficiaries. We have also seen repeated incidents
of aid diversion in areas under the control of Sana'a de
facto authorities, especially in Taiz governorate.

At a time when Yemen is facing the real near threat
of famine, local authorities in areas controlled by Sana'a
de facto authorities have also hindered humanitarian
assessment missions that are needed so as to establish
the necessary evidence base for humanitarian
assistance. Despite my repeated calls to the de facto
authorities in Sana'a to facilitate imports of armoured
vehicles and other equipment critical to humanitarian
action, progress remains painfully slow. Many of those
incidents are eventually resolved through discussions
with the de facto authorities, but the time lost represents
an unacceptable burden for people who desperately
need help, and directly causes avoidable death.

Humanitarian partners continue to reach the most
vulnerable people through a well-led, principled and
coordinated response despite extraordinary challenges.
More than 120 partners have assisted 5.9 million people
this year in every governorate of Yemen through United
Nations-coordinated humanitarian action. The cholera
response has established 222 treatment centres and 926
oral rehydration points across the country. Despite those
achievements, partners are struggling with funding
shortages. The Yemen humanitarian response plan has
received only 39 per cent of its revised requirements
of $2.3 billion for 2017 although we are already two
thirds of the way through the year. I stress that we now
urgently need Member States and other partners to
provide full funding to the humanitarian response plan.
There is no time to lose, and even if all the fighting and
the restrictions were stopped within the next hour, we
would continue to need that amount. Let us be clear that
the sum of $2.3 billion is not an inflated negotiating
number. It is a careful and collective best estimate
of the cost of meeting the needs of Yemenis that the
parties and their proxies either do not want or do not
care for them to get.
Humanitarian action alone cannot and should not
replace the commercial or public sectors in Yemen,
nor can it resolve the underlying crisis. An end to the
violence, a cessation in hostilities and a sustainable
political agreement are the building blocks of Yemen's
peaceful future. But while those are being sought,
humanitarians must be able to carry out their work
and provide aid and support to the millions of Yemeni
people in desperate need. The international community
must take meaningful action. I renew my call for the
Council's support not only with additional funding, but
to address the following points.

First, we must ensure that all ports - land, sea and
air-areopentocivilian-includingcommercial-traffic.
This includes supporting UNVIM, lifting restrictions
on commercial imports, immediately re-opening
Sana'a airport and allowing delivery of desperately
needed mobile cranes to Hudaydah port, which handles
some 70 per cent of imports into Yemen and is the
closest port of entry to the majority of people who
need humanitarian assistance. The Council must not be
swayed or deterred by those saying Aden - or other
ports - is good enough.

Secondly, we must influence parties to the conflict
to respect international humanitarian and human
rights law. This entails all Member States using all
possible means of leverage and influence to ensure
that the parties and their proxies protect civilians
and infrastructure, respecting the fundamental rules
of distinction, proportionality and precaution. It also
includes facilitating entry of life-saving supplies into
Yemen and their rapid distribution without interference.
I would like to be clear: ofcourse, the evidence is being
gathered to hold hideous breaches of international
humanitarian law to account one day.

Thirdly, civil servant salaries must be paid. Recent
funding in support of essential services is a temporary
measure that will shore up some services in priority
locations. But only full payment of civil servant
salaries across the country - a basic obligation of the
State - will halt institutional collapse. This collapse
is in no one's interest and it exacerbates all the death,
disease and human damage.

Fourthly, accountability must be strengthened. More
broadly, there must be accountability for the appalling
conduct of this entire war. We must not get hung up on
the semantics of who is a party, who is a proxy and who
denies being involved. All the perpetrators and their
facilitators of this hideous Yemen war know who they
are. The evidence of their conduct is being gathered,
preserved and prepared for holding each and all to
account, to seek to avert the abominable confidence
that the sense of impunity is currently motivating
them to perpetrate this horror on the Yemeni people.
We therefore welcome all steps towards improving this
accountability. The United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights has rightly called for the creation
of an international independent body to investigate
alleged Violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law. I urge the Human Rights Council to
act on this call.

Fifthly, we must demand an immediate cessation
of hostilities, a return to negotiations and a political
settlement. Parties to the conflict have brought ruin
and deprivation to millions of Yemenis for more
than two years. There is no military solution to this
conflict, and the international community must
push for a political settlement based on peaceful
negotiations, and, indeed, compromises. Not to admit
that fact is to deliberately condemn many more Yemeni
people - girls, boys, women and men - to death,
damage, fear and hopelessness in this deliberate, man-
made human catastrophe.

On this day, of all days, World Humanitarian
Day, I straight-forwardly ask members of the Security
Council: how much shame can we all, members of the
Council in particular, keep accepting on our failure to
rein in the parties and proxies to this heinous war and
to start meeting the needs and the legitimate hopes that
every Yemeni person should be allowed to have and
that we would demand as the very minimum for each
and every one of us?

