Mr. Lacroix: Thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this briefing on the strategic priorities of
United Nations police components in peace operations.
I am pleased to be joined by our Police Commissioners
currently serving in Abyei, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Mali.

This annual briefing serves as an opportunity
to reaffirm the vital role that United Nations police
(UNPOL) play in peace operations and to reflect on the
ways in which we might better support their essential
work, from conflict prevention to peacekeeping
and peacebuilding.

In 2018, the Secretary-General launched the
Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative, calling on all
stakeholders to collectively address the challenges facing
peacekeeping and to renew their collective engagement.
I thank everyone - police, troop and financial
contributors, members of the General Assembly and
the Security Council - for supporting A4P. Today I
will highlight some of what we have achieved through
ongoing efforts to reinforce peacekeeping, as well
as those areas that require progress. I also welcome
Member States' plans for advancing the A4P agenda.

While the overall number of peacekeepers has
decreased in recent years as a result ofthe closure ofsome
of our missions that have completed their mandates,
the role of police in peacekeeping is likely to grow in
the near future. In fact, our missions are increasingly
faced with challenges that call for a response that the
United Nations police is particularly well placed to
provide, including the challenge of dealing with high
concentrations of the population, whether it be in urban
areas or internally displaced persons camps, the need
to respond to such emerging challenges and threats as
organized crime and international terrorism, and the
need to build the national capacities of host States,
particularly in the area of the rule of law.

I would like to pay tribute to our dedicated men
and women serving in UNPOL, both at Headquarters
and, particularly, the field, often in very difficult and
challenging conditions.

Partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations, as well as across the United Nations
system, are critical in every area of our work and
particularly in facilitating transitions. In Darfur, we
are collaborating closely with the African Union to plan
for the transition and exit of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) with a
view to sustaining gains and preventing a relapse into
conflict. UNAMID and the United Nations country
team have pioneered a unique approach to jointly
deliver programmatic activities in four states, through
state-liaison functions in three key areas, namely, the
rule oflaw, durable solutions, resilience and livelihoods,
and human rights. The role of United Nations police
in ensuring the delivery of the mandated activities of
the state-liaison function is critical, particularly with
regard to UNAMID's efforts to strengthen rule of
law capacities.

In Mali, police of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali are contributing to building key national rule of
law capacities and are partnering in that effort with
other stakeholders, such as the European Union.

Protection is also one of the key roles of United
Nations police, in close cooperation with our civilian
and military colleagues. In Abyei, protection
committees have been established to fill the void in
the absence of a functioning police service. Owing to
increased crime, the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei police component has started to
expand those committees, particularly among women.
A total of 172 members of joint protection companies,
including 18 women, have received basic training
from UNPOL to provide law and order in the Amiet
common market. Commissioner Gahonzire will brief
the Council on the community protection committee
concept in more detail.

Our efforts to enhance performance are guided
by the provisions of resolution 2436 (2018). We have
made significant progress in that regard, including by
strengthening internal evaluations as a core element
of the action plan to improve the safety and security
of United Nations peacekeepers. Since January
2018, we have undertaken over 40 assessments of
operational readiness visits. The evaluations of our
police commissioners give us a comprehensive view of
strength, capacities and limitations and allow us to make
more informed selection decisions through monthly
performance meetings, which I chair. The roll-out of
the comprehensive performance assessment system
(CPAS) in five missions provides a platform to assess
the overall performance of our components, including
that of police components. What we have seen so far is
that CPAS has strengthened unity of purpose and cross-
component planning, while enhancing data collection.

We are also revising our approach to training.
A new curriculum based on the Strategic Guidance
Framework for International Police Peacekeeping will
enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of all UNPOL
activities in the field. To oversee those efforts, the
Police Division has created a task force to address the
needs of our police officers across the spectrum, from
predeployment assessment and training to in-mission
and specialized training to post-duty care.

Increasing the number of women peacekeepers
means making peacekeeping more effective. To date,
we have met our targets for the percentage of women
peacekeepers deployed as individual officers and as
part of formed units, which stands at 26.8 per cent and
10.9 per cent, respectively. As the targets are baselines
not ceilings, more work remains to be done. I therefore
call on police-contributing countries to redouble their
efforts to deploy more women. I would like to pay
tribute to Major Diouf from Senegal, currently serving
in the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, who
was awarded the title of female police officer of the
year yesterday. Her dedication and commitment are an
inspiration to all ofus and, most certainly, to her fellow
female police officers, as well as to the vulnerable
women she is helping every day.

We all know that the whole of United Nations
peacekeeping is undermined when our standards of
conduct are violated, especially when it comes to sexual
exploitation and abuse. I am therefore pleased to report
that we have seen a steady downward trend in claims of
sexual exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping, from 104
claims in 2016 to 55 in 2018. Our continued vigilance
remains essential, and we rely on the full cooperation of
all troop- and police-contributing countries to advance
our goal of fully implementing a zero-tolerance policy.

In conclusion, while much progress has been made
through the Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative
on making peacekeeping, including United Nations
police, fit for the challenges we face, we are still at
the start of the journey and we cannot go it alone. For
our part, I commit to reinforcing our efforts to support
political processes, enhance our performance and
make peacekeeping missions stronger and safer. By
aligning our reporting with the A4P agenda, we aim to
provide clearer, more consistent information to inform
decision-making by our Member States. UNPOL is
fully committed to our collective effort to improve the
performance and impact of peace operations. Allow
me to reiterate that we are grateful for Member States'
ongoing commitment to our work in all areas of A4P,
and in particular for the support provided to United
Nations police. I trust that we can continue to count on
that support.

