Mr. Simonovic': I would like to thank Singapore
for organizing this meeting and the Working Group
Chairperson, Ambassador Koonjul, for his very useful
briefing.

It is an honour to participate in this discussion on
the initial activities of the Security Council's ad hoc
Working Group on Africa, on behalf of the Economic
and Social Council. It is another important step in the
improvement of cooperation between major United
Nations bodies, while respecting fully their individual
competencies and mandates.

The international community is indeed
increasingly recognizing the importance of addressing
conflict prevention and conflict resolution issues in
Africa. It is part of the general recognition of the
importance of addressing the root causes of violent
conflict and the interlinkages among relief,
rehabilitation, reconstruction and longer-term
development for building peace. Effective strategies to
deal with conflict prevention and recovery require a
comprehensive approach that embraces actions in a
wide range of areas, including political, diplomatic,
humanitarian, human rights and institutional measures,
as well as efforts to promote development. The
Economic and Social Council has important
responsibilities in these areas. I am very glad that the
General Assembly and the Security Council have
recognized the contribution that the Economic and
Social Council could make to the effective
implementation of conflict prevention and recovery
strategies.

The Assembly has called upon the Economic and
Social Council to focus more on actions that are related
to the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa. The
Security Council, in its meeting in January 2002 on the
situation in Africa, reaffirmed the importance of
strengthening its cooperation with the Economic and
Social Council through greater interaction, in
accordance with Article 65 of the Charter.

The Security Council also identified the
enhancement of cooperation with the Economic and
Social Council as one of the purposes of its newly
established ad hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa. Ambassador
Koonjul's report has clearly indicated the commitment
of the ad hoc Working Group to cooperation with the
Economic and Social Council.

As a central intergovernmental body for
coordination in the United Nations system, as well as
for undertaking studies and making recommendations
to other entities, the Economic and Social Council has
Charter-mandated functions that can help in studies and
actions dealing with the root causes of violence and the
humanitarian assistance, economic, social
reconstruction and development and human rights
processes that are at the heart of peace-building. The
Council's oversight role in matters of development
cooperation and humanitarian assistance can have
particular value in promoting better integration
between relevant policy and operational dimensions,
thereby complementing ongoing work that takes place
in the General Assembly and the Security Council.

There is a gap between the end of humanitarian
assistance and the beginning of systemic development
assistance in countries emerging from conflict. This
gap can be successfully bridged by the Economic and
Social Council undertaking coordinated effort through
its functional commissions, agencies, funds and
programmes. Enhanced cooperation between the
Council and the Bretton Woods institutions is also of
utmost importance.

In this regard, of particular importance is the
proposal that the Economic and Social Council
establish an ad hoc advisory group on African
countries emerging from conflict. At the Council's
request, a report of the Secretary-General on the
possible mandate, composition and modalities of work
of such a group has been prepared. It recommends a
flexible, time-limited approach in setting up such an
advisory group, at the request of the country
concerned. Such a group would review existing
arrangements to meet the country's humanitarian,
reconstruction and development needs and would make
proposals to the Economic and Social Council on how
to ensure that the country receives adequate and
coordinated assistance in order to prevent the
reoccurrence of conflict and promote long-term
development.

A draft resolution leading to the establishment of
the ad hoc working group will shortly be submitted for
consideration by Member States. The Economic and
Social Council is scheduled to take it up in the near
future, with the aim of first establishing an advisory
group and then putting it into practice upon the request
of an interested African State.

In closing, I would like to emphasize again the
importance of the issues and ideas being raised in
today's meeting and to express my satisfaction at the
closer cooperation between the principal organs of the
United Nations in attempting to cope with the problems
set before us.

