Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Zannier,
for his briefing. We welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Jeremic', and thank him for his
statement. We also thank Mr. Hyseni for his statement.
Let me also welcome Mr. Kyrle, Vice Federal Minister
for European and International Affairs of Austria.

Uganda welcomes the completion of the
reconfiguration of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and
commends it for reaching its authorized strength. We
call on UNMIK to focus on promoting security and
stability in Kosovo and in the Balkans by facilitating
practical cooperation between communities, as well as
between the authorities in Pristina and Belgrade. The
creation of the UNMIK Office for Community Support
is significant in facilitating engagement and
cooperation by all sides.

We are encouraged by the level of cooperation
between UNMIK and the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) regarding the exchange
of information and coordinating on issues of mutual
concern. That cooperation, in all sectors, should
continue to be strengthened. We are also pleased to
note that EULEX has reached full operational capacity
and is continuing to operate under the overall authority
of the United Nations, within the status-neutral
framework of resolution 1244 (1999).

We are encouraged by the progress being made in
decentralization, and we call on the authorities to
ensure that the process is carried out in a consultative,
participatory and inclusive way.

Although it appears that the overall situation in
Kosovo during the reporting period remained relatively
calm, we are concerned by the incidences of violence
in the northern Mitrovica suburbs. We therefore call on
both parties to exercise restraint, mutual respect and
tolerance in order to live together harmoniously, in the
interests of peace.

We salute the efforts of UNMIK, in coordination
with EULEX and the Kosovo Force (KFOR), to
encourage both sides to find a sustainable and peaceful
solution. We also commend UNMIK for its efforts to
encourage the return of Kosovo Serb internally
displaced persons to their homes.

Finally, we commend UNMIK for its work and
urge the internationally community to continue to lend
the necessary support to enable it to effectively carry
out its role of maintaining peace and stability.

