Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland) (spoke in French): First
of all I would like to thank the Canadian delegation, and
you personally, Mr. President, for placing this important
issue on the agenda for an open debate in the Security
Council.

Over the last few years, as we all know, the number
of sanctions regimes imposed by the United Nations has
increased significantly. Targeting sanctions against elites,
Government officials and selected entities has been
identified as an important objective in order to strengthen
their effectiveness and to lighten their undesirable side
effects. In this respect, the idea of better targeting of
financial sanctions has been given particular attention.

Switzerland, as a non-Member, applies United Nations
sanctions autonomously. In this way, it joins the efforts of
the United Nations to maintain and promote peace and
security. One of the concerns of my Government is to make
sanctions more effective and at the same time to minimize
the negative humanitarian consequences that comprehensive
sanctions regimes may have on the civil population.

As a financial centre with specific expertise and skills,
Switzerland has a particular interest in the question of
financial sanctions. We are aware that only a coordinated
effort of all the main actors can help to achieve the desired
political objectives. Switzerland has therefore, for two
consecutive years, organized expert seminars on targeted
financial sanctions. These meetings have made it possible
to examine, in an informal and technical context, specific
proposals to improve the administration of sanctions. These
seminars, known as the "Interlaken process", have
established a place for dialogue among representatives of
national Governments, central banks and the United Nations
Secretariat, as well as of the private banking sector and the
academic world. The Interlaken discussions have shown
that targeted financial sanctions are an effective instrument
for directly targeting the decision makers in countries
subject to sanctions regimes.

However, financial sanctions alone are not enough to
influence the behaviour of these Governments. Such
sanctions must be integrated into an overall strategy and
accompanied by other targeted measures, such as arms
embargoes and travel and visa restrictions. The choice of
kinds of sanctions and the modalities for their application
depend on a meticulous analysis of the vulnerability of the
targeted country as well as of its elite. Furthermore, the
political will to maintain these measures over the long term
is essential.

The Interlaken seminars basically cover the practical
and technical aspects of the measures to be taken so as to
ensure their effectiveness. I should like to refer so some
of the results achieved at Interlaken. First, greater
knowledge has been gained of the functioning of the
instrument of financial sanctions and of certain technical
aspects, including data collection with regard to the
economic and financial profile of the targeted country, the
role of offshore centres and technologies for monitoring
the flow of funds.

Secondly, standard language and definitions have
been drafted, which should facilitate the work of the
Security Council when negotiating the text of a draft
resolution. Thirdly, technical guidelines have been drawn
up enabling the better implementation of sanctions by
Member States. Fourthly, model laws have been
developed, which should make it possible for Member
States to draft their national legislation relating to
financial sanctions. Fifthly, an informal mechanism for
international cooperation between national Governments,
the financial sector and the academic world has been
established.

The main conclusion of the Interlaken seminars is
that targeted financial sanctions are technically feasible,
but that concrete measures are required at the national and
international levels, as well as in the United Nations
Secretariat, to make the sanctions more effective.

Interlaken has shown that the technical and practical
elements for the implementation of targeted financial
sanctions are available to the Security Council. Above all,
therefore, the question now is how to mobilize political
will so as to translate these elements into action.

