Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): If there are no further speakers wishing to
take the floor, I should like to say a few words.

At a previous meeting of the Security Council, I
asked the representative of the United States a
question: What, in his opinion, should the Security
Council be focused on - serious political work or
propaganda? At that time, unfortunately, I received no
answer to that question, and today it is clear why.
Unfortunately, the statements made today by the
representative of the United States and others have
been clear expressions of propaganda, to the detriment
of the serious political work that must be done in the
Security Council and the political tasks facing us
today.

I believe that one can hardly fail to see that
today's meeting was convened to a large extent under
the influence of the North Atlantic Council foreign
ministerial session just held in Brussels. I note in
passing that the final statement issued at that meeting
appears to be non-objective and biased and contains
not a single word concerning the reasons for the
conflict or about who initiated the aggression, who
armed Georgia and who has consistently blocked our

insistent proposals to conclude a legally binding
agreement on the non-use of force. The impression has
been given that, behind the convening of today's
meeting, there is a wish to distract the Security Council
from its task of adopting a decision endorsing the well-
known Russian-French peace initiative to end the
conflict and pave the way to a settlement.

Once again in this Chamber, there has been a
further attempt today to turn matters on their head and
to portray the aggressor as the victim. Once again,
rhetoric has been bandied about accusing Russia of the
most mortal sins, including some extremely wild
accusations. I wish in that respect to focus on the key
theme that the French delegation is now promoting for
the draft resolution it has proposed for adoption by the
Security Council. However, in the light of some of the
remarks that have been made in the Council Chamber
today, I cannot fail to say a few words first.

First, with regard to the humanitarian situation,
no one is undertaking a humanitarian operation as large
as that of Russia in the conflict zone. Not one country
or one humanitarian organization is doing as much as
Russia, not only inside South Ossetia and Tskhinvali,
which was effectively wiped off the face of the Earth
by the Georgian aggression, but also in some Georgian
areas that we have entered, such as the city of Gori,
which is in close vicinity to South Ossetia and where
our military has had to deal with massive stockpiles of
discarded weapons. In recent days, we have fed the
civilian population there and have called on the
Georgian authorities to help the people of that city,
who have been abandoned to their own fate. No one is
doing anywhere near as much as Russia to avoid a
humanitarian catastrophe.

With respect to the international humanitarian
organizations, with which we have of course sought
contact, the heads of those entities have either
concluded or are planning visits to Russia and the
conflict zone. We therefore hope that cooperation can
begin and that the international humanitarian
organizations will be able to do their humanitarian
work effectively in the conflict zone.

I should now like to address what may be a side
issue, but one on which I wish to focus. In several
statements made today, reference has been made to
what President Kokoity of South Ossetia said about
refugees. Our Foreign Ministry has issued a special
statement on that matter which lays out the facts with
respect to international norms applying to refugees.
That is undoubtedly one of the questions that will have
to be settled in the process of normalizing the situation
in the conflict zone.

Much has been said and many rhetorical
questions have been asked on the basis of unverified
information and even of disinformation. The
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom was
not present when previous statements were made, but
he has expressed concern about the fate of the United
Kingdom's military attache, who for some reason was
in the area of conflict and was arrested. I do not know
the facts of that specific situation.

As I read the statement issued today by the North
Atlantic Council foreign ministerial session, I was
struck by a phrase to which I would like to draw the
Council's attention. It was obviously drafted by
military experts and not by politicians; NATO clearly
has good people working on such statements, just as
we do, and they should be appreciated. I am sure that
they understand each other very well in such matters.
In particular, the statement reminds Russia of its
obligation to maintain security and order in the areas
under its control. We do not need to be reminded of
that. I will cite one example to demonstrate our
awareness that we bear full responsibility for security.

Some illegal activities may have occurred there;
that cannot be entirely dismissed, of course, when the
entire region has been destroyed as a result of the
Georgian military adventure. We cannot deny that there
may indeed be such circumstances, but I can state that
Russian military personnel have the strictest orders to
stop such illegal activity when they witness it.

Some of my colleagues are behaving as if they
have not attended the five previous meetings and are
now making their own interpretations of events, but I
should like to recall that this is now the sixth meeting
on this topic. The first was convened as Russia warned
the Council that Georgia was on the verge of
unleashing a military adventure. We called for that
meeting on the night of 7 August; further meetings
were held in the course of the conflict in an attempt to
reach a settlement. That quest concluded in a meeting
in the Moscow Kremlin on 12 August at which the
Presidents of France and Russia read out the six-
principle peace plan.

The task of the Security Council today is to
support that plan and to promote progress in its

implementation. Unfortunately, given the kind of
propaganda we have heard today, we are merely
making it harder for the Council to perform that task.
We do not understand why that must be so, but
returning to the core issue that the French
representative touched on today, I can say the
following.

The Russian side has consistently implemented
its obligations. Under the Moscow six-principle
agreement, by order of the President of the Russian
Federation the Russian armed forces have pledged to
pull back the forces and mate'riel provided to the
peacekeeping contingents. As of today, preparations are
under way to establish the logistical bases for the
peacekeeping posts that, again pursuant to the Moscow
agreement, are being set up as an additional security
measure in the peacekeeping zone. The construction of
the posts is slated to be concluded by 22 August. I
stress that the pull-back of the combat units that have
been attached to the peacekeeping contingents is
ongoing. Rear units and military hardware are being
pulled back, and the roads are being cleared for the
pull-back of forward units. At the same time, in full
compliance with the Moscow agreement, a security
zone is being created. When the peacekeepers assume
their positions on the external border of that zone,
those forces that were introduced in support of the
peacekeepers will return to their areas of deployment.

I should like in passing to ask the representative
of the United States a question. In the course of the
conflict, the United States withdrew 2,000 Georgian
servicemen from Iraq. Are they going to return to Iraq?
What does the future hold for them?

The withdrawal of Russian troops will be
commensurate with the effectiveness of the Georgian
side's implementation of its obligations under the
Moscow peace plan, which stipulates first and foremost
the return of Georgian troops to their places of
permanent deployment: their barracks. And I would
like to point out that, although Mr. Saakashvili signed
the peace plan's six points and pledged to withdraw his
troops, we note today that that obligation has not been
fulfilled. Every day there are incidents in which our
servicemen, in one part of the security zone or another,
hold Georgian troops who have not yet returned to
their barracks or groups of armed individuals who are
present for no comprehensible reason. Such incidents
seriously complicate the overall situation and hamper
the process of withdrawing troops according to plan.

We appeal to all to be guided by objective
criteria, not by a desire to whitewash those who
initiated the aggression. We are convinced that the
Council's attention should be focused on endorsing the
Moscow peace plan developed by the Presidents of
Russia and France. It contains six clear, consistent and
logically interlinked principles for stabilizing the
situation and overcoming the crisis. Singling out
individual elements of the Moscow plan and
interpreting them to suit the purposes of political
propaganda is counterproductive, and the Russian
Federation will therefore be unable to support the draft
resolution submitted today by France.

The representative of France referred earlier to
two of the peace plan's six principles announced by the
Presidents of France and Russia. But even on those two
principles everything was mixed up: the order was
changed and additional suggestions were put forward.
Why is this being done? During all the work we have
done together with our French colleagues in recent
days, was there not an understanding that the six
principles of Presidents Sarkozy and Medvedev should
be clearly reflected, verbatim, in a draft resolution to
be adopted by the Security Council?

Incidentally, during today's telephone conversation
between President Medvedev of Russia and
President Sarkozy of France, to which Mr. Lacroix
referred, the French head of State said not a word about
any kind of new draft resolution that would bypass the
12 August agreement.

In the light of all we have said, we appeal to
Council members to step up their endeavours to forge
truly effective and viable decisions to resolve the
situation in Georgia. The basis of such decisions
should be the six principles of the Moscow peace plan.

