Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): First, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report of 24
March and Mr. Prendergast for his supplementary
briefing. In deference to the wishes of the President, I
will be brief.

I would recall first that the holding of free, fair and
transparent elections in Guinea-Bissau marked a major
stage in the democratization of the country. As the
Secretary-General's report states, with the completion of
the transitional process, the country stands at a critical
crossroad in its history, energized by the progress made
so far, but conscious of the many challenges that lie
ahead.

The need to satisfy the popular need for change, as
shown by the overwhelming election victory of President
Kumba Yala, who got 72 per cent of the vote, is very
strong, which determines the post-electoral priorities for
the authorities in Guinea-Bissau for the short and medium
term. It should also reinforce the spirit of reconciliation
among the people, consolidate the rule of law, and assure
good administration of public affairs as well as respect for
human rights.

We are pleased at the positive measures reported by
Mr. Prendergast. At the same time, the new authorities in
Guinea-Bissau must continue to improve relations with

 

neighbouring States and cooperation with the international
community as a whole.

Despite the achievements made so far, however, the
situation in the country is still fragile, and that is why we
believe that the Security Council must send a strong signal
to the political class of Guinea-Bissau, of all political
parties, and to civil society in that country, a signal
insisting on a return to normalcy and emphasizing the end
of the transition period established by the Abuja Accord of
1 November 1998.

Likewise, we believe it urgent that the international
community be mobilized to provide assistance for the
rebuilding of the economy and the consolidation of lasting
peace in Guinea-Bissau. In this regard, we look forward
with interest to the donors conference that will be held in
New York in May of this year.

The draft Presidential statement that has been
submitted to the Council for consideration, which will be
adopted following this meeting, may be viewed precisely
from this twofold perspective.

I would like to recall the firm commitment of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
to continue its efforts to consolidate the situation in Sierra
Leone as well as to stabilize the entire subregion. President
Konare has made this a priority in his term of office as
Chairman of ECOWAS, and has shown determination and
resolve, as was recalled yesterday by Mr. Miyet in a very
timely way.

In addition, I would also like to pay tribute to the
representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nana-Sinkam,
to the people working in the United Nations Peace-building
Support Office in Guinea-Bissau, and to the whole United
Nations team, for their devoted efforts on behalf of Guinea-
Bissau.

