Mr. Nihangaza (Burundi) (spoke in French):
Allow me at the outset to perform the pleasant duty of
congratulating you, Sir, and, through you, the
Government of the United States on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of May. We are convinced that your presidency will
allow the work of the Council to progress on the path
towards peace throughout the world, in particular in the
Great Lakes region.

Let me also welcome the presence of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, and commend him
for his commitment to peace and development in the
world, in particular in the countries of the Great Lakes.

The Government of the Republic of Burundi has
received the report in document S/2001/357, issued by
the Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of
Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We wish to draw
the Security Council's attention to the following points.

First, in its report, the Panel did not find
sufficient evidence to indict Burundi. In view of the
publicity in the media focused on the accusations
levelled against Burundi, anyone might have expected
to find a mass of very specific data in the report to
substantiate those accusations. It will be noted from a
reading of the report that Burundi is named from time
to time, appearing in a perfectly ritual fashion on a list
of countries to be targeted.

It is only in paragraph 105, on page 25 of the
English version of the report, that we find three
sentences that might be regarded as containing these
so-called accusations against Burundi. This is the
substance of the paragraph:

"An IMF office memorandum indicates that
'Burundi does not produce gold, diamonds,
columbo-tantalite, copper, cobalt, or basic
metals'. Burundi however has been exporting
minerals it does not produce. As in the case of
Uganda and Rwanda, Burundi's export of
diamonds dates from 1998, coinciding with the
occupation of the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The coltan exports span a longer
period (1995-1999), perhaps suggesting that this
might be a regular activity."

This is the only sort of accusation against Burundi
contained in the report: a reference to an International
Monetary Fund (IMF) document of which there is no
trace; I have looked in Washington and hunted in my
country, and this IMF document does not exist. In
short, paragraph 105 confirms that Burundi is not
involved in plundering the wealth of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Secondly, paragraph 105 seems to suggest that
there are no mineral ores in Burundi and that there is
no trade with the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
This is quite astounding. Trade between Burundi and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has always
existed and includes a wide range of products. I would
like to inform the Council that before the war
approximately 40 per cent of Burundi's exports went to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the same is
true today. As far as ores are concerned, the document
presenting the position of the Burundi Government,
which was submitted to the Security Council, provides
statistics that attest to Burundi's exploitation of gold,
cassiterite, coltan and tin.

It should also be noted that comptoirs for gold
and diamonds existed long before independence, both
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
Bujumbura. They were run either by Congolese or
Burundians, or by nationals of other countries.

Thirdly, the grave nature of the conclusions on
Burundi contrasts with the lack of supporting data that
one would expect to find in the body of the report.
When we were in school, we were taught that the
conclusion of a composition should reflect the
substance of the body of the text. In the case of this
report, five whole pages of serious conclusions and
recommendations correspond to just three sentences in
the body of the report. This disproportion undermines
the credibility of the report as far as Burundi is
concerned.

Fourthly, Burundi is still prepared to cooperate
with the Panel of Experts. Despite the indiscriminate
way in which Burundi is implicated, the Government
of Burundi is still prepared to offer its full cooperation
with the Panel of Experts. Indeed, it intends to carry
out its own inquiry into the possible involvement of
Burundians, We recommend that the experts revisit
Burundi and interview people on both sides of the
border. To this end, Burundi is glad that the Security
Council has decided to extend the mandate of the Panel
of Experts.

Burundi has always stated that the deployment of
security arrangements on its border with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo was dictated by
security concerns and by the need to keep open the
trading corridor via Lake Tanganyika. My country has
no political or territorial ambitions vis-a-vis any
neighbouring country.

In conclusion, the Government of Burundi refutes
the serious accusations that have been levelled against
it, and calls on the Security Council to take into
account the anomalies identified in the report where
Burundi is concerned.

Burundi takes the view that resolving security
issues between the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and its neighbours would end all of the problems and
elements of tension associated with the state of
"subregional conflict". The report of the Panel of
Experts should not distract us from genuine security
concerns. This is why Burundi once again states its
readiness to pursue a dialogue with the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the other
partners of the subregion in order to secure our
common borders and find long-term responses to the
underlying causes of the conflicts that are tearing that
region of Africa apart.

In this context, the Government of Burundi notes
with concern that the Burundian rebels and other
negative forces based in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo are shifting towards other rear bases in the
subregion with a view to provoking total war in
Burundi. The Government will shortly be making
proposals to the Security Council that will be aimed at
ensuring that the successful implementation of the
Lusaka Agreement does not have the unfortunate result
of causing the death-mongers to move into
neighbouring Burundi and other adjacent countries - a
situation that would imperil the Arusha Peace
Agreement and that we hope the international
community will not allow to develop.

