Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Like other colleagues, I too regret your impending
departure from New York, Mr. President. We have
always greatly respected your wisdom and leadership
skills. We thank you for guiding the work of the
Security Council during the month of August. When
you arrive in Geneva, another centre of United Nations
activity, you will deal with disarmament and economic
issues as well as with the important issue of human
rights. We believe that in Geneva you will make an
important contribution to those fields.

In addition, Mr. President, please allow me to
thank you for convening this public meeting. It is our
hope that this discussion will be of assistance to the
Security Council in its wide-ranging search for ways to
strengthen United Nations peacekeeping operations in
order that it may better carry out its duty to maintain
international peace and security.

Over the years, peacekeeping operations have
played a very positive role in contributing to the
resolution of many regional disputes and in improving
stability in the regions concerned. Their use as an
important tool to maintain peace and security at the
disposal of the United Nations is increasingly
appreciated. I would like to take this opportunity to
convey my great appreciation to the personnel of
peacekeeping operations, especially to those who have
given their lives in the performance of their duties. We
owe our gratitude to them for their contribution in
bringing relative peace to many parts of the world that
had lacked peace and security. Last June, I took part in
the Security Council delegation visiting Central Africa.
In addition to their selfless sacrifice, I saw with my
own eyes how difficult it is for peacekeeping personnel
to carry out their work. Their spirit deserves our
appreciation and respect.

As other colleagues have done, I too would like
to strongly condemn the actions of those responsible
for the terrorist attack of 19 August against United
Nations personnel in Baghdad. I firmly believe that
such terrorist criminal activity will not succeed in
achieving its aims. The Security Council and the
international community will further strengthen the
peacekeeping activities of the United Nations.

An important practical challenge confronting us
is how to continue our efforts to enhance the efficacy
of United Nations peacekeeping operations. I would
like to make three points in that regard.

My first comment pertains to further improving
the ability of the United Nations to conduct
peacekeeping operations on its own. As the overall
situation evolves, the tasks faced by peacekeeping
operations are increasingly complex. Traditional
peacekeeping operations cannot meet the real
challenges that exist in certain regions. The situations
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Liberia
suggest that, under certain conditions, the United
Nations should become involved earlier, faster and
more forcefully. To that end, the United Nations should
enhance its peacekeeping capacities, mechanisms,
sources of troops, logistical support, training and
command structure in order to better meet actual
requirements.

Secondly, the Security Council should further
endeavour to guarantee the success of its peacekeeping
operations. To a large degree, the success of United
Nations peacekeeping operations depends on the level
of support they receive from members of the Council.
We believe that the Council should first make a greater
effort to help regional parties to make better use of the
conditions created by peacekeeping operations in order
to find political solutions. That is the only way that
peacekeeping operations can play their true role.
Furthermore, members of the Council in a position to
do so should continue to support peacekeeping
operations in the areas of logistics and personnel.
Moreover, the mandates of peacekeeping operations
should be well defined, clear and achievable, so as to
improve their effectiveness. In that regard, the existing
consultation mechanism should be fully utilized. In
addition, communication between troop-contributing
countries and the Secretariat should be strengthened
and expanded.

Thirdly, the African Union and subregional
organizations in Africa should receive assistance to
enhance their peacekeeping capabilities. Africa is a
focus of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Regional and subregional organizations in Africa have
contributed a great deal to regional peacekeeping
operations. They have also achieved positive results.
However, some peacekeeping operations have not fully
fulfilled their mandates due to logistical, technical and
financial constraints. It is our hope that the United
Nations, and Member States with the capacity to do so,
will increase their contributions to the African Union in
the areas of enhancing its institutional capacity, the
exchange of information, financing and the training of
personnel. In doing so, they would be improving the
Union's overall capacity in the areas of early warning
and peacekeeping operations.

China has consistently supported United Nations
peacekeeping operations, and favours enhancing their
effectiveness. Last year China decided to contribute
non-combat military units to the United Nations
standby arrangement for peacekeeping operations. An
engineering company and a field hospital were
deployed last March from China to the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. More recently,
with the initiation of the peace process in Liberia,
China has supported United Nations activities there,
and is studying the question of how we can make our
contribution.

In short, China shall continue actively to support
United Nations peacekeeping operations, to the extent
allowed by its own capacity, in order to contribute to
maintaining lasting peace and security.

