Mr. Yaacobi (Israel): At the outset, Sir, I would like
to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of April. I would also
like to congratulate your predecessor, Ambassador Legwaila
of Botswana, for the very able manner in which he
conducted the affairs of the Council last month.

May I say that I am very sorry that the Observer of
Palestine used this forum, at this meeting, to react on the
Lebanon issue, to which I understand that the Security
Council will specifically devote its evening session. I will
not respond to what he said on that matter. I will save my
remarks for the evening meeting.

During a span of eight terrifying days in February and
March of this year, Islamic fundamentalist terrorists from
the West Bank and Gaza perpetrated four separate suicide
bombings within Israel. These despicable crimes left 59
men, women and children dead and an additional 200
injured. As a direct result of these murderous acts of terror,
the Government of Israel imposed a closure of Israel to
residents of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.

The rationale behind the closure was to restore a
sense of security to the Israeli people by preventing
armed terrorists from infiltrating Israel in order to wreak
further havoc with the express intention of derailing the
peace process and killing innocent Israelis.

Let me make it very clear: the closure is not a form
of collective punishment against the Palestinian
population. It is a measure enacted solely to ensure
security for the people of Israel. We really experienced
that easing the closure preceded the terrorist actions
which took place in the urban centres of Israel. The
connection between the easing of the closure and those
terrorist activities was very clear and very obvious to
everyone who watched the scene.

Israel is aware of the toll that the closure has taken
on the residents of the West Bank and Gaza and we are
sensitive to the plight of the Palestinian population. But
this, for the time being, is a must to protect the people of
Israel and to save the peace.
In recent days, the Government of Israel has
undertaken measures to gradually ease the closure.
Currently, 7,000 workers from Gaza are permitted entry
into Israel each day. Since 8 April, Palestinians 45 years
of age and older have been able to cross into Israel to
earn their living. In addition, development projects
initiated in Gaza by Israel and other international donors
continue to employ over 25,000 local labourers. Lately,
the passage of goods has been greatly eased both between
Gaza and Israel and between Israel and the West Bank.

We know that there are still terrorists at large in
Gaza and other areas. The Palestinian Authority has
gained self-rule over Gaza and most of the West Bank
population. Following the successful elections there, we
believe that it is the Authority's responsibility to root out
the terrorist cancer. Those people are the enemies of the
peace which serves the future of all of us. We are indeed
encouraged by the efforts undertaken lately by the
Palestinian Authority to curb the terrorist groups within
the areas under its jurisdiction. Israel cannot lower its
defences in the face of terrorists whose stated aim is to
kill innocent people and to destroy the peace process. We
will continue to pursue peace and security for our people.
At the same time, we will fight the dark forces of
terrorism and fanaticism. We will not allow them to
destroy what we have worked so hard to achieve.

 

Unfortunately, the terrorists are supported by several
foreign Governments that have time and again shown their
opposition to peace through their words and deeds; one of
them was just invited to take a seat at the side of the
Security Council Chamber. The international community
must unite in its effort to isolate these terrorist regimes.

Israel is encouraged by the support of the international
community in this respect. Last month, at the Summit of
the Peacemakers in Sharm El Sheikh, Egypt, 29 world
leaders, including leaders from many Arab States, pledged
their commitment to enhance the peace process, to promote
regional security and to combat terror.

All of us, Palestinians, Israelis and others, must be
patient and look beyond our immediate hardships in order
to achieve our long-term goals of peace and security.

Despite the terrorist attacks, we shall continue to work
towards enhancing the peace process and towards
implementing the agreement which we have reached with
the Palestinians.

Additional resolutions here will merely serve to further
complicate the peace process. Only by confronting the
enemies of peace can we ensure that the peace process will
move forward. I call upon all the members of the Council
to do what really serves the building of a new order in the
Middle East and to contribute to a better future for us all.

