Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union and its States members.
The candidate countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland and
Serbia; the countries ofthe Stabilization and Association
Process and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia
and Herzegovina; the European Free Trade Association
countries Liechtenstein and Norway, members of the
European Economic Area; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.

I would first like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report on the situation in Afghanistan
and its implicaitons for international peace and security
(S/2014/163), as well as the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for his briefing in the Council
today.

The coming months and the upcoming elections
will be critical for Afghanistan, as the country needs
to safeguard the progress made over the past 12 years.
That will be the platform from which it can then move
towards the goal of self-sustainability. The United
Nations has played a critical role in the progress made,
and I would like to commend the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
personally for their continued support for the people of
Afghanistan. The challenges have also been outlined
in the statement by the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, for which I would like to thank him.

Afghanistan will continue to depend upon financial
assistance from the international community for some
time. With the transition to full Afghan control to
be completed by the end of this year and a reduced
international presence, the role of UNAMA will be
even more critical in ensuring the effective coordination
of donor assistance. UNAMA has a vital role to play
in enabling the Government of Afghanistan and the
international community to work together to fulfil the
mutual commitments made at the Tokyo Conference on
Afghanistan in 2012.

The importance of strengthening and safeguarding
the gains made on human rights, women's rights and the
rule oflaw for the Afghan people cannot be overstated.
While there have been real improvements in the lives of
Afghan women and children, due to improvements seen
in health and education, much more still needs to be
done, especially to implement the statutory protection
for women's rights, in order to enable Afghan women
to play a more substantial role in Afghan society. The
European Union welcomes UNAMA's work in that
regard, in fulfilment of its mandate, particularly in
promoting the rights of women and children.

The upcoming elections are the most immediate
priority in Afghanistan. The European Union condemns
the recent killings of journalists in Afghanistan.
Safety and security for the media is a crucial part of
the elections and, indeed, of democracy. The elections
offer the opportunity for the first democratic transfer
of power in Afghanistan's history. The European
Union welcomes the spirit in which the campaign has
so far been conducted. Of course, much of the focus
has been on the presidential election, but it is worth
recalling that the provincial council elections are also
vitally important to embedding democracy across the
country. The European Union hopes that the successful
candidates will better reflect the Afghan population,
in particular that the number of women representatives
will increase.

Following the invitation issued by Afghan
authorities to the European Union to observe the 5 April
elections, I am pleased to confirm that the European
Union has already deployed an election assessment
team. The team of 15 international experts is being led
by Thijs Berman, a member ofthe European Parliament,
and is based in Kabul.

The elections are vitally important, but they are
also a further step on the longer journey of firmly
establishing democracy in Afghanistan. Next year,
there will be parliamentary elections, with further
elections to follow in subsequent years. Viable and
capable electoral institutions and infrastructure are a
prerequisite for holding credible, inclusive, transparent
and legitimate elections, now and in the future. In our
view, therefore, the UNAMA mandate should include a
clear commitment to continued political and technical
support to elections in order to strengthen Afghan
leadership and ownership of the electoral processes and
to ensure that elections accurately reflect the will of the
Afghan people.

We would like to conclude by reiterating that
the international community should remain strongly
committed to progress in Afghanistan for the long
term. On our side, we will remain firmly focused on
supporting the people of Afghanistan to help them
achieve their aspirations. Our goal continues to be the
emergence of a fully self-reliant, peaceful, democratic
and prosperous society for the benefit of all Afghans.

