Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
would also like to thank Ambassador Qazi for his
introduction of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2006/945). I also wish to thank Ambassador Wolcott
Sanders for her briefing.

Allow me to make the following comments.

Unfortunately, my delegation agrees with the
observations made by the Secretary-General. We
reiterate our deep concern about the increasing
violence and great suffering of the Iraqi people. The
numbers set out in his report are terrible: more than
7,000 persons killed in two months - 5,000 of them in
Baghdad - over 1.5 million internally displaced
persons and 1.6 million refugees outside the country.
The violence, which is becoming increasingly
sectarian, threatens the very unity of the country and
poses risks to the stability of the region. Given that
situation, today each of us clearly realizes the need to
explore new solutions. From the point of view of my
delegation, those should be based on three pillars.

The first is to relaunch the Iraqi political process
to allow for reconciliation and acceptance of the new
institutions by all members of society. In that regard,
we hope that the proposals of Prime Minister Al-Maliki
on the holding of a national reconciliation conference
will be followed up positively. We also agree with the
Secretary-General that the constitutional review - a
concept that was agreed in October 2005 - is a key
element in establishing national consensus. We would
also like to commend the efforts of Mr. Qazi and the
in-depth dialogue he is carrying out with all Iraqi
officials.

The second pillar is to restore Iraq's sovereignty.
France has always believed that a timetable for the
withdrawal of foreign troops could contribute to
stabilizing the situation. My delegation is pleased to
note that prospects for such a withdrawal, which are of
course contingent upon a sovereign decision by Iraq,
have been very clearly set out for the first time in
resolution 1723 (2006). The establishment of the Iraqi
Government's authority could also provide a way of
achieving a solution to the critical problem of militias.
The latest human rights report of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Iraq states that they have been
operating with "almost total impunity".

With regard to the third pillar, namely, the
support of the countries of the region and the
international community, French Minister for Foreign
Affairs Philippe Douste-Blazy recently recalled that all
the countries of the region must be brought on board
once they have shown a willingness to contribute to
Iraq's stability.

France is also considering with interest the
Secretary-General's idea for an international
conference that includes all Iraqi protagonists and
external actors concerned - potentially along the lines
of the November 2005 meeting at Sharm el-Sheikh.
Such an initiative could help to reach collective
decisions on measures aimed at guaranteeing the unity,
sovereignty and independence of Iraq. We are prepared
to consider proposals by the Secretary-General, along
with any clarifications that Mr. Qazi may eventually
make, in particular as regards prospects for a regional
dialogue and an international conference.

France is aware of the difficulties of the situation
in Iraq and of the very courageous efforts by the people
and leaders of that country. The international
community must continue to play its role in assisting
Iraq and its leaders. France intends to play its full part
in that regard.

In that connection, my delegation would like to
commend the contribution made by the Secretary-
General in his latest report. We pay tribute to his
outstanding efforts in the past 10 years in connection
with the issue of Iraq. To echo his comments, it was
one of his greatest challenges.

