Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to begin by thanking Mr. Pascoe for his
statement this morning and by reaffirming my
delegation's absolute confidence in the excellent work
that he has accomplished. I also thank Mr. Mulet and
the Permanent Representative of Georgia for their
statements.

Like other delegations, Costa Rica believes that
the Secretary-General's statement reflects the chief
concerns of members of the Security Council regarding
this conflict, whose potential for regional
destabilization could lead to an extremely grave
situation. The Secretary-General accurately reflects the
conviction of the overwhelming majority of Members
of the Organization that only a peaceful and political
solution, not a military one, can put an end to this
conflict. Costa Rica regrets the scale that the hostilities
have reached and deplores the fact that they have
spread beyond the conflict zone. We are convinced of
the need for moderation on all sides, including that of
the Russian Federation, whose active participation in
this conflict threatens to transform it into a crisis of
international dimensions.

We do not believe that the repetition of mutual
accusations and the use of language that is truly
aggressive in any way helps to calm spirits or open up
options aimed at restoring peace. The repeated use of
terms such as "genocide", "ethnic cleansing" and "war
crimes" should give rise to reflection. In that regard,
we call for a more cautious approach with a use of
language that will provide more space and further
guarantees towards strengthening collective security

mechanisms.

It is time to call for moderation. In that regard,
we welcome the French Government's initiative and
the mediation efforts undertaken by other key actors.
We call for the immediate cessation of hostilities and
the restoration of the situation prevailing before the
conflict. That is the path towards peace, and the
Security Council must follow that path in compliance
with its lofty responsibilities. We are here to strengthen
the rule of international law, the guarantees of
collective security and internationally recognized
principles, including the protection of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States, in this case of
Georgia.
We reiterate our call for moderation, a cessation
of hostilities and the establishment of contacts between
the parties, as that is the road towards a political
solution to the conflict, something to which we are all
committed as we shoulder the lofty responsibilities we
bear

