Mr. Nteturuye (Burundi) (spoke in French):
Allow me, Sir, to recognize the noteworthy
achievement of the Pakistan presidency for the current
month. It is the result of your great activity and
personal skill. Burundi is proud of the work that you
have accomplished, and will continue to accomplish, in
the Council.

The Security Council devotes the greatest share
of its time to debates on conflicts in Africa. It is
regrettable that Africa always remains in a situation of
conflict, which, unfortunately, is slow in reaching an
end. The Council will soon undertake missions to
Central Africa and West Africa in order to observe on
the ground the difficulties of the various peace
processes under way and to discuss with national and
regional leaders, as well as with political and military
actors, how to restore peace in those two African
regions in crisis.

I will speak particularly of the upcoming Security
Council mission to Central Africa. In that context, I
associate myself with the statement to be made shortly
on behalf of the Central African States by the
Ambassador of the Congo, the current Chairman of the
Economic Community of Central African States. It is
true and important that solutions for the region must be
integrated in order to achieve peace, security and
stability in the entire region. The conflicts are
interconnected. As well, individual situations are made
difficult on all levels by the conflicts ravaging this part
of Africa.

I welcome the fact that the United Nations will
send, at almost the same time, a multidisciplinary
mission of United Nations agencies active in Central
Africa. All these missions testify to the real
commitment of the entire United Nations system to
stabilizing Central Africa.

Burundi greatly appreciates the Council's visits
on the ground, its missions to Central Africa for four
consecutive years. They have contributed to progress in
the search for peace, especially in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in Burundi. On the eve of
this fourth visit to the subregion, my delegation would
like to make the following comments and
recommendations so that the mission can truly meet the
expectations of the populations that are victims of a
state of war that has become unbearable and so that the
mission can strengthen the new leadership in the
second phase of the transition in Burundi. That
transition is crucial and must end a programme
expected to last 18 months, while adding the
programme that could not be accomplished during the
first part of the transition because of the ongoing war.

The first recommendation: we believe that the
Council's missions should give priority to calling for
the respect for and implementation of political
agreements and ceasefires that have already been
signed. So long as signatories do not attempt to
implement what they have agreed - even though that
may of course require many concessions on their
part - the peace progress could become bogged down
or even regress.

With regard to Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Lusaka and Arusha
Agreements continue to be the fundamental points of
reference. However, the side agreements that have been
signed since then should not be overlooked. In that
connection, the Security Council should remind
everyone that they must respect their commitments,
given that there is a tendency among some signatories
to question these agreements or - in the case of those
who have not signed the agreements and have been
invited to do so - simply to threaten to attack the
agreements and to nullify them.

Among the commitments undertaken in all the
agreements regarding Burundi there are also measures
to be taken against those who reject a negotiated peace.
Both the region and the United Nations were witnesses
when all that was agreed upon and signed in the Arusha
Agreement. It is always good to remind the armed
groups and movements who refuse to come to the
negotiating table of all that. I refer to the Lusaka and
Arusha Agreements because they are very closely
interrelated. There will be no peace in Burundi unless
there is peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and vice versa. The same can be said for the
region as a whole.

My second recommendation is that Security
Council missions to Central Africa should promote
lasting solutions, as the region is still living under the
threat of a new genocide. The deep-rooted tensions
linked to colonial history and to the poor leadership of
the first years of independence are at the heart of the
repeated violence in the subregion that culminated in
the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, as well as the genocidal
massacres that took place in Burundi in 1993, a few
months before the genocide in Rwanda. This has also
culminated in today's humanitarian catastrophe in the
eastern and north-eastern parts of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The ideology of genocide and
those responsible for genocide remain in the region,
spreading arms and death across borders. In order to
put to rest the demons of violence and to end the
physical extermination of neighbours, we should
endeavour to remember what took place in the Great
Lakes region of Africa so that we may discover the
truth, better address the problem at its roots and
prevent similar catastrophes for future generations.

The signatories of the Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi agreed to ask the Security
Council to establish a neutral and independent
international judicial commission of inquiry to
determine responsibility for all the violence that has
characterized the country's life since its independence
in 1962. The people of Burundi await the Council's
response during its visit to Burundi.

However, the Security Council must understand
clearly that the purpose of revisiting the past is not to
reopen wounds or to exact revenge. Rather, it is to gain
understanding and to make it possible for those
responsible to reflect and perhaps to ask forgiveness of
their past victims and to be reconciled with them. A
healing process is necessary. The Arusha Agreement
calls for a criminal tribunal to punish these crimes. But
it also calls for a truth and reconciliation commission.
All of this will of course depend upon the
recommendations to emerge from the inquiry. That is
why the commission is so important. It should be set up
as soon as possible, as the Council has already done in
similar situations, such as in Sierra Leone and, soon, in
Cambodia. As I have said, the purpose is to promote
reconciliation on a solid foundation. As someone said
earlier with regard to the fight against impunity, the
Security Council is called upon to help Burundi find
the means to fight this phenomenon, as that would be
the surest way to build a future on a solid foundation.

My third recommendation is that Security
Council missions be encouraged to deliver a clear
message to the protagonists in our conflicts. We often
hear from the public of the Central Africa subregion -
at least in Burundi - that the Security Council is being
repetitive in its messages. Perhaps they are not aware
of the virtues of repetition; or perhaps people forget
that it is the protagonists who have the primary
responsibility to settle their disputes. The Council can
only help Burundians and Congolese to achieve peace.
Nevertheless, there are situations that call for
more firmness on the part of the international
community. When, for example, the rebel group of
Pierre Nkurunziza - the Conseil national pour la
defense de la democratic-Front pour la defense de la
democratie (CNDD-FDD) - launches deadly bombs
against the capital's neighbourhoods or other
population centres throughout the country, that is called
terrorism and must be condemned as such. When that
group takes schoolchildren and student hostage and
places them in combat, it is violating the Convention
on the Rights of the Child. That too should be noted.

Along the same lines, the movements and
organizations that defy the international community by
refusing to come to a negotiating table open to
everyone should be neutralized. That is true in Burundi
of the Parti Liberation du Peuple Hutu-Forces
nationales de liberation (PALIPEHUTU-FNL) of
Rwasa Agathon. In a region that, as I have said, is still

living under the threat of genocide, and in a country
such as Burundi, where the situation is so conducive to
a repetition of similar violence, how can we continue to
accept a movement that bases its ideology on ethnic
violence? All of this must be said, and such movements
must be condemned.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
Council, which, in its presidential statement of 2 May,
reminded the PALIPEHUTU-FNL that the international
community was finding it increasingly difficult to
understand the legitimacy of its struggle.

Fourthly, it is important for the Security Council
to adapt the mandates of its interventions to the often
tricky conflict situations in Africa. In both Central and
West Africa, setbacks have sometimes derailed the
efforts of United Nations or regional observer or
peacekeeping missions. In Sierra Leone, Cote d'Ivoire,
Liberia and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Council and regional organizations are sometimes
suddenly called upon to modify mandates and to
increase mission troop levels. Such situations are
sometimes unpredictable. At other times it is inevitable
that such situations should arise, because the terms of a
mandate are not adapted or the troop numbers are
insufficient. The case of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is a good reminder of that.

With regard to Burundi, the presence on the
ground of a United Nations Office, as well Ambassador
Dinka's chairmanship of the Committee charged with
following up the Peace Agreement, reflect the unfailing
commitment of the United Nations to Burundi.

The newly created African Union responded to
the United Nations appeal for an African solution to
African problems by deciding to send an African
ceasefire observer mission, consisting of some 3,000
troops. After some initial delays, it seems that the
means are finally being found to deploy that mission,
which is, in fact, a force. But that effort must be
supported, because the force must be able to work for
some time. Apart from the financial and logistic
problems, there are also questions regarding the
mandate of the force, which will, we hope, be
discussed with the Security Council during its mission.
This will be the first time that the pan-African
organization has sent such a large force to a member
country.

Of course, a decision will have to be made about
what mandate to base the African mission's mandate
upon. Will it be based on Chapter VI, VII or VIII of the
Charter? Which of the three is best suited to the
Burundi situation? The Deputy President of South
Africa, Jacob Zuma, representing the facilitator, Nelson
Mandela, explained to the Council last December that
the African mission must ensure that the ceasefire is
observed and that, at the appropriate time, it hands over
to a United Nations peacekeeping mission in Burundi.

Here, I would also like to say that it is important
for us to demonstrate flexibility with regard to the
principles that guide the dispatch of a peacekeeping
force, because situations in different countries vary.
The United Nations, for example, hesitated to send a
peacekeeping mission to Burundi because the rebels
refused to lay down their arms before cantonment. That
was one reason why the Security Council was unable to
decide to send a mission. But if we demonstrate a little
patience and flexibility, the rebels will be encouraged
to lay down their arms once they are cantoned. Once
they are in that situation and we can work with them
psychologically, conditions might be created under
which a peacekeeping operation could function.

The transition from the African mission to a
United Nations mission need not be difficult, but of
course it must be prepared for. That is particularly
important, as a United Nations peacekeeping mission
would include a military component, as well as a
political, humanitarian and, most important, a
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
component, in addition to electoral support and so
forth. The African mission does not have all of those
components, but they will be necessary in the case of
Burundi.
There must be cooperation between the Council
and the African Union so that the ongoing efforts of the
international community in Burundi can be successful.
The forthcoming Council mission will provide an
opportunity for discussion with the Burundian
authorities.

Lastly - my final recommendation - the
population of the Great Lakes region hopes that the
political support of the Council will be accompanied by
an improvement in the economic and humanitarian
situation. In a region where political conflict is
exacerbated by insufficient resources to go around and
chronic poverty, the message of peace is wasted on
people who are starving. Of course, significant efforts
are now being made. But they are still inadequate, and
the mobilizing role of the Council in encouraging
donors will be decisive. According to a Burundian
proverb, those who share little or nothing accuse each
other of being thieves. That reality is still more
dramatic when it leads to the physical elimination of
others in order to take their place, or to take a larger
piece of the pie.

Before concluding, I would like to stress the
importance of cooperation between the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council in
assisting in conflict and post-conflict situations in
Africa. Burundi has sent a request to the Economic and
Social Council for the establishment of an ad hoc
advisory group to follow up the economic and social
situation in Burundi and to mobilize donors. I believe
that a decision on that issue will be taken at the next
substantive session of the Economic and Social
Council in Geneva. We hope that, as soon as such a
group has been set up, it will be able to work closely
with a similar group established under the auspices of
the Security Council so that their efforts can be
synergized and help to return stability and peace to
Burundi. I hope that the forthcoming Council mission
to Africa will be a complete success.

