Ms. Tang (Singapore): I take this opportunity
to congratulate the newly elected members of the
Security Council and to thank Kuwait for convening
today's meeting.

I would also like to thank Japan for its efforts
over the past two years in steering the work of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. Under Japan's leadership, a major
update of note S/2010/507 on the working methods of
the Council was compiled and issued in August 2017
(see S/2017/507). Last week, we began a new round of
intergovernmental negotiations on the reform of the
Security Council. Today's open debate is therefore a
timely occasion to reflect on progress made thus far
and to identify what can still be improved.

To begin, we are pleased that there has been
significant progress in transparency in recent years.
The number of public meetings has increased steadily
since 2013. The webcasting of meetings and media
interactions have given greater visibility to the
Council's work. More information is also now available
through the Council's website as well as social media.
My delegation is also grateful to the members of the
Council who have actively sought to engage and brief
the wider membership on key issues of interest.

Steps have also been taken in recent years to
improve inclusiveness. Singapore is encouraged that
Council members have made greater use of different
formats since 2015 to engage more interactively with the
General Assembly, including informal briefings, Arria
Formula meetings, Toledo-format dialogues and so on.
We also note the growing regularization of meetings by
each month's President to introduce the new programme
of work and wrap-up sessions to reflect on the work
of the past month. Those are important opportunities
for the Council to have exchanges with other Member
States on its work.

In terms of effectiveness, the record has been
mixed. There have been many occasions over the past
three years where the Council has achieved unity on
difficult subjects and found its voice in responding to
critical developments. However, there have also been
other occasions when the Council has not managed to
reach consensus or take adequate action. Singapore's
views on the use of the veto are well known, and I will
not repeat them here. Instead, we ask the members of the
Council, especially its permanent members, to reflect
on their role in the maintenance of international peace
and security. Robust debate must also be accompanied
by a willingness to compromise in the search for
solutions. Otherwise, this Chamber will amount to
little more than a stage on which the Security Council
postures, without meaningful impact on the ground.

These three principles are not mutually exclusive.
They are a call for the Security Council to be more
transparent, inclusive, and effective. Only then can
the Council also be more accountable to the wider
membership. In this regard, we think there are some
practical steps that the Security Council can take.

First, as highlighted by Kuwait in its concept note
for this open debate (S/2018/66, annex), more can be
done to involve concerned States or regional bodies
in issues and decisions that impact them. The Council
has stepped up informal consultations with concerned
States in recent years. We encourage the Council to
reflect on regularizing this process where possible. The
Council should also find ways to deepen its coordination
with troop- and police-contributing countries.
Our discussions on the evolution of peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and the peace continuum continue to
evolve, both within and outside this Chamber. The
common anchor for all these discussions must be
adequate consideration for the practical challenges
of implementation on the ground, especially when
decisions of the Council have far-reaching impact and
the General Assembly is called upon to resource them.

Secondly, we encourage the Council to look
seriously at ways to improve the implementation of
sanctions. Australia, Finland, Germany, Greece and
Sweden made an important contribution to this process
through the high-level review of United Nations
sanctions in 2014. Last year, Egypt made another
important contribution, convening several meetings on
the practical challenges of sanctions implementation
and capturing its reflections in document S/2017/1098.
This is a concrete beginning that we should build on
and the Council should find ways to continue working
with the General Assembly to take this forward.

Thirdly, we urge the Council to continue reviewing
and strengthening the role of elected members. The
Council's membership is not perfect. Sixty-six States
have never served on the Council, but the 10 elected
members of the Council were chosen by their peers to
represent their interests and concerns. A positive step
was taken last year to invite newly elected members to
observe meetings of the Council, subsidiary bodies and
informal consultations for the three months immediately
preceding their term of membership. More can be
done to strengthen their voice and role on the Council,
including through a review of the penholder system.

Finally, over the past year we have heard much
about performance, benchmarks and indicators of
achievement for the peacekeeping operations, special
political missions, subsidiary bodies and other
processes that are mandated by the Council. It is time
for the Council to also account for its own performance
and begin by adopting its own rules of procedure.
They constitute the only official set of rules guiding
the working methods of this important body, and
yet remain provisional after 70 years. The General
Assembly sought to ameliorate this situation somewhat
in 1952, by mandating a repertoire of the practice of
the Security Council. Sixty-six years on, the Council
should do its part.

Singapore welcomes Kuwait's chairmanship of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. This open debate is a positive
beginning, and we look forward to continued and
meaningful engagement between the Council and the
General Assembly under Kuwait's leadership.

