Mr. Umemoto (Japan): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Jan Kubis for
his informative briefing. I also appreciate Ambassador
Tanin's comprehensive statement.

At the outset, I wish to express our deepest regret
and condolences at the loss of many lives, both military
and civilian, during the recent brutal attacks by
anti-Government groups. We are also gravely shocked
by the assault against the International Committee
for the Red Cross which has sought to help Afghan
for years. Japan condemns these terrorist attacks
in the strongest possible terms and reaffirms its full
determination to contribute to the Afghan Government
and the international community's response in stopping
this cycle of violence.

Despite the dire security climate, we have all
witnessed the increased competence and confidence
of the Afghan National Security Forces in responding
to these incidents. We welcome the progress made by
the Afghan authorities in taking the lead for security
across the country, as well as the announcement of the
final tranche of the security transition. Challenges in
the field of security remain and are daunting, but we
have no choice but to remain united and steadfast in
our efforts.

We cannot overemphasize the crucial importance
of the meeting of senior officials to be held on 3 July,
which will serve as a transparent instrument to help
us realize our mutual commitments made at the Tokyo
Conference in July 2012. The concept of mutuality is
the key. Japan has already implemented $1.4 billion
of assistance out of $3 billion pledged at the Tokyo
Conference last July. We acknowledge the intense
efforts made by the Afghan Government in preparing
this first follow-up meeting.

At the same time, some urgent issues that constitute
the core of the Afghan Government's commitments
remain to be addressed. A basic electoral architecture
must be in place as soon as possible to guarantee fair
and credible presidential and provincial elections in
April 2014. Corruption continues to be a major concern
that undermines the legitimacy of the State. If the
international community is to uphold its commitment
made under the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework, it is incumbent on the Afghan Government
to move forward in a constructive manner, including by
resolving the Kabul bank case fairly and rapidly. The
full implementation of the Law on the Elimination of
Violence against Women is another key Government
commitment.

We believe that all the road maps leading to a
stable and prosperous future for Afghanistan can be
realized only when accompanied by the constructive
involvement of all regional actors, meeting both in
multilateral and bilateral frameworks. In that regard,
Japan welcomes the outcome of the ministerial meeting
of the Istanbul process in Almaty in April. Japan, as
a country supporting confidence-building measures
on disaster management, is pleased to share its own
experience in this area and to contribute to this regional
initiative.

Needless to say, Afghan-Pakistan dialogue and
good-neighbourly relations are vital to the long-term
stability of Afghanistan. It is our strong hope that the
new leadership of Pakistan and the Afghan Government
will further consolidate the mutual trust and respect
necessary to eliminate tensions over the border areas
and create further positive momentum for promoting
the Afghan-led peace and reconciliation process.

Finally, the peace and reconciliation process is the
predominant task at hand in order to achieve security
and political stability in Afghanistan. Japan welcomes
the opening of Qatar office by the Taliban and expects it
to result in the early start of reconciliation negotiations
and a peaceful resolution of the conflict. The
international community must remain united alongside
Afghanistan until peace dividends are delivered to all
Afghans.

