Mrs. Haley (United States ofAmerica): I would like
to begin today by expressing our heartfelt condolences
to the families of the 14 Tanzanian peacekeepers who
were killed and the more than 40 wounded in last night's
attack in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We are horrified by that cowardly attack on
those who were sent to protect the most vulnerable.

Terrorism and violent extremism exact a tremendous
human toll every day. There is not a member nation
of the Security Council that has not been affected. In
the Sahel, violent extremists - often in league with
transnational organized criminal networks - attack
civilians and peacekeepers with deadly impact that is
felt throughout and beyond the region. The setting up
of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) by member States committed to security
in the region shows real responsiveness to that threat.
Continued African leadership is vital in that long-term
effort, and the United States will continue to look
for ways to promote economic resilience and civilian
security through support for the Joint Force and other
G-5 Sahel initiatives.

By adopting resolution 2391 (2017), the Security
Council is also expressing its support for the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force by encouraging a technical agreement
between the United Nations and the G-5 Sahel. That
will provide some immediate logistical support on
a reimbursable basis. We wish to thank members of
the Council for their cooperation, especially France,
with whom we have worked closely during these past
months. The creativity and innovation in the text of
the resolution shows what is possible in the spirit of
cooperation on shared objectives. The international
community's support for the people of the G-5 Sahel
member States and the G-5 Sahel Joint Force is
undeniable and growing. The G-5 Sahel has numerous
partners in its effort to combat terrorism and violent
extremism. The United States has pledged $60 million,
thereby joining the European Union, France, Saudi
Arabia and others in supporting the G-5 Sahel.

We believe that such examples of expansive
international support show the best path forward for
future assistance to the G-5 Sahel's initiative. We
feel that the Council's encouragement of a technical
agreement is the full extent of any support role that
the United Nations should play outside of continued
coordination and technical assistance on a voluntary
basis. We must also not lose sight of the need to
ensure that the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali has the troops
and capabilities that it needs to succeed. The current
capacity of the Mission in terms of its manpower and
operational capabilities is not acceptable. It hampers
the Mission's ability to deliver on its own mandate, and
it will hamper its ability to provide support for the Joint
Force within the terms envisioned by resolution 2391
(2017).

In the longer-term, the G-5 Sahel must do a better
job in facilitating humanitarian and development
operations to help counter violent extremism and
re-establish State control. To be effective, the G-5 Sahel
must respect human rights, hold its forces accountable
and consult with local communities, while being
responsive to their concerns. As the Joint Force works
to ensure civilian security in the execution of its duties,
there will be a growing list of G-S Sahel partners to
help the Force work towards self-sufficiency.

We look forward to continuing our discussions
on improving the peacekeeping Mission in Mali.
We also welcome the opportunity to work with the
Malian parties to make progress on implementing the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, and
address other remaining challenges in the country.

