The League of Arab States highly appreciates the initiative by Germany to convene this meeting, which affords us the opportunity to advance the linkage between the Berlin process and the Security Council in addressing the situation in Libya. We remain fully committed to the implementation of the Berlin Conference conclusions in their entirety, including in our capacity as current Chair of the international follow-up committee and as co-Chair of its political working group. We are all aware of the complexities of the conflict and the challenges we face in its resolution. These have been exacerbated by the incessant external military interventions on the ground, the ongoing disregard for the arms embargo and the uninterrupted deployment of foreign mercenaries to the battlefield. This open- ended proxy interference in one of our Arab member States is unacceptable. Our position remains firm and clear - as was articulated once again during the League of Arab States' emergency ministerial meeting two weeks ago - in calling for the immediate cessation of hostilities and the withdrawal of all foreign forces present on Libyan territory. The Berlin process was essentially designed to uphold those commitments, yet they remain the subject of systematic violations, as is the case with the Council's own resolutions. That pernicious dynamic must change if we are to have any chance of returning Libya to the path towards a comprehensive political resolution of the conflict. The road map before us is clear. It was agreed in Berlin and was endorsed by the Council in resolution 2510 (2020). It was also recently afforded additional momentum by the Cairo declaration. Our immediate priority must focus on de-escalating the situation on the ground, especially around Sirte. We must continue to press the Government of National Accord and the Libyan National Army to engage in the 5+5 negotiations and reach a permanent ceasefire agreement under United Nations supervision. We must assist the Libyan parties and stakeholders in relaunching an inclusive political process to end Libya's transition. We also recognize the urgency of restoring Libya's oil production, under the authority of the National Oil Corporation, for the benefit of all Libyans and with arrangements for the equitable and transparent utilization of revenues. All of these tracks must remain wholly Libyan-led and Libyan-owned, under the auspices of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya and with the full support of the international community. They can succeed only in an environment free of all forms of intervention by external actors and of the threat posed by illegal armed groups and militias. The Arab League will continue to accompany the Libyan parties in pursuing these three security, political and economic tracks in a manner that safeguards Libya's sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and national unity. We remain fully opposed to any attempt to turn Libya into yet another theatre of external military adventurism or to demarcate its territory into zones of foreign influence. Our ultimate objective must be anchored in enabling the Libyan people to establish their permanent, unified and legitimate national institutions via free, fair and credible elections, which can be held only within an agreed legal and constitutional framework and in a conducive political environment and security situation. We call on all Berlin participants to recommit, in word and deed, to those goals, and we urge the members of the Council to unite in exercising their responsibility, in concert with the Arab League, to extricate Libya from this perilous abyss.
