Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zachary Muburi-Muita, Head of the United Nations
Office to the African Union, for presenting the report
on cooperation between the African Union and the
United Nations and, in that regard, the prospects for
that Office.

My delegation believes that deepening
cooperation among the various actors, including the
United Nations Office, is an immediate imperative.
Such an alliance will give us tangible results to the
benefit of international peace and security, in particular
peace in Africa. However, today we also have an
excellent opportunity to comprehensively assess the
progress, achievements and challenges of peacekeeping
missions in Africa as ideal tools to achieve and
strengthen agreement and harmony among peoples on
that important continent.

In that context, we appreciate the support
provided by the African Union for such aims. We
firmly believe that the African Union plays a crucial
role in the peace missions currently deployed on that
continent. Political support and military personnel, as
well as the police and civilian contributions, in
coordination with the United Nations, have reached an
unprecedented level in the history of those operations,
without which Rwanda, Cote d'Ivoire and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo would not have
been able to put themselves on track towards the
broadest goals of coexistence, such as those expected
of those countries today. Cooperation between the two
organizations is therefore essential.

On the basis of Article 52 of the Charter,
Columbia acknowledges the importance and value of
the efforts of regional organizations to achieve higher
goals, such as that of peace. With the support of the
Security Council, regions are called on to develop their
processes, to exercise their ownership and to promote
actions that truly respond to their own needs through
timely and appropriate assessments. Supporting the
stability and the development of countries through the
competent bodies of the United Nations is a priority
that should be given to any plan or mission under
development.

There are specific missions today, such as those
in Darfur, the Sudan and Somalia, that require actions
in the immediate future. Owing to events that continue
to unfold and their destabilizing consequences, we are
convinced that peace missions on the African continent
must be strengthened. At the same time, we should
seek formulas to resolve the fundamental social and
economic situations that give rise to such events.

Various regions of the continent are still
experiencing turbulent times, brought about by violent
groups, the impact of which makes it impossible to
foresee the ultimate consequences of their actions.
Therefore, our appeal is to maintain dialogue and
communication with all those who can provide a
peaceful solution to the conflicts. Thousands of lives
are at stake. In that regard, the humanitarian issue is a
priority of any agenda being developed. We know that
a peacekeeping mission must go hand in hand with
actions seeking peaceful solutions as a prerequisite to
the use of the military component so as to exhaust the
provisions of Chapter VI of the Charter prior to turning
to Chapter VIII.

My delegation believes that the training of
military, police and civilian personnel should continue,
in full compliance with the mandates that the Council
issues, with emphasis on the protection of civilians,
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and the
development plans for each specific mission. The
United Nations Office to the African Union can
certainly play a key role in the training process.

We still have much left to do. Joint capacity
should be given priority over any one-off initiative. To
that end, the allocation of and increase in the necessary
resources must be planned only when needed. It must
be recognized that such resources should not only
remain limited to the contributions of traditional donor
countries. We must explore alternative financing
methods that will make it possible to develop a
sustainable mid- and long-term plan, given the
difficulties faced by missions as they begin to deploy.
Such plans must have essential components, such as
the gradual transition to national capacities in order to
avoid the continued presence of United Nations troops
in certain scenarios.
Mission management is another aspect that we
believe to be important. We must set out a series of
measures and must assess results so that we can
achieve real answers as to the effectiveness and
efficiency of peacekeeping operations in the field in
order for actions and resources not to overlap. Perhaps
the United Nations Office to the African Union can
also cooperate in drawing up studies to that end. We
know that as processes improve, with better training of
its members, and, above all, better resource
management, results are multiplied. That aspect should
be taken into account.

As the Secretary-General rightly pointed out, the
requirements of the African continent are urgent in
order to prevent minor crises from becoming problems
to which the only solution is troop deployment. The
African Union plays a decisive role in that part of the
world with regard to security, development, prevention
and sustainability. The United Nations must stand
beside the African Union to support its efforts.
Colombia is certainly ready to support actions that give
rise to the security and peaceful coexistence of all its
States and of their citizens within respect for
sovereignty, the rule of law and the fundamental
principles of the Charter.

