Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to first thank Mr. Pascoe for his briefing.

We are meeting today to consider the situation in
Gaza, which has seen dramatic developments over the
past few days. Given the seriousness of those
developments, France believes that it is timely that the
Security Council consider this issue.

However, we believe that we must first recall the
context in which the situation in Gaza is taking place.
In fact, we must bear in mind the prospect laid out in
Annapolis by the parties themselves, the goal being
that all those involved should pursue the creation, by
the end of this year, of a democratic and viable
Palestinian State, living in peace and security alongside
Israel. That is a prospect and a process that involves all
of us.

Achieving that goal first entails support for the
Israeli Government and the Palestinian Authority in
their negotiations that have recently begun on
substantive issues. Israelis and Palestinians will both
need to be daring and creative in order to follow the
difficult path towards a settlement. It also entails
maintaining political and financial support for the
Government of President Mahmoud Abbas and Prime
Minister Salam Fayyad, so that they can make their
vision of a future Palestinian State both credible and
achievable.

Specifically, achievement means that the strong
signal sent during the international donor conference
for the Palestinian State held in Paris on 17 December
must lead to action. In Paris and since that time, the
delegations of 87 countries and international
organizations have undertaken to provide an amount of
money that to date totals $7.7 billion to support the
institution-building of the Palestinian State and
economic reconstruction in the coming three years.
All - States and international organizations - must
henceforth deliver on their pledged assistance.
Otherwise, the Palestinian people will see no specific
improvements in their living conditions and those who
oppose the peace process will be strengthened.

For our part, we continue to be strongly
committed. The French Minister for Foreign Affairs is
this very day meeting in Paris with the co-chairs of the
Paris conference, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Norway, Mr. Tony Blair and the European Union
Commissioner involved in order to ensure that there is
political follow-up to the conference of 17 December.

Returning to the situation in Gaza, France has
consistently highlighted the importance of confidence-
building on the ground. To maintain the momentum of
the Annapolis conference, the Israeli and Palestinian
peoples must be able to see positive developments in
their situation in terms of both security and economic
issues. For the time being, alas, the opposite is true.

It is up to the parties to meet their commitments
to immediately implement the first phase of the Road
Map. We are all aware of what that entails on the
ground. Israel needs to do more with respect to the
release of prisoners and the lifting of restrictions on
movement in the West Bank. Israel needs to stop all
settlement expansion and dismantle rogue settlements.
Palestinians, on their part, need to step up their efforts
in terms of security and fighting terrorism.

It is in that context that we need to analyse the
recent developments taking place in Gaza. In fact,
since June 2007, when Hamas took power by violent
means, Gaza has been in a crisis situation that can not
continue and that could be resolved by the
establishment of inter-Palestinian dialogue. Hamas, of
course, also must agree to accept Israel's right to
existence, renounce violence and meet its previously
undertaken commitments.

The reality on the ground, as just explained to us
in detail by the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, has been a clear increase in violence and a
serious deterioration in the humanitarian situation. That
situation is untenable and must be remedied.

France condemns the current violence in all its
forms. Hundreds of rockets have been fired over the
last several months into Israeli territory from the Gaza
Strip. We call, in the strongest possible terms, for a
stop to those launchings. No State can tolerate such a
threat to its civilians without making use of its
legitimate right to defend itself. That right should,
however, not be exercised indiscriminately. Israeli
Defence Forces need to spare civilians, who once again
have been victimized, killed or wounded by the
operations of the recent days. Furthermore, the
humanitarian situation in the territory, which had
already deteriorated, has become of grave concern in
recent days.

We can only greatly deplore the decision of the
Israeli Government to implement the blockade of Gaza,
and particularly its resultant cut-off of electricity. The
measures amount to the collective punishment of all
civilians, who were already deeply affected. That is
unacceptable. France calls for an immediate
resumption of all fuel delivery and for the maintenance
of essential services.

With our European Union partners and at the
urging of the Secretary-General, we also reiterate our
call for the lifting of all obstacles to humanitarian
activities, in particular the opening of crossing points
to goods and persons. Such a development, in
particular through implementation of the Agreement on
Movement and Access, is critical to the implementation
of plans undertaken by the Palestinian Government as a
result of the Paris conference. Like the Under-

Secretary-General for Political Affairs, we call for both
parties to meet their obligations under international
law, particularly with respect to international
humanitarian law.

We have received the draft presidential statement
circulated by the Libyan presidency. France is prepared
to work to adopt a text that would stress the Council's
concern with respect to the entire situation. In that
regard, we believe that the proposed text should be
amended to take all dimensions of the current
deterioration of the situation in Gaza into account.

