The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Sierra Leone, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Pemagbi
(Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Dmitry Titov,
Assistant Secretary-General for Rule of Law and
Security Institutions in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Titov to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Frank Majoor, Chairman of the Sierra
Leone Configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
and Permanent Representative of the Netherlands.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Majoor to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations. Members of the Council have
before them document 8/2008/281, which contains the
sixth report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Dmitry Titov and His Excellency
Mr. Frank Majoor. I now give the floor to Mr. Dmitry
Titov.


