Mr. Gargash (United Arab Emirates): I thank you,
Mr. President, for presiding over this important debate.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing.

As we approach the seventieth anniversary of
the founding of the universal and indispensable
Organization, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms its
commitment to the core principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and takes this opportunity to reflect
on how best to collectively equip the United Nations
to deal with the ever-more complex challenges before
us. The pressure of these challenges is fracturing the
global security order and being exploited by non-State
actors. Today more than at any time in recent history,
we need a strong and effective United Nations and
Security Counci. In that context, the United Arab
Emirates would offer the following observations.

First, it is vital that the Security Council consult
and coordinate with concerned States, even when
dealing with fast-moving, complex situations. Reform
of these working methods will make the Council more
effective and ensure that the full range of perspectives
of those countries most affected is considered.

Secondly, Article 52 of the Charter of the United
Nations states:

"The Security Council shall encourage the
development of pacific settlement of local disputes
through such regional arrangements".

Neighbouring States have the most to gain from the
peaceful resolution of a security crisis, and everything
to lose from protracted conflict. The role of regional
organizations as an essential component of the
international security system must be further utilized
and supported by the Security Council.

Mr. Wang Min took the Chair.

Thirdly, and perhaps most importantly, greater
consideration must be taken of the human cost of
protracted debates and inaction. For example, the crisis
in Syria has forcibly displaced close to 11 million
people - 3 million beyond its borders and 7.6 million
internally. Additionally, the suffering inflicted on the
Palestinian population, within Palestine and in the
diaspora, remains one of the gravest injustices in the
Arab region and has ramifications for the entire world.

In many parts of our region - especially in Syria,
Iraq and Yemen - current challenges have further
highlighted the need for legitimate, international
engagement. On a positive note, we would like to
commend the Security Council, and Jordan and the
United Kingdom in particular, for their efforts to
consult and involve the Gulf Cooperation Council in
the drafting of resolution 2201 (2015). Implementation
is now the priority challenge in Yemen, and the United
Arab Emirates stands ready to assist in this critical
task. The United Arab Emirates also reaffirms our
commitment to the legitimate Government headed by
President Hadi Mansour, calls for the release of Prime
Minister Bahah from house arrest, and urges a return to
the political process that was derailed through the use
of force by the Houthi militias.

With regard to Libya, the United Arab Emirates was
horrified by the recent atrocities and by the ongoing
terrorist attacks plaguing Libya and neighbouring
countries. We extend our full support to the endeavours
of Special Representative Bernardino Leo'n. There
is an urgent need for a political agreement. However,
a political strategy must be accompanied by a robust
posture that ensures that extremism and terrorism
do not take advantage of the ongoing international
mediation. That is why the United Arab Emirates
unconditionally endorses the draft resolution steered
by Libya and Egypt to lift the arms embargo on the
legitimate Libyan authorities. That is a necessary
step for the legitimate Libyan Government and the
House of Representatives to exercise their sovereign
power and secure regional stability. Any delay will
seriously impact the situation on the ground and send
a dangerous signal to the militant groups responsible
for the atrocities. The risks of militants gaining control
of Libya's significant resources and utilizing them to
export their extremist activities across borders are a
clear and present danger, not only for our region but
for the world. Our resoluteness as the international
community is required, or we will face a much more
complicated and dangerous situation in Libya.

We should also note where the international
community is making progress. Last week, the United
Arab Emirates was one of 60 countries to attend the
Summit on Countering Violent Extremism, hosted by
the United States White House, where the anti-Daesh
coalition confirmed it had made strategic advances on
the ground. At the United Nations, Security Council
efforts, including resolution 2199 (2015), sponsored by
the Russian Federation, to cut off the financial lifelines
of these groups, and resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178
(2014), on combating the flow of foreign fighters, are
significant.

Further normative developments to inhibit the
transmission of extremist messages - for example,
through social media - are also encouraging. As
President Barack Obama announced at last week's
Summit, the United States, in collaboration with the
United Arab Emirates, will establish a new digital
communications hub to work with religious leaders,
civil society and community leaders to counter terrorist
propaganda. Those efforts have been vital in the global
campaign to tackle the threat of extremism. Next, we
must focus on cooperating to eliminate the root causes
of extremism. In the United Arab Emirates, we are
building a national model of moderation, tolerance and
unity. We believe that our model is a contemporary
counter-narrative to extremism and a clear refutation of
the brutal and false message of extremists.

The challenge of countering extremism requires an
urgent, global, coordinated and multi-stakeholder effort.
There are many important United Nations initiatives in
place, particularly with regard to counter-terrorism,
but there is now a critical need to support effective,
State-led policy interventions to counter extremism
through social, economic and political means and on
multiple levels. I am pleased to announce today at
the Security Council that the United Arab Emirates
is launching a diplomatic initiative aimed at building
international cooperation and facilitating dialogue
through a contact group on countering extremism.
This strategic effort will focus on developing and
disseminating concrete solutions and best practices
in countering extremism. The progress made through
the contact group will complement and reinforce the
efforts of the anti-Daesh coalition and support the
United Nations to take effective collective measures
for the prevention and removal of threats in conformity
with the principles of justice and international law, as
enshrined in the Charter.

Let me conclude by congratulating China on its
successful stewardship of the Security Council during
its presidency.

