Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): Mr. President, it is a pleasure to have you
with us in the Security Council today. We would thank
you, Sir, for the presiding over this debate, and thank
the Secretary-General and the briefers for orienting us
with their experiences and recommendations.

Reconciliation plays an important role in the
processes of building and sustaining peace. In order
to achieve long-term success in reconciliation efforts,
we must prioritize the rebuilding of the rule of law
and the strengthening of State institutions, as well
as the confidence of those affected by conflict with
those institutions. Otherwise, it becomes impossible to
guarantee security, with impunity remaining the rule
and economic activities being severely disrupted. We
therefore insist that ending the climate of impunity is
vital to restoring confidence, including through the
prosecution of perpetrators of violence and by providing
the due reparation to the victims of the conflict.

Brutal memories of past abuses take years to heal.
In order to sow the seeds of reconciliation, it is therefore
necessary to use the potential of educational institutions
in their role as centres of social cohesion, reconciliation
and belonging when they promote understanding and
recognition of diversity.

We must further channel reconciliation efforts into
the programmatic work of United Nations agencies,
considering that they have vast experience and such
tools as impartiality and neutrality to contribute to
reconciliation. In peacebuilding and reconciliation
processes, we often pay attention to parties to conflicts
and forget those affected by them. Women, for example,
have taken on an important role in reconciliation
processes in Colombia, Guatemala, Liberia, Northern
Ireland and the Philippines, just to mention a few. It
is clear that the inclusion of women contributes to a
holistic understanding of what reconciliation requires,
increasing the chances of success.

I would like at this point to acknowledge the work
of Ms. Ilwad Elman and underline the excellent work
that has been done by young people in this area with the
following three points.

First, youth, including young women,
must be involved as stakeholders in the design,
implementation and monitoring of transitional justice
processes, including truth-seeking, reparation and
reconciliation programmes.

Secondly, young people serve as a fabric for
integrating the commitments assumed in peace
agreements and processes, being natural transmitters of
historical memory so that future generations may learn
from conflict thereby ensuring long-term sustainability.

Thirdly, young people should be recognized for their
key role in the raising of awareness and understanding
of the dynamics of conflict within their countries and
promoting the urgency of rebuilding relationships
among marginalized communities. As an example, the
Dialogue for the Future initiative developed under the
auspices of the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and implemented in conjunction with United Nations
agencies, the Republic of Serbia and Montenegro, is a
concrete example of a project that creates more spaces
for constructive dialogue among various communities
and leaders at the highest level, alongside young people.

The social capital of young people must be seriously
taken into consideration in peacebuilding processes.
We call on Governments, regional organizations,
United Nations country teams, peacekeeping and
political missions and stakeholders to involve young
people in political dialogue and formal and informal
reconciliation processes so as to ensure that their
participation be structured and systematic.

