Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): Allow me first to thank Mr. Ghassan Salame,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing. I would like to particularly commend his
efforts, as well as those of the entire staff of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), who
work in a particularly challenging environment. I also
thank Ambassador Schulz for his briefing as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya.

Belgium remains committed to the implementation
of the amended United Nations action plan for Libya.
As several speakers before me have said, in order to
break with the status quo, progress is necessary on
three tracks - political, security and economic. They
are inseparable as part of an inclusive process, led by
the Libyans themselves.
We therefore support the work of the Special
Representative and UNSMIL as a whole in their ongoing
efforts to convene the national conference in the near
future. Belgium calls on all Libyan actors to cooperate
constructively with UNSMIL towards the holding and
success of the national conference. The latter should
adopt all the principles and commitments necessary to
enable parliamentary elections to be held.

There is no military solution to the conflict in Libya.
Only a political solution can put an end to the violence
and make it possible to rebuild strong institutions for the
benefit of all Libyans, such as unified and professional
defence and security forces under civilian control.

The security situation in Tripoli remains fragile
despite the ceasefire and the security arrangements
agreed in September thanks to the efforts of the
Mission. We call for strict compliance with those
agreements and for the parties concerned to implement
their commitments. In that regard, we condemn the
recent fighting south of Tripoli.

Regrettably, the terrorist threat in Libya continues.
The absence of a political solution to the conflict can
only encourage the re-emergence of terrorism and of
Da'esh in particular.

In addition, I would like to draw attention to the
plight of children in Libya. Cases of the use of children
by armed groups in Libya continue to be reported.
Children have been deprived of their liberty by the
parties to the conflict and used in prisoner exchanges.
The United Nations has documented incidents that have
affected displaced persons and migrants, including
children, who have been denied freedom, raped or
subjected to prostitution or other forms of sexual
violence. It is essential that we protect children today to
prevent new cycles of violence and conflict tomorrow.

Responsibly and transparently managing the
country's significant sources of revenue, whether from
oil or taxes, for the benefit of all Libyans is a major
issue. Economic reforms, such as the elimination of
fuel subsidies and devaluation, also warrant priority
attention. We are encouraged by recently taken economic
reform measures and call on the relevant bodies to
continue along that path, especially with regard to their
work in developing a coherent and responsible budget
for 2019. In addition, Belgium supports UNSMIL
in its work to coordinate the reunification efforts of
organizations like the Central Bank of Libya and the
National Oil Corporation.

In conclusion, it is my hope that the integration of
economic structures canpavethewayforthereunification
of political and security-related institutions.

