Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to thank Germany, in its capacity
as President of the Council, for its very timely and
well-prepared initiative to hold an open debate on the

 

impact of climate change on the maintenance of
international peace and security. I also appreciate your
delegation's concept paper (S/2011/408, annex), which
concisely shows the potential implications of Climate
change on international peace and security.

Today's debate offers a meaningful opportunity
for the Security Council to discuss the link between
security and climate change, and my delegation would
like to take this opportunity to note the Council's
fruitful open debate on the interdependence between
security and development held in February (see S/PV.6479). In this connection, today's climate debate
may be able to marshal compelling arguments to
encourage world leaders to take responsibility for
reducing carbon emissions and to invest in adaptation
with a view towards guarding against future insecurity.

We are aware of the imminent threats that climate
change poses to the international community, as are
many scholars and Government officials. In May, an
international conference, "Threatened Island Nations:
Legal Implications of Rising Seas and a Changing
Climate", was sponsored by Columbia Law School and
the Republic of the Marshall Islands. A number of
policymakers and scholars shared common
understandings of the gravity of the current trend.
There have been many expert reports on climate
change and the security issue as well. A recent report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) predicted that, due to the expected sea-level
rise, many of the small island States will disappear by
the year 2040. In addition, the IPCC estimates that
between 350 and 600 million people in Africa will be
at risk of increased water stress by the middle of the
century, and that yields from rain-fed agriculture could
be slashed by up to 50 per cent by 2020. Therefore,
climate change could become a threat multiplier that
makes existing problems even more complicated and
intractable in terms of regional and global security.

In view of this, our delegation would like to
address three points. First, global challenges require
global responses. Given the global nature of climate
change, such responses call for the widest possible
cooperation by all countries and their participation in
an effective and appropriate international response.

Second, considering the respective
responsibilities of the principal organs of the United
Nations and the role of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) as the key

 

instrument for addressing climate change, the relevant
organs of the United Nations, as appropriate and within
their respective mandates, should intensify their efforts
in considering and addressing climate change,
including its possible security implications.

Finally, given its global dimension and
interconnection with other global issues, such as
poverty, underdevelopment and the food and energy
crises, climate change should ultimately be addressed
in the broader context of sustainable development. We
share the high expectations of the international
community for the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, to be held in 2012. We are
ready to join international efforts to ensure its
overarching success.

The Republic of Korea strongly supports the
efforts of the international community to address
climate change in the context of sustainable
development. As a country that has embraced green
growth as a national strategy, the Republic of Korea
has offered, in particular, to host the eighteenth
Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC in 2012. We
believe that our efforts can provide a unique
opportunity to highlight how green growth and a green
economy can not only help to mitigate and adapt to the
challenges of climate change, but also facilitate the
attainment of sustainable development. In that
connection, the United Nations Climate Change
Conference in Cancun last year made considerable
progress in the areas of climate finance, adaptation and
technology, resulting in the so-called Cancun
Agreement. We hope that this momentum can be
maintained in Durban this year.

I hope that today's debate will jump-start our
search for wise and insightful solutions to this far-
reaching problem, while simultaneously leading to
meaningful progress towards a breakthrough in future
climate change negotiations.
