Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Allow me to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his excellent briefing on the
situation in Kosovo, and convey to him my country's
support for the work that he is doing to reconcile the
various Kosovo Serb communities.

As the tenth anniversary of Kosovo's independence
nears, we are pleased to note that much progress
has been made in various areas in the country.
C6te d'Ivoire, which has recognized Kosovo as an
independent and sovereign State since 21 September
2011, enthusiastically welcomes the significant
progress made in the country. Since 1999, thanks to the
support of the international community, in particular
by UNMIK, Kosovo has made enormous strides in
security, economic and political areas. I would like
to take this opportunity to commend the work carried
out by the staff of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and by NATO troops in Kosovo.
My country also welcomes the unremitting commitment
of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
to the maintenance of multi-ethnic, transparent and
democratic institutions in that country i an effort that
dates back to 2008.

I would now like to focus on progress on the
political front and to highlight the successful holding
of municipal elections of October and November 2017,
which demonstrated the country's democratic backbone
and the maturity of its institutions. What is more, the
broad participation of Kosovo Serb communities in
the elections is cause for great optimism. Besides that,
the comprehensive implementation of the agreement
on the courts for northern Kosovo, concluded by the
parties on 10 February 2015, is proof of the Kosovo
authorities' recognition of their country's multi-ethnic
nature and their desire to consolidate the rule of law.
On the institutional front, Cote d'Ivoire welcomes
the implementation of the agreements on freedom
of movement. My country earnestly hopes that the
Assembly of Kosovo will definitively enact its draft
law on freedom of religion, with a View to guaranteeing
that freedom for the Kosovo Serbian community.

Despite my delegation's optimism on the political
situation in Kosovo, we continue to be alarmed by the
murder on 16 January of Mr. Oliver Ivanovie, leader of
the civic initiative Serbia, Democracy, Justice. It goes
without saying that if such political crimes continue,
they will seriously threaten the country's stability and
intercommunal unity. The Council must take every
appropriate measure to ensure that the perpetrators
of the crime are apprehended, tried and, if found
guilty, convicted.

We also call for the rapid operationalization of the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities,
which will undoubtedly contribute significantly to
calming the sociopolitical atmosphere and easing
tensions. We urge the Government and the Assembly
of Kosovo to honour their commitments with regard
to the Kosovo Specialist Chambers and the Specialist
Prosecutor's Office. We call on both to respect the
agreement signed in 2015 with Montenegro on the
demarcation of the two countries' shared border. My
delegation is of the view that these commitments are
inseparable from those undertaken by the Kosovo
Government on 10 November 2017 with regard to the
implementation of its European reform agenda.

In conclusion, we hope that the high-level meetings
held last year between Pristina and Belgrade political
authorities, under the auspices of the European
Union High Representative, Ms. Federica Mogherini,
will continue this year once again in the interests of
reconciliation and a final settlement of the Kosovo
question. These meetings, along with the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, have contributed
to the significant progress made in the areas of
human rights and national reconciliation between
Kosovo's communities.

Finally, as I should have said at the outset, my
delegation also wishes to thank Mr. Daeie, First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia and Ms. Citaku, Ambassador of Kosovo to the
United States, for their briefings, which have enabled
us to understand the reality of the situation in Kosovo.

