The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Nigeria.

First, I want to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, not only for his briefing this morning but
especially for his abiding interest in the subject under
review. My appreciation also goes to Mr. Toure' of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Commission and Ambassador Adenike
Ukunga of the Commission of the Gulf of Guinea for
their very lucid and detailed briefings.

The challenges of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
are enormous and daunting, with devastating
consequences for the economies of the countries of the
subregion. These reprehensible acts are unremitting
and continue to hamper maritime navigation,
consequently threatening the stability and security of
coastal countries and beyond.

We now know that perpetrators are motivated by
access to crude oil and that many of them are also
involved in the trafficking of illicit goods and small
arms and light weapons. Their activities have led to an
escalation in criminal acts, including armed attacks on
financial institutions along coastal areas. In convening
this briefing, our intention was to build on the
momentum already generated through the Council's
statement of 30 August and to underpin the resolve of
the international community to tackle the problem.

As has been aptly acknowledged by speakers
before me this morning, Nigeria is already working
with bilateral and multilateral partners to find solutions
to these challenges, One of these initiatives is my
country's cooperative arrangement with the Republic
of Benin to confront piracy, in the spirit of collective
security. Our joint patrol mission incorporates a fleet of
armed vessels to patrol our territorial waters and
disrupt the activities of pirates. For an initial period of
six months, a fleet of six Nigerian vessels and
helicopters will work with the Beninese navy to deter
piracy and counter the threat that these criminals pose.
The recent call by ECOWAS to incorporate elements
from all of the coastal areas and beyond in the patrol
and interdiction effort is very pertinent. Obviously, this
problem cannot be resolved by two nations alone; it is
a collective responsibility. For this reason, we eagerly
look forward to the forthcoming summit of the heads
of State of the region to devise a comprehensive
strategy to address this important threat.

We are nevertheless mindful of the capacity
constraints that confront countries in the region. It is in
that connection that we call on the international
community to support ongoing regional efforts. Thus
far, France and the United States have deployed naval
vessels to the area and are assisting with anti-piracy
training. Such international initiatives, including
efforts by the United Kingdom, are highly appreciated
and must be encouraged. China has also recently
offered funds to the Government of Benin to assist in
its antipiracy efforts. I believe I speak for many
affected countries when I say that we are willing to
form strategic and lasting partnerships with
international stakeholders to exchange information and
technical know-how, mount surveillance and formulate
interception techniques, all culminating in capacity-
building.

There is no doubt that cooperative arrangements
such as these will benefit enormously from the overall
strategic assessment of the Secretary-General's
intended mission to the region. We hope that the
briefing today will provide the mission with the
necessary focus to undertake this assignment. It is also
expected that concrete proposals for United Nations
support will emerge from the mission, capitalizing on
the presence and activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa, the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime.

The need for concerted international effort to
address the problem of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
cannot be overemphasized. The Council must therefore
lend its support to regional efforts and, in so doing,
eliminate the security challenge that affects not only
the countries of the Gulf of Guinea but also
international navigation.

Today, following this meeting, Nigeria will
circulate a draft resolution that builds on the statement
of 30 August. The draft resolution focuses on regional
cooperation as the basis of the fight against piracy in
the Gulf of Guinea and calls for firm, strategic and
targeted international support for this demonstrable
political will.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Benin.

