Mr. Chabar (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset, Sir, to extend to you and your friendly
country, Slovakia, our sincere congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We wish you every success in your
work. Nor must I fail to pay tribute to your
predecessor, the representative of the Russian
Federation, for the wisdom with which he conducted
the work of the Council last month.

Permit me also to extend our thanks to Mr. Alvaro
de Soto for his briefing today. The briefing showed that
this meeting of the Security Council to discuss the
situation in the Middle East is taking place in very
delicate and sensitive conditions that raise both hope
and concern: hope in the wake of the Mecca agreement
between the Palestinian parties and the continuation of
international efforts to revitalize the peace process and
direct negotiations between the parties; and concern
because of the explosions in brotherly Lebanon this
morning, in addition to the continued tense situation in
the occupied Palestinian territories, particularly
Al-Quds Al-Sharif, which is due to the continuation by
the occupying Power of its policy of provocation and
daily humiliation of the Palestinians.

In this context, Morocco associates itself with
those that have condemned Israeli intransigence. In
that regard, we particularly support the statements
made on behalf of the Group of Arab States, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the Non-
Aligned Movement. Those statements clearly
expressed the Kingdom of Morocco's concerns with
regard to the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories.

I will address only certain points, in view of the
fact that the Kingdom of Morocco, in the person of His
Majesty King Mohammed V1, is currently presiding
over the Al-Quds Committee of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and given the gravity and the
consequences of the situation in Al-Quds Al-Sharif.

It is no secret that what the Israeli authorities in
occupied East Jerusalem are calling renovation work in
the vicinity of the Al-Aqsa mosque has led to the
collapse of the Al-Maghariba gate and two rooms
adjacent to the Al-Boraq wall, which are extremely
important religious and historic sites. Nothing can
justify such actions, which constitute further violations
and aggression against the sanctity of the Al-Aqsa
mosque and threaten it with collapse, and they provoke
Muslim sentiments. These actions contravene
international laws and norms and constitute a direct
violation of Security Council resolutions.

His Majesty King Mohammed VI, Chairman of
the Al-Quds Committee, immediately condemned the
work being carried out in the vicinity of the Al-Aqsa
mosque - work aimed at changing the demographic
character of the site, which is a symbol of Islamic
culture. He reiterated that Israel must abide by United
Nations resolutions concerning Jerusalem and
reaffirmed the legal imperative of preserving its
religious, cultural, geographic and demographic
character. The Chairman of the Al-Quds Committee
also called upon Israel to immediately halt these
activities and instead to focus on peace negotiations
and mutual respect.

These illegitimate Israeli practices, which pose a
grave threat to the region, should be addressed by the
Security Council, which bears primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
The Council should urge the Israeli Government to put
an immediate end to these violations and to comply
with all relevant international resolutions.

The Kingdom of Morocco believes that the time
has come for the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibilities, just as Palestinian and Arab efforts
have been made at Mecca to prevent the situation from
deteriorating further. My delegation believes that a just
and equitable peace must be based on the security and
stability of the region and that the path of peaceful
negotiations is the only basis for international
legitimacy. That path will free the Middle East from
the vicious circle of violence and counter-violence.

Accordingly, we believe that every effort should
be made to that end. All the parties must return to the

negotiating table as the only means of establishing a
just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East,
leading to Israeli withdrawal from all occupied Arab
and Palestinian territories and to the establishment of
an independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem
as its capital. As ever, Morocco stands ready to
contribute to any effort to escape this vicious circle,
which would enable the peoples and the countries of
the region to live in peace and security.

