Mr. Heinbecker (Canada)(spoke in French): Mr.
President, thank you for organizing today's meeting. I
also want to thank the Secretary-General and Ms.
Frechette for their excellent report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. I would also like to thank
Mrs. Robinson for her very relevant comments on the
work of the Council.

My remarks will focus on three themes, the first
of which is the important progress achieved; the
second, the protection of civilians and shared
responsibility; and, thirdly, the Council's responsibility
to see to it that its recommendations are implemented.

(spoke in English)

The Permanent Representative of Singapore was
kind enough to refer to our initiative to put this issue
on the Council's agenda. We did not do so lightly. I
remember very well in the months of December and
January 1999 receiving the advice of colleagues -
well-intended advice - that this was the "big leagues",
that it would be wise for new members of the Council
not to take the initiative so early, that it would be a
good idea to learn the ropes a bit before pressing
ahead. The difficulty we had was the calendar. We had
no choice; we had only two opportunities to put our
views forward; and one of those opportunities had
already come in February 1999. So we took our
courage in our hands, and we did do it. One never
knows what one can accomplish until one tries.

It is evident that the Council has made a lot of
progress since that time. The safety of people has
moved from the periphery of the Council's
preoccupations towards the centre. The protection of
civilians is now a routine element of Council discourse.
That could not have been made more clear than in this
morning's debate, when the need to mainstream the
protection of civilians in the work of the Council and
of the Secretariat was widely noted and with scarcely
any reservations. This is an important step forward.

In the past, peacekeepers lacked explicit authority
to prevent or stop violence against civilians within
their areas of deployment. Recently, however, three
peacekeeping missions - in East Timor, Sierra Leone
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo - have
included provisions for civilian protection. Advisers on
child protection and on gender have been integrated
into missions, as have human rights officers. This is
also progress. The Council now regularly calls on all
parties to conflicts, State and non-State actors alike, to
respect international human rights and humanitarian
law. The Council also has evidence of willingness to
take on the issue of impunity. Nothing will strengthen
the Council's hand more than the widespread
ratification of the Statute of the International Criminal
Court. The Council has improved its sanctions
instrument, including better targeting and streamlined
humanitarian procedures. This amounts to the
beginning of a culture of protection- but only the
beginning. There have been setbacks.

In particular, we regret that the revised concept of
operations for the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC)
excludes the extension of protection to the civilian
population. This exclusion was retained by the Security
Council in its resolution 1341 (2001) of 22 February
2001. Obviously, MONUC's 1,900 armed personnel
could not provide widespread protection for civilians in
the Congo. Equally, it is clear that what one
Ambassador referred to as "gaps" between ambition
and capability should not be allowed to appear. But
MONUC could have, and in our View, should have,
been mandated under Chapter VII to take the necessary
action "within its capabilities and areas of deployment"
to afford protection to civilians under imminent threat
of physical violence. All United Nations peacekeeping
forces should be so mandated explicitly, and with the
same caveats, where necessary.

The second theme I would like to stress today is
that the protection of civilians is everyone's
responsibility. We believe it is appropriate that this
report of the Secretary-General go to the General
Assembly as well. There is work there to be done. For
example, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations can also help to give effect to the Secretary-
General's recommendations. Moreover, we endorse the
Secretary-General's suggestion that the protection of
civilians be addressed at the upcoming high-level
consultations between the United Nations and regional
organizations.

I would like to pick up on a point made by the
Permanent Representative of Singapore when he
referred to sovereignty and humanitarian intervention.
People here will know that the Government of Canada,
in cooperation with a number of foundations, has
promoted work done by an international, independent
commission to examine the issue of humanitarian
intervention and State sovereignty. We are asking it to
try to deal with those issues and to try to synthesize
what are otherwise very difficult concepts to reconcile.

I recall that, in another time and place, Madam
Brundtland and the World Commission on
Environment and Development, as it was then called,
did manage to synthesize two of what, up to that point,
had seemed to be irreconcilable points: the necessity of
economic growth, on the one hand, and the imperative
of environmental protection, on the other. I do not
think it is beyond the ingenuity of humanity to come up
with a similar synthesis in this area. In our View, that
would be based on the idea of the responsibility to
protect people. That responsibility, obviously, begins
with the host Governments of the countries concerned,
but in extreme cases also extends to the international
community.

Our third point is that existing resolutions and
recommendations on the protection of civilians must be
implemented. In his recommendations, the Secretary-
General could not have been clearer in putting the ball
in the Security Council's court. We encourage him to
continue to keep this issue before the Council. We also
encourage him to tell the Council, to paraphrase the
Brahimi report, what it needs to hear and not what at
times might be more convenient to say.

Resolution 1296 (2000) asked the Secretary-
General to include observations related to the
protection of civilians in his regular reports to the
Council. This practice should be systematic and should
go even further. It should also identify cases where
particular recommendations for the protection of
civilians should be acted on especially promptly. We
want to see further reports on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict not as ends in themselves, but as
catalysts for continued action. In this regard, we
support the recommendations on follow-up action put
forward today by the Permanent Representative of
Norway.

Whatever document emerges from today's
debate- and we agree with the President and the
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom that
it need not be another presidential statement or
resolution - should task the Secretary-General with
producing the next report on protection of civilians in
armed conflict as well. The Council must not allow
itself to be distracted by urgent needs from
implementing the Secretary-General's 54
recommendations. One way of not being distracted is
to implement the annual audit idea put forward by the
delegation of Singapore.

We are encouraged that the Secretary-General's
report recognizes the positive role that the private
sector can play. It also documents how corporate and
non-State actors in conflicts can prolong and worsen
war. We therefore support further study into the roles
the private sector can play in conflict areas, including
through conflict prevention activities such as early
warning and, subsequent to conflicts, through post-
conflict reconstruction. Ways of explicitly integrating
private-sector activity into a broader protection-of-
civilians strategy need to be developed.

I would like to conclude with a few words
directed to members of the Council. The Secretary-
General's report is an excellent one. The Council has
the opportunity to make progress with it. Please do not
let politics or the urgency of a particular crisis obscure
these fundamentals: the world has changed; the nature
of conflict has changed; civilians have become the
principal victims; people need your protection; your
implementing the Secretary-General's
recommendations can go a long way towards giving
them that protection.

