Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Haiti and Head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), Ms. Sandra Honore,
for her briefing and for her dedicated service. In just a
few days' time, the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) will take over from
MINUSTAH. That will testify to both the successful
completion ofMINUSTAH's mandate and our readiness
to move towards a new form of the United Nations
presence in the country, one that is better adapted to
the requirements and conditions on the ground.

We would like to commend in particular the
important role that MINUSTAH has played in ensuring
stability and security during particularly difficult
times for Haiti, such as the aftermath of the devastating
earthquake in 2010. The Mission was also there assisting
Haitians in arranging the latest elections and providing
urgent aid after Hurricane Matthew. Its contribution
to strengthening the capacity of State institutions, in
particular the Haitian National Police, is second to
none. In that light, Ukraine pays special tribute to all
of the brave men and women who have served in the
Mission over the past 13 years.

We are pleased that the country has overcome
numerous challenges and difficulties and returned to a
constitutional order based on the will of the voters. At
the same time, as the Secretary-General rightly stated
in his recent report (S/2017/840), the country should
waste no time in making full use of the current window
of opportunity. It is critical to advance dialogue among
all political stakeholders so as to ensure stability and
security, along with further democratic consolidation.
We fully support the Government's calls for
broader unity as a prerequisite for moving forward with
the reform process, ensuring respect for human rights,
combating criminality and sexual and gender-based
violence, putting an end to impunity and providing
for accountability. In that regard, MINUSTAH should
provide the crucial support needed to advance those
important transformations and consolidate the progress
achieved. We have full confidence that MINUJUSTH
will also deliver effectively on the mandated tasks,
such as strengthening the rule of law, further
supporting the development of the Haitian National
Police and engaging in human rights monitoring and
reporting. However, in order to ensure the success of
the mission, the commitment of the Haitian authorities
will be essential.

The recent report of the Secretary-General
highlighted the gains made over the years in developing
the capacity of the Haitian National Police. We welcome
the adoption of the new strategic development plan of
the National Police covering the period up until 2021.
At the same time, further prioritization of the Haitian
National Police's build-up is essential, both for the
Government and for MINUJUSTH. Taking note of
the Government's decision to re-establish the armed
forces, we share the idea that such an initiative should
not affect the work being done on the development of
the Haitian National Police.

However, the police is only one of the components
of the justice sector that require further reform. The
Haitian authorities need to carefully balance capacity
development with enhanced civilian oversight. Equally
important are the continued efforts of the international
community, multilateral agencies, Haiti's regional
partners and individual States in supporting long-term
security and development in the country.
We recognize that considerable national, regional
and international efforts have been made to combat
cholera. On 13 July the General Assembly adopted
resolution 71/161, on the new United Nations approach
to cholera in Haiti. Ukraine has responded to the
Secretary-General's appeal and has contributed to the
United Nations Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner
Trust Fund.

We share the concerns about sexual exploitation
and abuse related to the United Nations presence in
Haiti that were raised during the Council's visit to the
country in June. Having signed last month with the
Secretary-General the Voluntary Compact regarding
that problem, Ukraine is strongly committed to a policy
of zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse for
all peacekeepers and United Nations staff, uniformed
or Civilian.

To conclude, no progress could have been achieved
without strong will on the part of the Haitian people.
While facing many political, economic and social
challenges, as well as creeping natural disasters, they
have demonstrated remarkable resilience in rebuilding
the country, despite all odds. We express our sincere
congratulations to them. Ukraine remains a committed
partner for Haiti in its endeavour to move forward on
the path to sustainable peace and development and to
build "one Haiti for all Haitians", as President Moise
said in his inauguration speech.

