The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Belarus, Burundi, Canada, Costa Rica, Fiji, Finland,
India, Indonesia, Japan, Jordan, Liechtenstein, Mexico,
the Netherlands, Nigeria, Peru, the Republic of Korea,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland and
Uganda in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Juan Mendez,
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide and Director of the
International Centre for Transitional Justice.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Mendez to take a seat at the Council
table.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 1 October 2004 from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations,
which will be issued as document S/2004/793, and
which requests that the Security Council invite the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to participate in the
open debate on "Justice and the rule of law: the United
Nations role".

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting, in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
take the seat reserved for him at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before the report of
the Secretary-General - whose presence here this
morning I very warmly welcome - on the rule of law
and transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict
societies, document S/2004/616.

At this morning's meeting, we will first hear an
introduction by the Secretary-General of his report.
Thereafter we will hear a briefing by Mr. Juan Mendez,
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide and Director of the
International Centre for Transitional Justice.

In the afternoon, we will hear a briefing by Mr.
Mark Malloch Brown, Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme.

I should like very briefly to say, in welcoming
this debate, that this is an initiative that we launched
just over a year ago. I think that there has been
significant interest in this issue and that there is a
developing consensus. I hope that we are going to have
a very constructive debate today, building on the work
of the Secretary-General's report and taking these
critically important issues forward. I am certainly very
pleased to be here to witness these proceedings.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General
and invite him to take the floor.


