The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Benin.

Benin joins in the expression of condolences to
Bangladesh and of sympathy to the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and to the families of the soldiers who fell
on the field of honour in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

I too would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa, for the introduction he gave us this morning
to the progress report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) and for his personal account of
developments in Timor-Leste.

My delegation is pleased at the ongoing progress
being made by this young State in strengthening its
institutions. We congratulate the Government and
people of Timor-Leste on having kept up the
momentum of the transition since the country acceded
to national sovereignty. We encourage them to stay the
course and continue to work hard, fully mindful of the
prospect of the withdrawal of the United Nations
Mission.

In this respect, the Secretary-General's report
describes not merely progress made but also challenges
for the short- and medium-terms in UNMISET's main
areas of operation to make the process of building a
democratic nation irreversible and to deal with the
difficulties involved in the transition from a period of
providing emergency assistance to a period of
promoting sustainable socio-economic development.

In particular, we welcome the success of the local
elections and the continuing strengthening of the
legislative bodies. However, the persistence of the
latent confrontation between the police and the army,
the lack of professionalism among law enforcement
forces and human rights violations are of concern to us,
as is the lack of progress in the area of border
demarcation.

These issues show that there are still difficulties
and risks endangering the transition process in Timor-
Leste, and they are a challenge to the international
community. The international community must
continue to support the efforts being made by that
country to resolve the many problems it faces in the
particularly crucial areas of security and defence, the
establishment and consolidation of political
institutions, the civil service and the improvement and
maintenance of good neighbourly relations with
Indonesia and Australia.

With regard to the assessments made by the
Secretary-General in his report, Benin supports the
idea of keeping a United Nations presence in Timor-
Leste after 20 May 2005 and will take an active part in
discussions about the form and modalities for that
presence. In our View, that presence should be defined
through taking thorough account of the context and of
the capacity of the Timorese to meet the challenges
that have been identified, using their own resources.

We believe that the withdrawal of UNMISET,
which was set by resolution 1543 (2004), should be
gradual and should take place in a way so as to not
compromise what has been achieved in the essential
sectors covered by the Mission.

The continuation of training programmes for the
civil service and the judiciary, as well as in connection
with the prosecution of serious crimes, may be decisive
in strengthening the bases of the rule of law in the
country. Benin cannot endorse any mechanical
interruption of training courses just because the
Mission that initiated them has reached the end of its
mandate.

The international community must also resolutely
continue to fight impunity and make sure that all
persons who committed serious crimes during the
violence of 1999 answer for their actions. The question
of bringing to justice the 304 indictees living outside of
Timor-Leste is a real challenge. We welcome here the
establishment in February by the Secretary-General of
the independent United Nations commission
responsible, inter alia, for assessing progress made by
the tribunals in Jakarta and Dili in dealing with their
caseloads.

Furthermore, the exit strategy for UNMISET
must be based on follow-up on assistance that might be
provided by the United Nations funds and programmes.

In conclusion, we appeal to the international
community to remain committed to Timor-Leste,
because, despite the great efforts that have been made,
a lot still remains to be done. Timor-Leste still needs
international assistance.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Australia, on whom I call.

