Mr. Vieira (Brazil): Brazil is a staunch advocate of
a more transparent Security Council. I therefore thank
the Government of Kuwait and commend you, Sir, for
organizing this open debate.

I will address two sets of issues: first, the working
methods within the Security Council, while focusing
on aspects related to the use of force, and, secondly, the
Council's methods of work in its relations with other
organs and interested Member States.

We should devote more attention to the working
methods of the Council as they relate to the use of
force. Communications issued under Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations - that is, invoking self-
defence - and the follow-up of the relevant resolutions
authorizing the use of military force are two cases in
point. We have witnessed an increase in the number
of letters submitted to the Council seeking to justify
military action, especially in the context of counter-
terrorism. The current practice indicates that there
is ample room for improvement with regard to the
content, timing and circulation of Article 51 letters.
A proper follow-up of such communications is also
needed, thereby ensuring that the obligations set out in
the Charter are fulfilled.

It is critical that States provide sufficient
information regarding the attack based on which self-
defence is invoked so as to allow for the appraisal
of proportionality and necessity. While the Charter
demands that measures to implement self-defence
be reported immediately, it far too often happens
with delays. The flow of information directed to
non-members of the Council should also be improved.
Brazil suggests that a special section dedicated to
listing all communications received under Article 51 be
created on the Council's website.

I now wish to draw attention to another aspect of
the working methods of the Council concerning the
use of force - that is, the exceptional circumstances
in which it authorizes military interventions. The
implementation of such resolutions must be responsibly
carried out so as not to harm those whose very
protection is invoked. Action must be judicious,
proportionate and strictly limited to the objectives of
the mandate. To that end, Brazil has suggested that the
Security Council draw inspiration from the relevant
peacekeeping and sanctions regimes in order to ensure
that such resolutions include sunset clauses, demand
adequate reporting and establish panels of experts to
monitor their implementation. We live in challenging
times in which we cannot allow for the erosion of the
authority of the Charter, especially regarding the rules
on the use of force.

Allow me now to address the working methods of
the Council with regard to other organs and interested
Member States. I will focus on dialogue with troop-
and police-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCs),
with the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and with
international courts. States that have a special interest in
a substantive matter under consideration by the Council
should be allowed to take part in its consultations so
that their views are taken into account. That applies
not only to countries on the Council's agenda, but
also to TCCs and PCCs. That interaction should be
meaningful, inclusive, active and dynamic so as to allow
an exchange of views that genuinely contributes to the
review of the mandate. That is particularly important
at a time when the number of fatalities in peacekeeping
operations is increasing owing to, among other reasons,
the gap between the expectations arising from Security
Council mandates and the delivery capacity in the field.

Deliberations of the Council would also benefit
if it exchanged views more frequently with the
countries chairing the Peacebuilding Commission's
configurations. That could be done informally - even
at the expert level, and in addition to the invitation
to deliver formal briefings to the Council, which
is a practice we much appreciate. In that regard,
we encourage the Secretariat to make the proper
arrangements to allow Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General and Special Envoys to brief the PBC
configurations prior to Security Council meetings so
that the Commission can fully play its advisory role
vis-a-vis the Security Council. The Council could also
consider inviting the Chairs of PBC configurations to
join some of its official missions. The Chairs of PBC
configurations maintain close contact with national
leaderships and senior United Nations officials in
the field, make frequent visits to the country and
benefit from information provided by a network of
embassies that, in some cases, is broader than those
of Security Council members. That potential could be
better explored.

I would like to make two comments regarding the
relationship with international tribunals. First, there
is no compelling reason for the annual briefing by the
President of the International Court of Justice to be
private. On the contrary, the role of the Court in the
peaceful settlement of disputes and the strengthening
of the international rule of law attests to the need to
make such meetings public. Secondly, with regard
to referrals to the International Criminal Court, it is
neither fair nor sustainable that its financial costs fall
solely on the States parties to the Rome Statute. That
issue should be addressed by the General Assembly, the
organ that holds exclusive competence to decide on the
United Nations budget.

Brazil presented a number of proposals aimed
at improving the working methods of the Council.
It remains difficult, however, to see how to achieve
breakthroughs in such an area without the expansion of
the Council's membership. In the view of the majority
of United Nations States Members, the best way to
enhance the Council's dynamics and to ensure that
its decisions are more legitimate and effective is the
creation of new permanent and non-permanent seats.
That would allow for countries committed to a more
transparent, efficient, accessible and accountable
Council to acquire the expertise and ability required to
help modernize it from within.

