Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me to express to you, Sir, our great appreciation
for the interest in the conflict in Somalia that you have
demonstrated during your presidency of the Council
this month. It will undoubtedly contribute to
successfully and appropriately restoring the question of
Somalia to the agenda of the Security Council and of
the international community in the coming months.
This is particularly true given the developments taking
place on this issue within the framework of the
Djibouti initiative.

I would like to stress once again the approach to
the Somali crisis that Egypt has maintained
consistently since the crisis broke out. The elements of
this approach are the preservation of the unity and
independence of Somalia and opposition to the
principle of the division of Somalia and to the
establishment of autonomous entities within the
country. In seeking to promote this approach, Egypt
has been making use of its contacts in various
international forums and with people involved in
Somalia. Because we believe in the unity of Somalia,
we seek to maintain a balance in our approach to and
contacts among all Somali provinces. We are providing
humanitarian and technical assistance to all Somalis.
We are eager to develop our relations with the two
administrations of Somaliland and Puntland in the
framework of maintaining one Somalia.

Egypt believes that responsibility for the solution
to the Somali question rests with the Somalis
themselves, including the leaders of civil society and of
the warring factions. We believe that international
intervention, be it collective or individual, must be in
the context of support for the realization of the unity
and territorial integrity of Somalia. Egypt therefore
welcomes and supports the Djibouti initiative. We bless
the efforts of President Ismail Guelleh and express our
confidence that he can carry out this difficult mission.

Egypt also believes that the Djibouti initiative
represents an appropriate framework, commensurate
with the Somali situation and environment, for the
solution of the conflict. This, in our view, will
guarantee the return of stability and peace to Somalia
and ultimately lead to stability in the Horn of Africa
region.

The Djibouti initiative met with success during
the first phase of the Somalia National Peace
Conference. The meetings held under this formula were
able to settle many of the differences between the
warring factions and clans, particularly between the
Hawiye and the Darod. We consider this to be a
positive step towards the realization of national
reconciliation. We hope that the second phase of the
Somalia National Peace Conference in Djibouti will
lead to a solution to the political questions, including
the establishment of executive and legislative State
institutions, in a way that guarantees a calm transition
in which the Somalis can reunify their territories.

The upcoming phase requires us to work
seriously to help the Somalis to recover their national
territories and territorial integrity and to guarantee that
they are able to overcome the crisis after a full decade
of human tragedy and suffering. We therefore
underscore the importance of the international
community's support for the Djibouti initiative. We
believe that the international community must provide
all the assistance necessary to urge the various Somali
leaders who have chosen to boycott the initiative to
approach it in a positive manner.

We believe that it is important to increase
humanitarian assistance to Somalis throughout Somalia
and to contribute to rebuilding the Somali
infrastructure. We also believe that the international
community must seriously consider coordinating
international demining efforts, since landmines prevent
a return to normal life in Somalia. We must also
seriously implement Security Council resolution 733
(1992) regarding the arms embargo against Somalia.

