Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to commend the Indonesian
presidency for its initiative in convening this meeting,
which coincides with the seventieth anniversary of the
1949 Geneva Conventions on the protection of civilians
in conflict and war as well as the twentieth anniversary
of the inclusion of the protection of civilians on the
agenda of the Security Council. We also welcome Her
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs oflndonesia
and all the other Ministers present here today. We

thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Federico Borello and
Mr. Peter Maurer for their valuable briefings.

The acts of Violence being perpetrated around the
world, and the scourge of war in many of its regions,
accompanied by gross violations of international
humanitarian law, require concerted international
efforts to support the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts. Over the past 20 years we have witnessed
positive developments on the Security Council's agenda
in that regard. However, despite such developments,
civilians still constitute the vast majority of the victims
of armed conflict. Notwithstanding these challenges,
Jordan has always been an advocate for peace and an
effective mediator in establishing peace and security,
not just in our region but all over the world. I would
like to briefly mention the three fundamental pillars
of Jordan's humanitarian role in providing protection,
security and safety for civilians in armed conflicts.

The first pillar is in regard to refugees. The crises
and wars that the Middle East continues to endure
have had repercussions for our country. In the past few
decades we have hosted waves of refugees who found
safe haven in Jordan for themselves, their families and
children until their voluntary, safe and dignified return
to their countries could be assured. The Government
has cooperated with international donors to improve
the infrastructure of refugee camps by providing roads,
crossings, sanitation networks and education, food,
medicine and health services, despite the scarcity of
resources and economic challenges in Jordan. We have
also cooperated with the United Nations in order to
bring essential humanitarian assistance to the needy
through our borders. We have implemented projects
aimed at building the capacities and resilience of local
communities hosting Syrian refugees by creating and
providing work opportunities for them and for the
refugees, with a view to strengthening their resistance
to crises. Jordan has also provided a wide range of
educational, health and legal services, as well as
mechanisms for protecting refugee women, girls and
children from physical and sexual Violence in the
camps, because we fully believe in a zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse.

The second pillar is our active participation in
peacekeeping operations. Jordan has been participating
in peacekeeping operations under the umbrella of
the United Nations all over the world for decades.
More than 100,000 male and female Jordanians have
participated in peacekeeping operations and have
provided protection to civilians amid difficult and
complicated circumstances. For example, Jordan
has run a number of field hospitals in Iraq, the West
Bank, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia,
Ethiopia and other countries. The Jordanian military
field hospital in Gaza has continued to help civilians
through the provision of treatment and medical services
and has provided services to more than 2.5 million
patients since its creation in 2009.

The third pillar is related to combating terrorism
and violent extremism. Obscurantist and extremist
ideologies have fuelled destructive conflicts all over
the world, particularly in the Middle East. Jordan has
therefore implemented a number of global initiatives
aimed at prevention, with the goal of confronting
erroneous ideologies promoted by terrorist groups
against the Islamic faith. We have also worked hard
to spread a culture of harmony and coexistence in the
region and internationally, as well as introducing the
youth, peace and security agenda in the Security Council
with a View to immunizing and empowering young
people. Jordan and New Zealand recently co-chaired a
meeting of the Christchurch Call to Action to Eliminate
Terrorist and Violent Extremist Content Online, with the
participation of major global technological and Internet
companies, to raise awareness of the threat created
by the spread through social media of Obscurantist
ideologies in societies and countries.

At the same time, we are seeing the ongoing
Violation of every fundamental human right in the
occupied Palestinian territories, accompanied by
Israeli violations of the principles of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and norms of international
humanitarian law. That demands that we take urgent
and appropriate steps to ensure the safety, welfare,
protection and security of civilians and accountability
for all violations, in accordance with relevant United
Nations resolutions and international humanitarian law.

In conclusion, I would like to recall the wisdom
that says that evil prevails when good people cannot
function. If we work together we will be able to achieve
something essential - a future of harmony and peace.
That is what humankind desires and needs today.

