Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Mr. President, I
wish to start by expressing my delegation's gratitude to
President Kibaki and to the Government and the people
of Kenya for their warm welcome and legendary
hospitality. Since our arrival in this beautiful city of
Nairobi, we have been made to feel at home. We also
commend you, Sir, on your vision to include this
extraordinary meeting of the Security Council on the
Sudan during your month in the presidency. The end
results we have achieved are a very good reward for
the resolve and dedication you have demonstrated
towards solving this crisis.

The holding of this meeting in the historic city of
Nairobi constitutes a sign of recognition of the efforts
of the member States of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) to find a solution to
the various conflicts affecting our continent,
particularly in this subregion. The Government of
Kenya has played a particular role in this process by
acting within the spirit of pan-Africanism, a legacy of
one of the most prominent and unforgettable sons of
Africa, Jomo Kenyatta. Today it is almost impossible
to write the recent history of many African countries
and peoples - including my own, Angola - without
referring to a Kenyan city or locality. We all agree on
the historic importance of holding this meeting in
Africa, especially for the country my delegation
represents today, the Republic of Angola.

It must be recalled that 32 years ago, at the very
first meeting of the Security Council in Africa, the
Council addressed the question of apartheid in South
Africa and the question concerning the situation in the
territories under Portuguese administration - namely,
Angola, Mozambique, Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau and
Sao Tome and Principe - as well as the questions of
Zimbabwe and Namibia, then under occupation and
colonial rule. Two years after that Council meeting,
freedom became a reality in the former Portuguese
colonies, while the question of apartheid in South
Africa and Zimbabwe entered a decisive phase that led
to their settlement.

We also hope that this meeting will be a turning
point for the end of conflicts still affecting the African
continent, particularly in the Sudan and in Somalia.
Vice-President Taha referred yesterday to the Sudanese
presidency of the Security Council in 1972. Guinea-
Conakry and Somalia were at that time the other
African members of the Council, while Angola was a
country on the agenda and represented by a liberation
movement, the MPLA. My delegation would therefore
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the people
of the Sudan, Somalia and Guinea, and all those who,
through the Organization for African Unity, the United
Nations, or in their individual capacity, contributed to
the liberation of Angola and all African countries from
colonial domination.

Today, 32 years after that historic Council
meeting, there are still unresolved conflicts prevailing
on the continent, and in that respect the Security
Council may offer an opportunity to meaningfully
address them and provide solutions. Nairobi, in
keeping with its tradition, will certainly remain the
place to advance towards the end of the long conflict in
the Sudan. My delegation was particularly pleased
yesterday to hear the word "brother" from Vice-
President Taha and Chairman John Garang when
referring to each other. This is indicative of the good
atmosphere and openness that seem to prevail among
the parties and are key factors for the successful
implementation of the core peace agreements and
protocols.

The signing today of the declaration on the
conclusion of the IGAD negotiations on peace in the
Sudan opens a new page of hope for all Sudanese
people. It is important, however, that the same patience
and seriousness so far demonstrated by the parties
continue to prevail in order to face the challenges of
implementation, bearing in mind that no peace can be
achieved without mutual concessions and great
sacrifice by all Sudanese men and women.

Angola highly values the international
community's efforts to pave a way for the
implementation of the protocols. It welcomes the
preparatory work being done by the United Nations to
deploy an advance mission in the Sudan, as well as the
readiness expressed by Norway to hold a donors
conference to mobilize the necessary resources.

Regarding the Sudanese region of Darfur, the
signs of regression in key aspects of the situation were
discussed yesterday, and important proposals were
made regarding the African Union force, development
of the region and the impact of the Naivasha process
on a resolution of the conflict. We should by all means
avoid a scenario of having a poorly endowed expanded
African force in Darfur and a well-equipped United
Nations operation in south Sudan. This indicates the
need for appropriate support to enable the African
Union to play its leading role adequately.

Post-conflict peace-building in the Sudan and the
deployment of a United Nations peace support mission
to the country are some of the most challenging tasks
of our time, due not only to the size of the Sudan but
also to the complexity of the situation and the
multiform character of the required response. My
delegation fully shares the assessment of the Secretary-
General that it is not possible to implement a
comprehensive peace agreement without a joint,
integrated strategy among the competent United
Nations agencies and programmes. The approach
proposed for the future peace support operation,
according to which the work of the future mission must
be synchronized and coordinated with development
efforts, is key to addressing the root causes of the
conflict in the Sudan.

Finally, the delegation of Angola fully supports
resolution 1574 (2004) just adopted by the Council at
this historic session here in Nairobi, and we are
honoured to be part of the consensus. We are confident
that this resolution will enable the process to move
forward. The Sudanese people should play the primary
role for that to become a reality.

