Mr. Kamau (Kenya): The delegation of Kenya
congratulates you, Sir, on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of April and
commends you for your skilful conduct of the affairs
of the Council.

I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and
illuminating remarks. My delegation also appreciates
all the reports that have been shared with us, including
the concept note for this meeting (S/2016/306, annex).

Please allow me reiterate the solidarity of our
Government and delegation with the Governments and
peoples of countries who have suffered and continue
to suffer unnecessary loss of life perpetrated through
cowardly, backward and evil terrorist attacks by
retrogressive forces in various parts of the world.

The threat posed by international terrorism is the
greatest challenge to sustaining peace and sustainable
development. It is a global challenge requiring
concerted international efforts to eradicate. Terrorists
have become more sophisticated, globalized, cruel
and brutal as they continue to proliferate. The Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham/Da'esh, Al-Qaida, Boko
Haram, Al-Shabaab and other groups are emerging in

various parts of the world and continue to pose a real,
daily threat.
Kenya welcomes the Secretary-General's Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism as a basis for
each Member State to put its political will into concrete
action against terrorism. We are aligning our counter-
terrorism strategy and national action plans with the
Plan of Action in order to enable us enhance preventive
actions, particularly through early warning systems at
the local and grassroots levels, as that is one of the most
effective ways to snuff out the terrorist supply chain
of new recruits. Prevention will also delegitimize the
radicalization and violent extremist narrative online
and offline before it gains ground anywhere. The Plan
of Action focuses on and calls upon Member States
and the entire United Nations system to cooperate,
collaborate and work together to conclusively address
this problem. The international community must fully
unite in order to succeed.

The Kenya delegation is of the view that the
United Nations, in particular the Security Council,
has an important role to play in order to positively
advance the war against terror. Yet, it has not fully
brought its immense convening power to bear on this
matter. The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy alone, without a binding legal instrument
against terrorism, cannot yield the dividends that we
all aspire to.

At the national level, Kenya has established the
National Counter-Terrorism Centre, an inter-agency
organization that coordinates the implementation of the
national counter-terrorism strategy and action plans.
With the enhanced coordination of national efforts, we
have realized a reduction in the number and intensity
of terrorists acts in our country. Through increased
public engagement at all levels, the war against
terrorism is being prosecuted and executed by both the
law enforcement agencies and the citizenry and local
communities, as it is now seen as a call to defend their
national values, democracy, freedom and, of course,
Kenya's way of life.

Kenya's efforts to counter violent extremism take a
threefold approach.

First, prevention measures target individuals and
communities at risk and exposure to recruiters into
violent extremism. These prevention measures focus
on investments, for example, in education to counter
terrorism and violent extremism ideologies. We also
focus on smart immigration and border-control systems,
effective puinc service delivery, the protection of
liberties and freedoms, and the enhancement of
democracy in our country.

Curative and rehabilitative measures to deal with
those already radicalized and the affected communities
are a second, important measure. The Government plans
to set up a prison and rehabilitation centre dedicated
to the rehabilitation of terrorists to help them transit
and be reintegrated into the community as reformed
and productive members of our society. Training and
continuing education for both the investigative and the
prosecution arms of law enforcement on best practices
investigations and evidence collection, the protection
and promotion of the rule of law, and training in other
other criminaljustice aspects to enhance and consolidate
the war against terrorism are another strategy. A
financial reporting centre is now also fully operational,
The centre enhances the capacity of the banking and
financial services sector to prevent, detect and counter
terrorism financing through Kenya's economy.

Capacity-building to build the resilience of
communities, including initiatives to assist them in
preventing and addressing threats and in rehabilitating
and reintegrating their members who have been
radicalized or are reformed terrorists, is the third
strategy. This helps these communities to reject violent
extremist narratives and to recover from acts of violent
extremism. That is why the Government is fully
committed to the devolution of budgetary resources to
the county level for development initiatives, because
we have come to realize that this helps to create jobs,
deliver services and delegitimize the narratives of
marginalization by extremist groups. The Kenyan
Government is also heavily invested in youth and
women. Development funds to enhance and facilitate
financial inclusion have been set up and help to ensure
that all segments of society are engaged in productive
economic activities.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate my delegation's
commitment to international solidarity in the war
against terrorism, and we look forward to the review of
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Strategy in June
2016, subsequent to which we expect that we shall be
able to adopt a more progressive strategy that is able to
address current and emerging challenges and realities
to help us achieve our collective aspirations of ending
terrorism and violent extremism. The 2030 Agenda
on Sustainable Development (General Assembly 
resolution 70/1), provides us, as we all know, with a
collective standard and a transformative framework
to address economic inequalities within and among
nations. That will help all of us address alienation and
exclusion, intolerance and violence, as those are the
challenges that are driving and enablisng terrorism and
violent extremism to advance everywhere throughout
the world.

