Mr. Wolff (United States of America): I too
would like to welcome the Permanent Representative
of Georgia to the Council and to express our
appreciation to the Secretariat for its briefings.

The Council meets today in emergency session
for the sixth time since the outbreak of hostilities in
Georgia on 7 August. This time, the immediate
development that has compelled us to meet is Russia's
decision to recognize the Georgian entities of Abkhazia
and South Ossetia as independent States. The United
States categorically condemns that decision.

Over the course of these meetings, certain facts
have not changed: first, Russia's military invasion of
Georgia; secondly, Russia's continued occupation of
parts of Georgia in contravention of the ceasefire
agreement negotiated by President Sarkozy on behalf
of the European Union; and thirdly, Russia's disregard
for Georgia's territorial integrity. We now recognize
those stubborn facts for what they were: a prelude to
Russia's illegal attempt to redraw the borders of its
neighbour.

Russia's recognition of South Ossetia and
Abkhazia as independent States is incompatible with
the United Nations Charter and at odds with numerous
Security Council resolutions. Just under five months
ago, on 15 April this year, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1808 (2008), which spelled out, as
had many previous resolutions, the following language
as its first operative paragraph:

"[The Security Council r]eaffirms the
commitment of all Member States to the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Georgia within its internationally recognized
borders ...".

That simple statement, incapable of being
misinterpreted, was unanimously supported by the
members of the Security Council, and it is now being
single-handedly disregarded by the Russian Federation.

Russia's decision to recognize Abkhazia and
South Ossetia in contravention of its own commitments
and obligations could portend further disregard of this
institution and its undertakings by one of its permanent
members. That should be a source of concern and
reprobation not only for the members of the Council,
but for every Member of the United Nations, whose
Charter requires that all Member States shall refrain in
their international relations from the threat or use of
force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State, or in any other manner
inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations. If
this wanton effort to dismember Georgia through
military force under the guise of self-defined
peacekeeping cannot be condemned, the very
foundations of the international order that this
Organization was founded to uphold will be in
jeopardy.

We should all be concerned by the manner in
which Russia has acted just as much as we are
concerned about what Russia has done. Russia did not
call for this body or other international institutions to
consider facts regarding Abkhazia or South Ossetia as
Russia perceives those facts. Russia did not work
through legitimate international institutions available
to it to deal with the concerns that it has raised since
7August, And Russia did not need to recognize two
Georgian regions - a decision made possible by its
overwhelming military might - to fulfil what it had
claimed was its initial reason for taking over Georgian
territory, namely, the protection of its peacekeepers and
civilians in the South Ossetian region of Georgia.
Rather, Russia presumed to confer independence on
those two separatist entities as a political act that
challenges the post-Soviet borders for the first time
since the former Soviet republics gained their
independence.

Let us consider the situation in Abkhazia for a
moment. Abkhazia does not border South Ossetia.
There was no outbreak of hostilities with Tbilisi. There
was no humanitarian crisis to address. Russia and its
Abkhaz allies advised the United Nations observers to
leave and then moved beyond Abkhazia to occupy
areas beyond Abkhazia's administrative boundary,
where Russian forces remain to this day. The ceasefire
plan agreed by Russia does not allow for any presence
of additional Russian troops in Abkhazia or for the
creation of any security zone there, much less for
Abkhazia's independence.

Let me underscore another point. The Abkhaz
region hosts a United Nations presence, the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG),
mandated by the Security Council. In the course of
Russia's invasion through Abkhazia, Russia violated a
security zone patrolled by United Nations
peacekeeping forces deployed by the Security Council.
In Abkhazia, Russia is therefore undermining not only
the territorial integrity of Georgia, but also the integrity
of this Council. This Council should call on Russia to
facilitate immediately the full redeployment of
UNOMIG personnel to the Abkhaz region.

With regard to South Ossetia, Russia has
repeatedly justified its invasion as necessary to stop
what it quickly termed genocide, which allegedly had
left more than 2,000 ethnic Ossetians dead. That is a
serious charge, and it must be seriously investigated.
We have also heard reports of human rights abuses
against the ethnic Georgian population of South
Ossetia. Those are also serious charges, and they too
must be investigated. We urge Russia to facilitate an
impartial investigation by the United Nations of all
allegations of human rights abuses on the territory of
Georgia, including in South Ossetia and Abkhazia, in
order to establish the facts for all to know.

The Council must also have an impartial and
accurate account of the number of internally displaced
persons (IDPs) created by this conflict not only in the
conflict zone of South Ossetia, but also in Abkhazia.
Are ethnic Georgians being permitted to return to their
homes? If not, why not? Should we believe so-called
president Kokoity's proud claim that ethnic Georgians
will not be permitted to return to their homes in South
Ossetia? Is there a place in civilized society for such
attitudes? Should it not be one of our principal
obligations, and one of the international community's
principal obligations, to ensure that all Georgian IDPs,
regardless of their ethnicity, have the opportunity to
return to the homes that they had to flee as a result of
the fighting?

Russia needs to complete its withdrawal from
Georgia, in accordance with its own undertakings and
the ceasefire plan, and we need to move quickly to
strengthen the international mechanism called for in
that plan. The deployment of additional observers of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) in South Ossetia is a start, but
additional international observers must be permitted to
patrol the security zones to ensure that all parties are
complying with their agreements, including the
agreement to respect Georgia's territorial integrity.
Russia's credibility and its relations with its immediate
neighbours, as well as with others in the international
community, are at stake.

