Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): The
emotion that was upon us on Friday has not left us,
but today we have gathered to act. Resolution 2166
(2014), which we have just adopted at the initiative
of Australia, underscores the importance of quickly
conducting an investigation into the circumstances
of this abominable tragedy. We owe it to the families
of those who have perished, as the presence of many
nationalities represented here today shows. Once again,
we want to express our profound condolences and our
complete solidarity in this ordeal. In that regard, we
welcome the presence among us of the Ministers from
Australia, Luxembourg and the Netherlands.

In adopting this resolution, the international
community has taken a first step towards shedding
light on this tragedy, establishing responsibilities and
meeting the demands ofjustice. Resolution 2166 (2014)
bolsters the existing framework that should apply in
this matter. In keeping with the Chicago Convention on
International Civil Aviation, it is up to Ukraine, with
the assistance of all those impacted by the disaster,
especially experts from the International Civil Aviation
Organization, to lead the work of the international
investigation.

The resolution also demands that everything be
done to facilitate the rapid work of the investigators.
Henceforth, all parties and States in the region must
guarantee immediate and unfettered access to the site
of the disaster, to the remains of the victims and to
material elements necessary for the investigation.

We would like to express our grave alarm about
the fact that reports available to us continue to indicate
repeated obstruction by the separatists. We demand
that the disaster site no longer be profaned, that it not
be altered and that it not be manipulated. The revolting,
shameful and, ultimately, inhuman actions must stop.

The resolution asks the Secretary-General to
present options to the Security Council in order to
provide support to the investigation and give an account
of its developments.

The resolution also recalls that those responsible
for the disaster will have to answer for their heinous
acts. The investigation that we support today through
resolution 2166 (2014) must be pursued to its end.
France will ensure that this happens.
We will never forget the 298 innocent victims
struck down in the Ukrainian skies.

