Mr. Ilkin (Turkey): Turkey has already aligned
itself with the European Union statement. Therefore, I
will refer to a few issues that, in our opinion, deserve
particular attention.

First and foremost, we all have to remind
ourselves that we are not failing in Afghanistan. Yes,
we are not yet Where we would like to be, and it is
obvious that fully achieving our objectives will take
longer than we initially expected, but that does not
mean that we are on the losing side. After all, we are
talking about a country that has been devastated by
violent wars for decades. No one should expect a fast
and easy recovery. What is important is to be able to
remain committed and to take up with full
determination every challenge and opportunity as it
presents itself. That is extremely important because
those who want to take Afghanistan back to its dark
days aspire to do so mainly by weakening our resolve.
They are hoping that the international community will
tire itself out and eventually abandon Afghanistan to its
fate.

Allowing that to happen would be a disaster,
especially when one considers that Afghanistan is one
of the top priorities for the entire international
community. Indeed, a failure there would be seen as
the failure of everything we stand for everywhere. In
that regard, we should not allow ourselves to be carried
away by events and incidents of the day, but should be
able to see the general trends because, although they
may be modest, it is those positive trends in many
areas, ranging from education to healthcare, that
contain elements enabling us to look forward to a
bright future for Afghanistan.

Having said all that, can we then just be content
with the way we are proceeding? Of course we cannot.
There is certainly no room for complacency. On the
contrary, because of the very reasons I just mentioned,
we must be ever more determined, active and vigilant.
The challenges facing us are tremendous and a setback
in any one of them could deal a serious blow to our
collective efforts to bring about stability and prosperity
in Afghanistan.

To understand those challenges, one need look
nowhere else than the Secretary-General's recent
report. We fully agree not only with the observations
set out in the report, but also with its
recommendations, in particular as to the need for a
common approach that integrates security, governance,
the rule of law, human rights and social and economic
development. For that, there needs to be a strong
partnership between the Afghan Government, the
United Nations, NATO and the rest of the international
community under strict Afghan ownership and
leadership. Also, the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy and the Afghanistan Compact
should continue to be the foundations of our efforts.
We should now be able to carry on with a robust and
effective implementation phase.

At this critical stage, there is no doubt that the
United Nations has a key role to play in leading the
efforts of the international community. Here again, we
are in full agreement with the priority areas identified
in the Secretary-General's report. In particular, the
need for enhanced coordination and political outreach
remains essential to the success of that approach. We
hope that the Security Council resolution to be adopted
next week to extend the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) will
reflect those very pertinent points.

I take this opportunity to extend our heartfelt
congratulations to the newly appointed Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kai Eide.
We are confident that, under his able leadership,
UNAMA will effectively deliver what is expected of it.
In that challenging endeavour, Turkey will lend it
every support.

In fact, Turkey has already made extensive
contributions to security and development in
Afghanistan, as evidenced by, among other things, our
significant support for the International Security
Assistance Force and sizeable reconstruction
assistance, rendered mainly through our Provincial
Reconstruction Team in Vardak, and we will continue
our efforts unrelentingly by exploring every
opportunity.

To that end, and to give just one example, we are
now providing emergency humanitarian assistance to
the Afghan people hard hit by severe winter conditions.
Moreover, we are also determined to take forward the
trilateral cooperation process that we spearheaded
between Afghanistan, Pakistan and Turkey.

Before concluding, I should like to reiterate
Turkey's strong commitment to Afghanistan's stability,
security and prosperity. As one Afghan diplomat once
told me, Turkey is the closest neighbour ofAfghanistan
without common borders. Therefore, we are resolved to
act in keeping with the responsibilities of that
privileged status.
