Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Ms. Helen La Lime, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti, for her briefing on the situation in the country and the work of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH). We agree with the assessment of the situation in Haiti contained in the first report on the work of the special political mission (see S/2020/123) during an extremely important period for the country. The withdrawal of the United Nations peacekeeping mission coincided with an uptick in political activity. Disagreements between the branches of State power prevented the appointment of a Government and Parliament and it was not possible to hold timely elections. The lack of a fully functioning Government complicates all aspects of life, from ensuring security to meeting normal business and humanitarian needs. We welcome the emergence of various initiatives to promote direct public dialogue in order to overcome the crisis. Our consistent position has been that sustainable peace, in any country, can be guaranteed only through a frank and inclusive discussion on resolving critical problems and overcoming differences by taking the views of all parties into account, and Haiti is of course no exception. In that context, the mission's efforts to assist Haitians in establishing dialogue are very important. We believe that this should remain a top priority for the United Nations. In such a critical period in the country's history, resources and time must not be squandered on tasks whose success will ultimately depend on the country's political stability. We take note of the report's assessment of the work of the Haitian National Police. That institution currently has a special responsibility. At a time when the path of mutual understanding has yet to be taken, society must see police as reliable defenders. It goes without saying, however, that the inalienable right of all Haitians to peaceful assembly and freedom of expression must be exercised in strict compliance with national legislation. The challenges facing Haiti are not unique. With the withdrawal of the United Nations peacekeeping mission, Haiti's political leadership and law enforcement agencies have not only gained greater independence from international assistance, but have also assumed full responsibility for the country's fate and the security of its citizens. The Government and society have entered a critical phase of development that will not be any easier than before. Awareness of national responsibility will inevitably lead to an increase in social activity. At the same time, we must avoid simplistic conclusions about the root causes of what is happening, which is primarily due to chronic and unresolved critical socioeconomic problems, rather than the political ambitions of opponents. Regrettably, Haiti is a clear example of how the foundations of governance are undermined in the heat of political struggle. This should have a sobering effect on those who continue to promote reckless schemes to weaken the foundations of statehood in other Latin American countries, with potential risks for the entire continent. We see no alternative to negotiated settlements in overcoming disagreements in the States of the region that have faced domestic political challenges, whether in Haiti or elsewhere. We categorically reject double standards and interference in Latin American affairs. What is needed today is responsible international support for Port-au-Prince in order to ease social tensions and prevent Haiti from sliding into a full- fledged internal conflict. The primary task of finding a format and modalities for dialogue that are acceptable to all warring parties comes first. In that context, we welcome the targeted efforts of international mediators, which are in line with the priorities of BINUH. We will continue to work to ensure that the outcome of the Security Council's efforts leads to a genuine normalization of the situation in Haiti and to strengthening its sovereignty and self-sufficiency.
