Mr. Albanai (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin, Mr. President, by welcoming His
Excellency Mr. Barry's among us. We thank him for
his briefing and the other briefers for their statements.
We were pleased to hear a variety of speakers shedding
light on the overall situation in the Sahel, specifically
the challenges facing that region, including the
humanitarian situation, in which 12 million people are
in need of humanitarian and security relief owing to the
activities of terrorists, which target not only civilians
but military personnel in Mali and Burkina Faso.

I would like to address three points today: the
efforts of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel), regional cooperation and the steps
to be taken.

In our view, there is no doubt that the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force plays a critical role in countering security
challenges in the Sahel region. We commend the
efforts of all members of the Force to operationalize
it. The Force has undertaken five operations since
May, notwithstanding the administrative and financial
challenges that it has encountered. We stand ready to
consider the methods and tools at the disposal of the
Security Council to buttress the efforts of the Force and
ensure its administrative and financial stability over
the long term.

We also welcome the measures adopted by the
new Force Commander, General Oumarou Namata,
specifically through the plan of action for the upcoming
period. We are also eagerly awaiting the 2020 action
plan, and wish him and the Force success in its current
operations, all the more so given that the security
situation continues to unravel throughout the region, in
Mali, Chad and Burkina Faso, and to extend into the
coastal States.

In that regard, I cannot fail to commend the efforts
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) in
delivering the necessary support for the Joint Force.
We further welcome the efforts of the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights to enhance
compliance with principles of human rights in the
region. We also stress the importance of honouring the
pledges to the Joint Force to ensure that it can fully
shoulder its responsibility with the necessary resources,
without being stymied by financial shortfalls.

I would like to address the need to step up
international and regional cooperation to counter shared
challenges facing the States ofthe Sahel region, ofwhich
there are multitude. Information-sharing mechanisms
and best practices must be enhanced, especially given
that terrorist groups have cross-border networks
through which they accrue revenue by trafficking in
illicit goods in order to bankroll their activities.

Regional initiatives are important and positive,
such as the Economic Community of West African
States Extraordinary Summit on Terrorism, held
in September. That is an important step forward to
coordinate regional efforts. We believe that such
cooperation will enhance the efforts of the Joint
Force and other regional initiatives, such as the Accra
initiative and the Joint Force initiative.

We encourage the Joint Force to strengthen
information-sharing mechanisms with United Nations
bodies, specifically MINUSMA, which has provided
support to the Force. We believe that ongoing cooperation
between the Joint Force and MINUSMA will facilitate
such support, especially given that MINUSMA is
conducting a risk assessment and ensuring compliance
with human rights principles prior to providing the
requested assistance. To that end, a mechanism could
be adopted to improve coordination between the United
Nations and the Joint Force.

To conclude, many issues need to be dealt with in
order to achieve stability in the region, including in the
military and development areas. Progress must also be
made in the political process in Mali, and the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation must be implemented. We
believe that such implementation is necessary for the
region as a whole. We must closely monitor the situation
during the upcoming period and look into all means at
the disposal of the Council to ensure regional stability.

In terms of addressing the root causes ofinstability,
there is a need to achieve development throughout the
region, focus on strengthening governance, counter
poverty, open up economic opportunities for the people
and put an end to threats related to climate change.
We need to see progress on that track as well as at the
military level over the coming period.

