Mr. Lord (United States ofAmerica): I would like to
thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her briefing today. The
United States appreciates her efforts to bring justice to
the people of Darfur. We look forward to seeing further
progress with the start of the trial of Abdallah Banda,
who is alleged to be among those responsible for the
deaths of 12 African Union peacekeepers.

The continued work of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) in investigating ongoing war crimes
and crimes against humanity in Darfur is made more
difficult by the alarming levels of violence and the
persistent failure of the Government of the Sudan to
abide by its obligations under resolution 1593 (2005)
to cooperate fully with the Court. While the people of
Darfur continue to await justice, the architects of the
campaign of terror who bear the greatest responsibility
for atrocities in Darfur go free.

The consequences of this impunity are clear.
Although the world first became aware of crimes in
Darfur a decade ago, the Government continues to use
apparently indiscriminate aerial bombardments with
deadly consequences for civilians. Violence in Darfur
continues to escalate as paramilitary Rapid Support
Force soldiers kill, loot, burn and rape. This year, more
than 322,000 Darfuris have been forced from their
homes, worsening a humanitarian crisis that has been
compounded by humanitarian groups' lack of access.

Unsurprisingly, the violence has spread beyond
Darfur's borders. We are outraged by reports of
ongoing indiscriminate attacks, as well as targeted
attacks on civilians, hospitals and schools in the
states of Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile. These
attacks have resulted in more than 100,000 new
displacements since May, interrupting the planting
season. Nor has the Government of the Sudan honoured
its commitments to justice and accountability under
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. We have
yet to see any credible independent investigation into
violations of international humanitarian law or human
rights, much less any cases for such acts prosecuted in
the Special Courts for Darfur. Instead, we continue to
see protracted assaults on civilians, peacekeepers and
humanitarian aid workers. If the Sudan is to enjoy a
peaceful, stable and prosperous future, the Government
cannot be indifferent to the lives of its people.

But it is not just the Government of the Sudan that
has failed to live up to its commitments. We note the
decisions issued by the ICC's Pre-Trial Chamber with
respect to non-cooperation in the Darfur situation.
As the report by the Office of the Prosecutor notes,
President Al-Bashir has traveled internationally on at
least six occasions in as many months. We note that
Africans have not always welcomed his visits. Last
year, public protests and actions aimed at compelling
President Al-Bashir's arrest made him leave one
country before he was able to make an appearance, and
activists in another country filed petitions demanding
his apprehension and transfer to The Hague. The
Security Council should take a cue from those groups
and do more to follow up on the implementation of
resolution 1593 (2005), since inaction only emboldens
perpetrators in the Sudan and elsewhere.

In closing, the United States continues to believe
that working to ensure justice and accountability for
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide is
not just a moral obligation, but is integral to ensuring
a lasting and durable peace in the Sudan. We will
continue to support Prosecutor Bensouda and ICC
efforts to bring to justice those most responsible for
serious crimes in Darfur.

