Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, allow me to join those who spoke
before me in expressing my delegation's thanks to
Ms. Ursula Mueller for her briefing and to Ms. Nujeen
Mustapha for her important and moving testimony. We

believe that her remarks have not left a single Council
member unmoved. We therefore express our support
and solidarity.

We are aware that, in Syria, thousands of people are
experiencing the same situation and that their testimony
constitutes, above all, a call to action and to take
decisive measures to end this long war and compensate
the victims in order to restore peace in Syria and foster
the normalization of the political situation.

The Government of Equatorial Guinea remains
concerned about the escalation of violence in Syria,
especially in the north-western part of the country
where several terrorist groups and illegal armed groups
have entrenched themselves. While it is a fact that the
Syrian Government controls most of its territory and
that the situation in the province of Idlib needs to be
resolved as soon as possible, the need for the parties
to the conflict to refrain from large-scale military
operations nevertheless remains.

Concerning that governorate, which is key to the
outcome of the conflict, it is necessary that the parties
realize that any major military attack in the north-
western part of the country would not only endanger
the lives of thousands of people but also hinder the
work of humanitarian agencies. It is worth reminding
the parties that, in their counter-terrorist operations,
they must always fulfil their obligation to respect the
rights of and protect civilians, while ensuring timely,
sustained and unhindered access for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance in the north-western, north-
eastern and all other parts of Syria.

Any further hostilities in Idlib would undoubtedly
have a devastating impact on civilians. Every effort
must be made to prevent the use of explosive weapons
in populated areas and all parties to the conflict must
comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law so that civilians are spared from the
worst impact of the fighting. It is imperative that the
Security Council be more united and work collectively
to avoid further military escalation in north-west Syria.

In that regard, the demilitarized zone must be
respected so as to prevent the further mass displacement
of the population and shield schools, hospitals and
other vital civilian infrastructure. Accordingly, we
must ensure the recovery of children affected by the
conflict, including by restoring schools, improved
access to education for all, the provision of adequate
child protection services and the removal of explosive
remnants of war and landmines.

The priority of the Security Council must be to
protect the lives of the millions of innocent civilians.
Our priority and moral duty is to ensure that the
people - most of whom are women, children and
persons with disabilities - survive. That is, however,
an extreme challenge, given the situation in the Rukban
and Al-Hol camps, which are sheltering thousands of
people subsisting in appalling conditions.

That is the most horrific aspect of the war, as the
needs of the population remain extremely critical in all
areas. Given such a deplorable situation, it is necessary
that a consensus be reached on the importance ofmeeting
the urgent and immediate needs of those displaced and
traumatized people. In that regard, we welcome the
ongoing arrangements to ensure the deployment of a
third humanitarian convoy to the Rukban settlement,
although we believe that it would be better to come up
with sustainable solutions or, where appropriate, to
move people to other collective shelters.

There no longer remains any doubt as to the
urgent need to take action in Syria. The third Brussels
Conference, which succeeded in raising approximately
$7 billion in aid to fund the United Nations humanitarian
response plan for Syria and the region, attested to the
international community's solidarity with the Syrian
people and neighbouring countries. Donors and Member
States must now urgently fulfil their commitments, as
the Secretary-General has stressed.

In conclusion, in looking forward to the next
meeting in Astana, we reiterate our firm commitment
to finding a political solution to the Syrian crisis within
the framework of resolution 2254 (2015).

