Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): 1 thank both the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Prince Zeid Al Hussein, and Under-Secretary-General
Jeffrey Feltman for their respective briefings, which
my delegation listened to intently. I also take this
opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (A/70/393) and to recognize the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006), concerning the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea, and its Panel of Experts for the important
work that has provided us with insight for today's
discussions.

My delegation assumed its seat on the Council
with the understanding that, as a member, we would
not shy away from difficult discussions on delicate
and complex situations. We have consistently held
the principled position that issues of concern should
be addressed through constructive dialogue and
consultations. In that regard, we have supported the
proposal for the Council to discuss the issue before us
today. At the same time, Malaysia reaffirms its position
on upholding the principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations, such as respect for sovereignty and
territorial integrity, and non-interference in the internal
affairs of a country.

Malaysia furthermore reaffirms the understanding
that the Council's consideration of this situation is
without prejudice to the role of other bodies and
mechanisms, particularly the Human Rights Council
and the Universal Periodic Review process, which
have the primary mandate of promoting and protecting
human rights. In that regard, Malaysia welcomes the
recent announcements made by the Government of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea of its
intention to engage in dialogue with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) on human rights issues. The upcoming visit
of the High Commissioner to the country should be
seen as a positive step towards further constructive
engagement. That would allow OHCHR to have a more
objective and accurate assessment of the human rights
situation in the country. At the very least, it would
ensure that the views and positions of all parties could
be conveyed accurately.

We are also encouraged by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea's continued participation in the
Universal Periodic Review process and welcome its
acceptance, last September, of 113 recommendations,
including on economic, social and cultural rights. We
believe that the full implementation of the accepted
recommendations will contribute positively to the
enjoyment of human rights and to the socioeconomic
development of the people and demonstrate the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea's willingness to
subscribe to the United Nations human rights system.
At the same time, we encourage closer cooperation
between that Government and the relevant United
Nations bodies and agencies, as well as other potential
partners and donors, with a view to enhancing the well-
being of its people.

Malaysia notes with concern that, on the political
security front, tensions remain high between the
Republic of Korea and the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea. In that respect, we welcome the recent
engagement between the two countries. We continue
to emphasize the importance for both the Republic of
Korea and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
to honour the terms of the 25 August 2015 agreement
in order to continue making progress in inter-Korean
relations, as well as to maintain peace and security
in the Korean peninsula. We note that the recently
held working-level meeting resulted in the proposed
vice-ministerial level talks at the Kaesong Industrial
Complex in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
on 11 December 2015. We urge both sides to make full
use of that meeting to resolve all pending issues, for the
betterment of inter-Korean relations.

My delegation is also encouraged by the October
2015 reunion of families separated by the Korean
War. That is a positive development that we hope will
contribute to further improving inter-Korean relations.

We continue to believe that the Six-Party Talks is

the best platform available to facilitate and consolidate
various efforts aimed at resolving the long outstanding
issues in an amicable manner. In that regard, we
call on all parties to return to negotiations without
preconditions. We welcome the commitment made by
China, the Republic of Korea and Japan during the
recent trilateral summit in Seoul to resume the Six-Party
Talks at an early date. We hope that the United States
and the Russian Federation will also work towards
that goal. Furthermore, we encourage the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to step up cooperation
and engagement with the Council, other partners and
stakeholders, including the 1718 Committee's Panel of
Experts, with a view to addressing non-proliferation
concerns.

I wish to conclude my remarks by reiterating
Malaysia's readiness to engage constructively with all
Council members, the United Nations, other partners
and stakeholders, as well as with the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, not only on the human
rights pillar but also on the development and peace and
security pillars.

