It is a great pleasure to see you again, Madam President, albeit only virtually. I wish to thank you and the Indonesian presidency for having convened this meeting and for having invited the best briefers for this timely and important topic. My special greetings go to Secretary-General Guterres and former Secretary- General Ban Ki-moon. I am joining this meeting from Hanoi, Viet Nam - a country that has seen early success in controlling the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. A whole-of-government approach and strong and determined actions that leave no one behind have helped minimize casualties and impacts. Yet the recent re-emergence of the coronavirus in Viet Nam after three months is a stark reminder that no single country can win this battle unless and until everyone wins it. Viet Nam has been enjoying peace, stability and long periods of growth for decades. But when the pandemic hit Viet Nam, it hit us hard. It put enormous strain on our health-care system and undermined our socioeconomic development. It disrupted every aspect of our lives in unprecedented and unthinkable ways. As such, we can only imagine the level of devastation this pandemic can bring to conflict-affected areas. The pandemic threatens to wipe out hard-won peacebuilding gains and worsen already complex and fragile situations, especially on the humanitarian front. Such a multidimensional crisis demands multidimensional solutions. At a national level, a whole-of-Government approach is needed to tackle the pandemic from a disease-control perspective while strengthening institutions, building trust and fostering cooperation. Special support must be given to the most vulnerable in conflicts and health crises, particularly the elderly, women and children, persons with disabilities, refugees and displaced persons. Globally, a threat like COVID-19 can be curbed only by working together through multilateral efforts. Viet Nam welcomes the adoption of resolution 2532 (2020) and the Secretary-General's appeal for an immediate global ceasefire and facilitation of humanitarian activities. We call for the lifting of sanctions that can undermine countries' capacity to respond to COVID-19. We commend United Nations peace operations for continuing to fulfil their crucial mandates and support host countries, despite an increasingly challenging operating environment. We urge the United Nations peacebuilding architecture - from Headquarters to field operations - to take coordinated actions and deliver as one. A whole-of- system approach is crucial for the United Nations to deliver its promises of sustainable peace and development. Even the smallest actions to sustain peace during a pandemic can do a great deal to win the hearts and minds of local communities. I am particularly moved by the story of a resourceful Vietnamese woman peacekeeper in the Central African Republic who made face masks to help protect fellow peacekeepers and the local populations. Lastly, the important role of regional organizations cannot be overstated. In Southeast Asia, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), of which Viet Nam and Indonesia are proud members, is taking a whole-of-community approach in fighting the pandemic. ASEAN leaders have reaffirmed their political commitment and taken coordinated measures to protect the health of our citizens, revitalize our economies and prevent the pandemic from undermining overall regional peace and stability. No one can win this battle against the COVID-19 pandemic alone. Viet Nam continues to underscore the critical importance of international solidarity and strengthened cooperation in our response to COVID-19. We are strongly committed and call on all to join hands in this common endeavour.
