The President (spoke in French): I now give
the floor to His Excellency, Mr. Ibrahim Yacoubou,
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation, African
Integration and Nigeriens abroad.

Mr. Yacoubou (Niger) (spoke in French) I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council on behalf of your country for the
month of June 2016. I also wish to welcome, once again,
the presence of the President of the Central African
Republic at this important meeting. I would also like
to congratulate you, Sir, for organizing this debate, a
particularly important one for our Organization and for
States such as mine, the Niger.

Indeed, as you know, the Niger is a country resolutely
committed to peacekeeping operations through our
significant contribution of civilian, military and
police components. To date, we have more than 1,820
men and women serving in those operations, making
our country, the Niger, the 17th global contributor
in that regard. The Niger has firmly adhered to the
principles of Kigali, which we consider to be relevant
and appropriate. With regard to the specific topic of our
meeting today, namely, the protection of civilians in the
context of peacekeeping operations, we believe that it is
essential to make a few observations.

The first is that the nature of conflict has evolved
considerably to the point that most conflicts are not
inter-State wars involving regular armies in which the
men and women involved are conventional soldiers
known and recognized as part of a regular army and
identifiable by their uniform or their units. Instead,
conventional armies are pitted against terrorist groups
that operate outside of laws and conventions, recruit
civilians to arms and make no distinction among those
they target.

Our challenge as democratic States is therefore
two-fold in seeking to protect civilians. First, we must
ensure that we do not victimize innocent civilians in
our armed conflicts; secondly, we must ensure that
all civilian populations affected by such conflicts
are protected and preserved in dignity as human
beings. Even if they are refugees, displaced persons
or returnees, civilian populations have the right to
protection. That must remain a priority and a constant
principle for States.

In addition, it seems appropriate to raise certain
considerations, which I consider important for us if
we are to succeed in our task of protecting civilians
in the context of current conflicts. First, the primary
protection of civilians is, first and foremost, their
security. Therefore, it is essential that all peacekeeping
operations are able, both in terms of their human and
material resources and of their mandates, to ensure
and defend the security and lives of citizens, both
civilian and military, living in areas of operations. It
is therefore up to us to question ourselves, above all,
about the relevance of mandates that we initiate. We
should get beyond the quasi-standard templates and
ensure that for every situation, for every context, there
is an appropriate peacekeeping mandate.
The example of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
right at our borders, demonstrates, if need be, that major
operations can be put in place and prove inadequate
or ineffective in the actual context. We must now
question the MINUSMA mandate as designed and as
MINUSMA has operated thus far. Today, a condition
for the security of Malian and border populations is to
change the force's mandate or to put in place a force
modelled on the multinational joint task force that
we established in the Lake Chad Basin to confront
Boko Haram.

My second observation is derived from the first.
Only an appropriate offensive mandate specific to
each context can constitute the basis for the protection
of civilians. The third observation is that States have
the primary responsibility to protect their populations.
In that context, the United Nations must do more
to strengthen those States' capacity to act, as well
as that of regional organizations in that regard. We
must strengthen and give priority to States in all
circumstances, subjecting them, of course, to the
obligations of international morality and universal
rights, but always considering States as the primary and
essential instruments for the protection of civilians.
Whenever States are weakened, the situation of
civilians in conflict becomes problematic.

The fourth element of our reflections concerns
the substance of the protection of civilians in conflict.
In our View, in addition to preserving the security
and lives of people, the protection of civilians must
be understood as including access to basic social
services, the protection of their human rights and the
strengthening ofthe resilience ofpopulations in conflict
areas. Costs and arrangements for the protection of
civilians must include the costs and arrangements for
the minimum social services needed to ensure a decent
life for every citizen.

The fifth observation is that, even if there is
reason to recognize the role that non-governmental
organizations can play in the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, in particular because of their capacity
for local communication, the fact remains that action
or interventions by the latter should not be undertaken
at the expense of the sovereignty of States and their
primary responsibility in that regard.

Sixthly, I would like for the United Nations to
regard assisting countries in conflict with the care of
refugees and internally displaced persons as a matter
of utmost urgency. As a result, with the actions of Boko
Haram in the east and the jihadists in Mali, the Niger,
while doing battle with terrorists on all fronts, must care
for and accommodate more than 300,000 refugees and
internally displaced persons. Therefore, prevention,
predictability and the need for a rapid response also
seem to us to be indispensable to ensuring the effective
protection of civilians. We have the obligation to prevail
on both fronts of our battle: defeating the terrorists
and protecting civilian populations. If today we are
discussing the protection of civilians, it is because there
are conflicts. There are wars that are taking place.

Today, on behalf of the Republic of the Niger,
I would like to thank all the countries that help and
support us in the struggle against terrorists, our
struggle for the security of our country, our region
and the world. Terrorists know no borders. I would
therefore like to express my appreciation in particular
to France, the United States, Chad, the European
Union, the countries of the G5-Sahel, the Lake Chad
Basin countries and all the many countries that I cannot
mention here. May they find here the expression of our
gratitude, which is an expression of our solidarity and
capacity for generosity aimed at ensuring the triumph
ofa society of peace and freedom.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Cyprus.


