Ms. Loj (Denmark): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The countries
of Central and Eastern Europe associated with the
European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia - and the associated countries,
Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well as the European
Free Trade Association country of the European
Economic Area, Iceland, align themselves with this
statement.

Mr. President, thank you for convening this open
debate of the Security Council. Currently more than
500 million small arms and light weapons are estimated
to be in circulation worldwide. The uncontrolled
accumulation and spread of these weapons have
devastating political, social, economic and
humanitarian consequences. The issue calls for urgent
international action. The European Union would like to
emphasize the importance of addressing the problem at
all levels: national, regional and international. Today's
debate in the Council is therefore timely and, indeed,
necessary.

The EU actively seeks to alleviate the human
suffering caused by these weapons. First and foremost,
we need to counter the illicit trade and proliferation of
small arms and light weapons. The European Union
played an active part in the 2001 United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. We engaged
constructively in the elaboration of the United Nations
Programme of Action. We had hoped for a stronger
Programme. We especially would have liked to see
firmer commitments in regard to export controls,
stockpile management, marking and tracing, as well as
brokering. However, we must now look ahead. In this
regard, the EU welcomes the emergence of new
partnerships among States, civil society and non-
governmental organizations as a follow-up to the
Conference.

The European Union actively pursues the prompt
implementation of the Programme of Action. This is
not only a disarmament issue. The problem is multi-
dimensional and should be addressed accordingly. We
remain committed to an effective, ambitious and
continuous follow-up process leading, through the
biennial meetings to be held in 2003 and 2005, to the
review conference to be held in 2006. The EU stands
ready to assume responsibility in this process. The
meeting in 2003 will be the first occasion to take stock
of the progress made. Stock-taking must be dynamic
and operational. The outcome should include proposals
for strengthening and further developing the measures
contained in the Programme of Action. Legally binding
commitments on marking and tracing, as well as on
brokering, should be further pursued. That must be
followed up in 2005. Only thus will we be able to
achieve concrete results and to further our initial goals
at the 2006 review conference.

The EU commends the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2002/1053) on small arms. We welcome his
recommendations. They are well founded and
constructive, and they merit implementation. We
remain convinced that initiatives by Member States, by
the General Assembly, by the Security Council and by
all other relevant bodies and organs must be mutually
reinforcing.

On behalf of the European Union I would like to
thank the Security Council for its decisions and actions
thus far with regard to small arms and light weapons.
The EU encourages the Security Council to continue its
ongoing efforts and to add impetus to implementation
at the operational level. As a first step, the EU would
propose that the Council concentrate its efforts on a
limited number of the recommendations. First, in order
to ensure concrete effects, the Council should
encourage Member States to enforce all its sanctions
resolutions, including those that impose arms
embargoes, and it should call for investigation of
alleged violations of those embargoes. Secondly, the
Council should continue to strengthen the provisions in
its mandates for peacekeeping operations on the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants, as well as measures for the
collection and destruction of illicit and surplus
weapons. Finally, the Council should establish
monitoring mechanisms under each relevant Council
resolution in order to further ensure implementation.
The European Union, for its part, stands ready to
contribute to, and to support efforts towards, a world
free of the illicit trade in and proliferation of these
weapons.

The EU Joint Action on Small Arms and Light
Weapons constitutes the overall framework for EU
policy within that field. It stipulates a set of principles
and measures that the EU will pursue in relevant
international and regional forums, and it contains
provisions for technical and financial assistance. The
Union is continuously developing the Joint Action in
the light of experience. Thus far, we have had success
in a wide variety of projects, but we can improve -
and we will do so. Therefore, the EU, in July 2002,
decided to extend the scope of the Action's application
to include ammunition. We look forward to and
welcome any initiatives on strengthening our common
efforts in the fight against the spread of small arms and
light weapons in an effective and lasting way.

