Mr. Reyes Rodriguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by congratulating Egypt on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council
this month. I also welcome its felicitous initiative to
convene today's debate on an issue of crucial timeliness
and decisive importance for our work.

Terrorism remains today a serious challenge for
the international community. Cuba has been actively
involved in the efforts of the United Nations to combat
international terrorism. It is the Organization's
responsibility to take the lead when it comes to
international efforts in this area. Our country has
fully endorsed the call of the United Nations to States,
international organizations and the international
community to collectively refrain from financing,
encouraging or supporting terrorist activities by any
means whatsoever or from providing training for them.

We reiterate our rejection and condemnation of
all acts, methods and practices relating to terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, by whomever,
against whoever, wherever committed and whatever the
motivation, including State terrorism. Any Government
involved in an act of State terrorism must step up and
assume its international responsibility.

We strongly oppose actions carried out under the
pretext of combating this scourge, which violate the
Charter of the United Nations and the principles and
norms of international law. The fight against terrorism
can never be ajustification for sullying the principles of
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of States, nor can it be a justification for violating
human rights and international humanitarian law or
for carrying out torture, kidnapping, illegal detentions,
disappearances and extrajudicial executions.

Terrorism cannot be eradicated if double standards
and selectivity in addressing and confronting this
scourge prevailing are prevalent. It is unacceptable that
some terrorist acts are condemned while others are met
with silence, are tolerated, justified or manipulated
by others for narrow political or economic interests.
Similarly, claims by some who seek to associate
terrorism with a particular ethnicity or religion are
also unacceptable.

For decades, Cuba has suffered the consequences
of terrorist acts that have been organized, financed
and executed from abroad. The number of victims of
these criminal acts has reached 3,478 dead and 2,099
disabled for life. The degree of this human suffering
is incalculable.

As part of Cuba's actions undertaken to fight
terrorism in the country we enacted Law No. 93, entitled
"Law against acts of terrorism," of 20 December
2001, which is a specific criminal law that defines
and punishes criminal acts of a terrorist nature with
severe penalties. Cuba is a party to 18 international
conventions on terrorism, pursuant to which it has put
in place legal and institutional measures designed to
fight terrorism in an effective manner. Our country
strictly complies with its obligations under the Security
Council resolutions on the subject, and has participated
actively in discussions on the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee. It has also submitted, within
the prescribed time limits, the information requested
on the measures taken for the implementation of the
resolutions.

Member States will soon begin the process of
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. In this regard, the United Nations should
devote their full attention to discussions on a future
convention on international terrorism. We consider the
adoption of the convention to be imperative. It must
be broad in scope and fill gaps and omissions in the
existing legal framework, which will permit coherent
international action against the scourge of terrorism.

An international convention on terrorism must
establish a clear and precise definition of the crime of
international terrorism that covers all aspects thereof
and includes State terrorism. Its adoption would help
to further the implementation of the Global Strategy
and the progress of the international community in
confronting this phenomenon. States must honour
their international obligations and ensure that victims
of terrorist acts, including the many victims of state
terrorism, enjoy their rights.

On 6 October we will mark the fourtieth year
since the mid-air explosion of a Cubana de Aviacion
commercial airliner off the coast of Barbados. Seventy-
three people of different nationalities, including the
Cuban junior national fencing team, lost their lives in
that horrendous crime. Unfortunately, the notorious
terrorist Luis Posada Carriles, who has acknowledged
his responsibility for that bombing, has never paid for
his crime. On behalf of the innocent victims, we will
not tire in demanding the compliance of States with
their obligations to prosecute or extradite all terrorists,
without exception.

In conclusion, Cuba reiterates its unwavering
commitment to the fight against terrorism. Multilateral
efforts to strengthen the full implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
its forthcoming revision, will enjoy our full support.

