Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): It gives me
pleasure, Sir, to warmly and sincerely congratulate you
once again on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. It is no surprise that the Council's
programme of work for this month should be full of
important items relating to Africa, including the recent
debate on support to African Union peacekeeping
operations (see S/PV.6409).

Earlier this month, a Security Council mission
visited Uganda and the Sudan, through which the
Council kept abreast of the facts of the situation in the
Sudan, including with respect to the present strenuous
efforts to complete the final phases of the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) and to the intensive endeavours
being made towards the achievement of sustainable and
comprehensive peace in Darfur through my country's
new strategy.

Today, the Council is meeting to review the most
recent reports of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the CPA (S/2010/528) and on the
situation in Darfur (S/2010/543). I take this
opportunity to reaffirm to the Council our resolve to
complete the final phases of the implementation of the
Agreement, including the holding of a credible,
impartial and transparent referendum reflecting the
genuine will of the people of the South, free from
pressure and political haggling. The referendum is not
an end in itself; it is a way to buttress peace, stability
and the ideal of coexistence - rather than war, which
is something we never accepted willingly. We have
accepted the path of self-determination with a view to
ending war once and for all.

The report of the Secretary-General on progress
in the implementation of the CPA clearly indicates the
extent of our resolve and determination to fulfil the
remaining provisions of the Agreement. Here I refer to
the second paragraph of the final communique of the
24 September high-level meeting on the Sudan, which
declared that the two parties to the CPA have been
addressing numerous complex issues under difficult
circumstances over the past five year. Now, with the
same resolve and determination, we are pressing ahead
with our efforts to resolve outstanding issues, including
the status of Abyei, the demarcation of borders and the
popular consultations in Southern Kordofan and Blue
Nile states.

It is clear that any attempt to hold a referendum
before an acceptable settlement on the status of Abyei
is achieved by the two parties would mean only a
return to war. The Government of the Sudan has made
all possible concessions with a view to achieving a
settlement that takes account of the legitimate and
inalienable rights of the two largest ethnic groups in
the area: the Misseriya and Dinka Ngok tribes. Reason
and wisdom are required, not rashness or recklessness.

That is true of the issue of border demarcation as
well. The Council has many examples of the secession
of nations and States, with wars continuing and
escalating precisely because of the lack of border
agreements. We do not believe that the Council has any
wish for additional similar issues.

Turning to post-referendum arrangements, the
Council knows that in signing the memorandum of
understanding in Mekelle, Ethiopia, on 23 June, we
were seriously determined to undertake serious and
objective negotiations on those arrangements,
including with respect to wealth-sharing, citizenship,
security and international legal instruments. Those
matters were considered exhaustively in a joint
workshop on 19 July, with high-level participation by a
team from the African Union and the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS). Four working groups
were established to discuss those matters and to
establish a schedule for continued work, including on
technical and procedural details.

With respect to the current security situation in
Southern Sudan, we agree with paragraphs 22 to 25 of
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/528) that
the current security situation in Southern Sudan is
alarming. That is particularly true of the humanitarian
situation, in the light of the "hunger gap" to which the
report refers in paragraph 49 and the increase in acute
malnutrition. These are all Sudanese citizens, and we
care about all of them.

The report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Darfur and on progress in the fulfilment of
the mandate of UNAMID (S/2010/543) is also before
the Council. In that regard, I remind members that
seeing is different from hearing. Council members saw
with 30 eyes and heard with 30 cars and learned about
the situation on the ground and about daily life in the
Abu Shouk and Zam Zam camps, which is not very
different from that in the El Fasher camp with respect
to food and drinking water. Enabling all those civilians
to return to their villages and lead normal lives is
among the top priorities that the Government is trying
hard to achieve through its new strategy for Darfur.

Council members heard a comprehensive briefing
on this in its meetings with senior officials, including
Vice-President Ali Osman Mohammed Taha, Foreign
Minister Ali Ahmed Karti and the high-level team.
Before that, the mission heard a detailed presentation
by Mr. Osman Yousif Kibir, Governor of Northern
Darfur and members of his government. The strategy
on Darfur accords special attention to fighting
impunity, particularly since those who carry out attacks
and robberies against humanitarian and peace workers
are members of armed bands of hooligans. The
Government is trying to bring them to justice by all
possible means.

The report before the Council reflects an
intensive internal political effort, embodied in the new
Government strategy aimed at making peace a reality
and providing the conditions for voluntary return,
security and stability. It also reflects the internal work
of Darfur's civil society, represented in various
categories of national and tribal leaders, as well as
previous work with Darfur's elected leaders and
members of the judiciary and executive branches: the
true representatives of Darfur.

The second track is the current joint mediation
efforts hosted by Qatar, in Doha, under the leadership
of Joint Chief Mediator Djibril Bassole and with the
valued support of Sudan's neighbouring States. Now
we are approaching the culmination of these efforts: a
sustainable and comprehensive peace agreement will
be reached in Doha in a matter of days. The missing
link in this process remains the role of the Security
Council in pushing ahead on the political track and
obliging those who reject the option of peace to
immediately join the negotiations in Doha. We
therefore appeal to the Council to force those rebel
forces that did not join the Doha process to join it in
negotiations aimed at ending the conflict and the war.

Finally, we heard Under-Secretary-General Le
Roy speak of the options for enhancing the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan in the light of
prospective developments. I believe we heard him
speak of the option of increasing troop levels. In this
connection, I would like to say that the optimal
solution is to assist the parties in reaching a
satisfactory solution to outstanding matters, not to
increase troop levels. That is not because we reject an
increase in troop levels, but rather because such an
increase will not resolve the matter or help the parties
to achieve a settlement. There is still time for the
Council to use its weight and wisdom to urge the
parties to achieve a satisfactory solution. We have a
significant opportunity to do so at the upcoming
November meeting in Addis Ababa. Here, I appeal to
Council members not to opt for measures that would
lead to more spending, wasting funds that could be
saved and used for projects that would be in the
interest of the entire international community.

I would like once again to emphasize that the
Government of the Sudan, together with the Council,
will press ahead constructively with its commitment to
finding a satisfactory solution to all pending matters,
regarding both Darfur and Southern Sudan.

