Mr. Castro Cordoba (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): We congratulate you, Sir, and the Mission of
the People's Republic of China on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of July.

Millions of human beings live daily in anguish,
despair and pain as a result of armed conflict. Costa
Rica deeply deplores the increase in conflicts in the
Middle East. The situation has deteriorated in recent
years, and it has not been possible to achieve peace and
security in the region. It is urgent that we put an end to
the humanitarian crisis we are facing and seek a political
solution, as this crisis has become a humanitarian
tragedy of shocking proportions and represents an
affront to all of humankind. We therefore appeal once
again to the Security Council to fully exercise its
mandate to maintain international peace and security,
as clearly set out in the Charter of the United Nations.

With respect to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict,
Costa Rica reiterates the urgent need to resume
negotiations between the parties on the central issues
of the conflict, which remain to this day, on the basis
of previous obligations undertaken and agreements
reached. My country condemns the escalation of recent
tensions and the clashes that have resulted in casualties
in and around the holy city of Jerusalem, and urges the
parties to show the utmost restraint and refrain from
any unilateral action that could worsen the already
volatile situation.

It is crucial that a political solution to this conflict
be found it and that we create, as soon as possible, a
new peace architecture that would make it possible to
resolve differences and lead to the achievement of the
objective agreed by the international community, that
is, harmonious coexistence between an independent
Palestinian State and the State ofIsrael.

June marked the fiftieth anniversary of the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict. That is 50 years of having
failed, as an international community, to come together
to find a solution to one of the most widely discussed
conflicts since the establishment of the Organization.
It is a failure of our multilateral system, in which
international law must prevail as a central pillar. We
cannot continue to overlook the pain of the millions of
people who are victims of this political and military
struggle. That is why I urge that we do our job and
ensure that multilateralism prevails so as to promote
solidarity and fulfil the commitment to achieve the
goals of the entire international community, not simply
those of a group of nations. The United Nations must
play its role as the epicentre of global governance on
the basis ofrespect for the collective quest for solutions.

Costa Rica deems it urgent to find a political
solution to this conflict. We must work on establishing
a new peace architecture so that we can resolve
differences and implement preventive diplomacy, with
a view to holding negotiations leading to tangible,
lasting and sustainable results. Military options are not
solutions. War cannot be fought with more war. Peace is
not built by fuelling conflicts with arms and bombings.
Peace must be built using the tools provided us by
diplomacy and multilateralism in order to put an end to
this humanitarian tragedy.

We believe that we must without delay work to
investigate and bring to justice those responsible for the
most serious crimes, with a view to putting an end to all
actions leading to the deaths of innocents, delivering
justice and preventing suffering and the deaths of even
more innocent civilians. The only thing worse than this
human tragedy is the fact that it results in impunity
rather than justice.

Costa Rica reiterates its concern over the growing
tensions in the conflict in the Middle East and strongly
urges the international community to achieve peace in
that region, and specifically all permanent members
of the Council to commit, in accordance with the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency Group
code of conduct, to not using the veto in case of
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. We
urge the Council to act expeditiously and decisively to
ensure the protection of civilians.

