Mr. Eide: This is certainly decision-time in
Afghanistan and for Afghanistan. As we look out over
the next feW weeks, we can see how many critical
decisions are ahead of us. Together, they will
determine the prospects for success in ending a conflict
that has become more intense over the last few months.
Let me just mention a few ofthese decisions.

First of all, of course, the final results from the
20 August elections will be determined and then
certified. Then the future president will have to
compose his Government and decide on his political
agenda. Among those decisions will be how to launch a
process of peace and reconciliation. Decisions will
have to be made on the future size and composition of
the international military forces as well as Afghan
security forces. Finally, decisions must be made
concerning priorities and the allocation of international
development assistance.

Faced with such important decisions, I must
emphasize that doing more of the same is simply not an
option any more. It is simply not an option. We must,
in a way, change our mindset.

Nothing of what I would ask the Council to do is
dramatically new. It has in fact been agreed. We talked
about it, we read about it. It has been solemnly agreed
in international documents. But there is one problem:
we have not implemented it. If implemented, I believe
that what we have committed ourselves to can have a
tremendous impact on the ground. But if we do not
implement it, if we shy away from difficult decisions,
then the overall situation on the ground will continue
to deteriorate.

First, I offer a few words about the elections. Yes,
there has been fraud, and irregularities have been
committed by election officials, by candidates and by
their supporters, as well as by Government officials.
The turn-out was low - almost as low as the elections
for the European Parliament. But Afghanistan is a
09-53153
country in conflict. No other day since 2002 has seen
so many security incidents as those we experienced on
20 August 2009.

Nevertheless, more polling stations opened than
in elections in 2004 and 2005. The security forces and
the Independent Election Commission (IEC) did their
utmost to provide access for voters. As I say, they did
so in a country that is not only in conflict, but has weak
institutions, weak infrastructure and a huge illiterate
population faced with a ballot paper containing 41
presidential candidates. That illustrates the complexity
of the matter.

I would like to emphasize a few positive elements
that we should not forget. The election campaign was
characterized by a public engagement that Afghanistan
had never seen before. There was a real debate between
political alternatives that the people of Afghanistan had
never previously witnessed. In my View, this strong
public engagement proves that the Afghan people
wanted these elections. They wanted to continue the
democratic processes in this country.

Two weeks ago, many believed that we were
almost at the verge of collapse in the election process.
But it has been kept on track. The IEC and the
Electoral Complaints Commission (ECC) have worked
together during these final stages. With the assistance
of experts brought in from abroad, an audit process has
been agreed to determine the level of fraud and then
the final results. The ballot boxes will all now be
brought to Kabul so that the final audit can take place.

This process is at every stage in accordance with
international standards. It has been used in other
complex elections. It should enable us to have a
credible and legitimate result. At the same time, this
audit process will enable us to determine the final
result in a short period of time. That means that a
second round, if required, could be held before winter
sets in, thereby avoiding a lengthy period of political
vacuum and instability.

We have been assisted by some of the most
experienced persons one can possibly find in this
world, in electoral processes and statistics and so on, in
addition to the excellent people that we have on the
ground. The challenge of the ECC will now be to
determine and reject fraudulent vote ballots while at
the same time avoiding disenfranchisement of voters
who have cast their votes in good faith and in an
3
Afghan cultural environment where many people had
never seen a ballot paper and had never used a pen.

When the final result has been certified, it must
be respected by candidates and their supporters. What
most Afghans by far now want is to see the process
come to an end, a Government formed and their lives
improved. Then the important decisions must be taken
by the future Afghan president. That means, first of all,
appointing a Government that can inspire the people
and enjoy its confidence. That will also be a first
important and necessary signal to the international
community and will help consolidate the commitment
of the public in donor and troop-contributing countries.
At this point in time, with the increasing debate about
Afghanistan in the international community, such a
signal is of vital importance.

Furthermore, we can no longer allow the warlords
and power brokers of the past, and their policy of
fragmentation, to contaminate the institutions of the
future. We need a unity of purpose and a sharing of
responsibility that have so far been lacking. Of course,
eliminating the influence of the fragmenting forces of
the past cannot be done overnight. But these forces
must also understand that in a conflict that is
expanding in scope and intensity, they will be expected
to step back from their policies of fragmentation and
personal interests.

Local and regional power brokers cannot be
allowed to hinder efforts to build a coherent
Afghanistan and thereby offer opportunities that
insurgents can exploit. In this respect, also, the
international community has an important role to play;
instead of paying tribute to and enriching those who
oppose the Government with undemocratic and
illegitimate means, we must make it clear that the
alternative to unity of purpose is marginalization.

The second challenge for the future President will
be to formulate an agenda that truly corresponds to the
concerns of the people. Better governance at the
provincial and district levels, an intensified struggle
against corruption, strengthened respect for the rule of
law, bringing an end to the culture of impunity and
promoting social and economic justice must be
prominent parts of this agenda. And I must stress that
we need a new compact between the Afghan
Government and its people. That compact will also be
the cornerstone of a renewed commitment by the
international community to Afghanistan.
I am often asked if there should be conditionality
in our assistance. There is, in my View, a de facto
conditionality; the decisions of donors and troop-
contributing countries are not made around summit
tables, not around Government tables, nor even around
the Security Council table. They are made around the
kitchen tables and in the living rooms where public
opinion is shaped. And the strength of that public
support in the international community depends on the
readiness of the Afghan Government to come closer to
the concerns of its people. The future Afghan
Government must understand that fully.

Important decisions will also be required by the
international community. On the security side, General
McChrystal has now presented his assessment. It is
clear, straightforward and demanding. His main themes
are the need to change the operational culture and get
closer to the people, to improve unity of effort and to
focus the resources and effectiveness of the Afghan
national security forces. I welcome his assessment, not
least his emphasis on cultural sensitivity and the need
to develop a different relationship with the population
in many areas.

I do not want to comment on the debate over the
need for additional international fighting forces, but I
do want to comment on the longer-term perspective.
We agree that there is a need to improve the strength
and capacity of the Afghan army and police. The
increase in the army is ahead of schedule and could
reach the goal of 135,000 personnel by October of next
year. That is encouraging, though a further and
significant increase will be required in subsequent
years, but if the army is to take greater responsibility
and conduct independent operations, much more than
numbers will be required. Decisions concerning the
procurement of equipment and weapons will have to be
taken soon. More international troops for training and
mentoring will be required.

The situation with the police is similar. A
decision to increase the number of police officers to
around 140,000 should be taken, in my View, before the
end of the year. But again, it is not merely a question
of numbers. The current attrition rate in the Afghan
police is between 20 and 25 per cent. That illustrates
the need for better training, better equipment and better
incentives.

All this - the training and equipping of the
police and army - cannot be a United States effort
alone. There must be a much wider engagement. I
therefore appeal strongly to other contributing
countries to step up their efforts in the area of
manpower as well as financial resources, and I did the
same to defence ministers of the European Union three
hours ago by video link to Sweden.

On the civilian side, I see two main areas that
must be given urgent priority. The first is institution-
building. If the Afghan Government is to connect better
with its population, a huge institution programme is
needed. I have said this before, and I insist on it. It can
be divided into five components, and I do so to
illustrate the complexity of the problem.

First, with respect to training and education for
current and future civil servants, some structures and
institutions exist, but they must be expanded and
improved. Today, 25 per cent of district governors -
one in four - are either uneducated or have only
primary education. Secondly, as regards the building of
subnational infrastructure, today half of the district
governors have no office, two thirds have no power
supply and one third has no vehicles. Thirdly, we must
build an information technology network that enables
provincial and district governors to communicate better
with their employers in Kabul, and thereby also link up
to Afghan national development plans. Fourthly,
incentives must be strengthened. The fact that a district
governor may earn $60 a month makes it difficult to
attract competent people to dangerous districts. And, of
course, there must be stronger emphasis on merit-based
appointments and accountability.

Yes, the Government must demonstrate, soon and
in concrete terms, a readiness to fight corruption and
strengthen its institutions. But the responsibility for
building viable and accountable governance is one we
must share. The shortcomings I have just mentioned
illustrate the complexity of the problem and the fact
that we must have realistic expectations as to how fast
we can go forward.

The second priority is sustainable economic
development. I understand the growing impatience in
the international community and the need to
demonstrate results for all the sacrifices that have been
made and resources committed. However, this
impatience must not lead us to accelerated pressure for
quick-impact results that can easily turn into quick-
collapse projects. If that were to happen, it would
distract us further from what is required for the
sustainable economic development that will enable
Afghanistan to rely increasingly on its own resources.

So we need a two-track approach - with doable
projects in conflict areas, in agriculture, rural
development, and so forth, that can visibly improve the
quality of the lives of the people - and greater
investments in long-term projects centred around
growth engines and national resources in those parts of
the country that can enhance revenue collection and
gradually reduce dependence on foreign aid. Today,
that balance is simply wrong, with too little resources
and attention given to long-term investment. This will,
in fact, lead to a situation where much of what we have
been doing so far will, in a few years' time, become
unsustainable.

At the G-8 meeting in Trieste, I presented
proposals on behalf of the Government and the United
Nations for two significant infrastructure projects: a
railroad and an expanded electricity grid that would
employ thousands of Afghans in the short term, and in
the longer term enable Afghanistan to exploit its own
rich mineral resources, not least the country's vast iron
ore deposits. These projects would stimulate the
private sector and provide engines for growth for
significant parts of the country.

I think that, in this respect, the Afghans seem to
be more advanced than we are. At the Special Envoy
meeting in Paris earlier this month, I brought with me a
paper elaborated by the Afghan Minister of Finance
with the United Nations, proposing a reorganization of
the efforts of the Afghan Government and its approach
to strategic and economic development. It moves away
from 17 inter-ministerial committees and proposes to
establish three main clusters: agriculture and rural
development, human resource development and
infrastructure and economic growth. It represents a
radical shift away from an unprioritized competition
among ministers to a strategic approach to sustained
economic growth. I wish we could follow, because
today our aid bureaucracies are too rigid and lack the
ability to respond to new and better policies.

Finally, I indicated initially that a new
Government will have to develop and decide on a
peace and reconciliation programme. Some - in
particular in the international community - are talking
about a reintegration programme distinct from a plan
such as I mentioned. I would like to appeal for some
caution. First, I am convinced that any such effort,
whatever we call it, must be an Afghan-elaborated and
Afghan-led process. Second, the distinction between
hard-core Taliban and those who can be brought over
with a chequebook is indeed simplistic. I think we
must analyze the insurgency better, how it is made up.
Yes, there are irreconcilable insurgents. And yes, there
are those who join the insurgency for financial reasons.
But there are many who have joined the insurgency
because they feel politically and socially alienated.
That will require a political process, greater
inclusiveness and a more effective justice system.

There are differences from region to region. The
insurgency is truly a multi-causal issue and must be
approached as such. Simplicity simply does not work.
We can play a supporting role, but let us leave it to the
Afghans to decide how to move forward.

There have been a number of calls for a new
international conference on Afghanistan, and I support
such calls. I believe that if security permits, the first
such conference should be held at the ministerial level
in Kabul. Such a conference, in the established JCMB
format, would be a strong political signal and would
underline that we are moving into a transition strategy
where the main focus must be on a compact between
the Afghan people and its Government, and where the
Afghan Government assumes greater responsibilities
for the future of its country, with the international
community gradually in a more supporting role. That
conference would be based on a new Government
programme and would provide international support to
it.

But I also believe we should look towards a
broader conference to formulate in a wider sense the
goals of our partnership for the years ahead, goals that
are ambitious but at the same time realistic and
realizable, and that would provide a roadmap for a
mutual long-term commitment, four years after the
Afghanistan Compact was concluded in London. It
would centre around some of the themes I have
mentioned: the Government's ability to assume the full
responsibilities of a sovereign State, institution-
building, economic development, a peace and
reconciliation process and Afghanistan's future status
in the region. It would mark the end of one phase of
our relationship and the beginning of another.

Before I conclude, I would like to mention a few
pieces of good news that have not received the
attention they deserve.

First, we talk a lot about drug production, and
rightly so. This year again, the area under opium
cultivation dropped significantly, by 22 per cent,
including a major drop in Helmand province. The
volume of production was reduced by 10 per cent and
the number of poppy-free provinces went up from 18 to
20. That is good news.

Second, in August, the young student named
Parwez Kambaksh, who had been given a death
sentence for downloading material concerning the
interpretation of the Koran, was given a presidential
amnesty on humanitarian grounds. This case had
received global attention. He is now a free man.

Third, during the United Nations Peace Day,
which we celebrated a few days ago, and the campaign
around that day, 1.2 million children were vaccinated
against polio. Only 3 per cent of the target group were
not reached, mainly due to ongoing fighting. Thanks to
the cooperation of all - including, I must say, the
Taliban - access was obtained to areas that had been
inaccessible in previous years. For us on the ground
this is important good news, and even more for the
children whose lives we may have saved.

The Council has received a set of benchmarks, as
instructed in resolution 1868 (2009) (S/2009/475, annex). They are formulated following a debate in
Kabul on Whether they should be UNAMA-specific or
of a more general nature. There was consensus on the
latter. They represent a first attempt and can, of course,
be further refined, following debate around this table
and in Kabul.

The United Nations has, I believe, expanded its
efforts in accordance with its mandate, not least in the
coordination of political and development issues. That
work will continue. Our ambition is still to continue to
expand with new offices across the country. There is a
need for a stronger coordinating effort, primarily in the
areas of development and governance. I have therefore
asked for additional resources for next year's budget in
order to implement the mandate more fully. However,
as I have said before, it is not only a question of the
number of staff. We need specialized personnel, who
are hard to find. I appeal to Council members for their
continued support and for their assistance in finding
the people we need in a challenging environment.
