Mr. McNee (Canada): Canada welcomes this
opportunity to address the Security Council on this
important issue. At the outset, my delegation would
like to commend Japan for its long-standing
commitment and very practical contributions to the
discussion of how to improve the working methods of
the Council.

The working methods of the Council are of
interest to Council members and non-members alike.
10-32436
Canada believes that there is a need for a continuing
dialogue on this issue. Canada would therefore support
the idea of regular annual or biannual open debates on
this subject.

The Security Council has primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
and the authority to make decisions that are binding on
all Member States. Given the heavy responsibility
entrusted to the Council, there is a need to ensure that
it is accountable, inclusive and transparent in its
decision-making. The presidential note contained in
document S/2006/507 outlines a number of important
areas where the Council could improve its working
methods to make them more transparent and more
efficient. In the past four years, there has been some
progress in implementing those measures. However,
this implementation has not been consistent, and even
those measures that have been implemented seem to
rely disproportionately on the individual efforts of the
Council President or elected members of the Council.

Canada believes that full implementation of the
measures contained in presidential note S/2006/507
would go a long way towards creating a Security
Council that is more transparent, efficient and
accountable. It is for this reason that Canada requested
a comprehensive review of the presidential note during
the open debate two years ago. It is our sincere hope
that the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions can undertake such a
review and present its findings to the Council before
the end of the year.

For the vast majority of Member States,
membership of the Security Council is a rare
occurrence, yet the decisions of the Security Council
affect all Member States greatly. While it is clear that
each Council member must act in accordance with its
national responsibilities, the wider membership has a
legitimate interest in knowing how these decisions are
made and in contributing to them as appropriate.

One practical suggestion for improving the
contribution of non-members of the Council is to
resume the holding of orientation debates before
discussions are scheduled on specific items on the
Council's agenda. In recent years, most of the open
debates of the Council have been on thematic issues.
Canada would urge the Council to return to the practice
of having orientation debates on country-specific
agenda items, as well as on thematic issues. That
10-32436
would allow non-members of the Council to have input
into these discussions before decisions are made.

Canada would also urge the Council to increase
the transparency of its deliberations. While Canada
acknowledges that private meetings of the Council are
sometimes necessary, there is also a need to keep the
wider membership informed about the Council's
deliberations. In practical terms, this means that the
Council should hold as many meetings as possible in
public format. When there is a need to hold closed
consultations, the members of the Council should
provide systematic briefings to other interested
Member States.

One area in which the Council has recently made
some progress is in consultations with troop-
contributing countries, and I would like to thank the
delegation of Japan for its efforts in this regard as
Chair of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations. In the past year, there has been a
noticeable improvement in the quality of the
consultations with troop-contributing countries. The
most effective change has been an improvement in the
scheduling of consultations so that they occur before
the decision on a peacekeeping mission's mandate has
already been taken. This allows the Council to benefit
from the significant experience of the troop-
contributing countries and also ensures that there is
broad support for Council decisions.

However, these improved consultations still seem
to be carried out in a rather ad hoc manner. Canada
would urge the Council to systematize this practice so
that the input of troop contributors can be heard before
the discussions on all peacekeeping mandates. A more
predictable consultation mechanism would also
improve the participation of troop-contributing
countries and the quality of their input, thereby
increasing the information available to the Council for
its deliberations.

(spoke in French)

While presidential note S/2006/507 was an
important step forward, it is also worth noting that the
United Nations has changed over the past four years.
As a result, there are other areas in which
improvements could be made to Council working
methods beyond those outlined in the presidential note.
One of the most important developments of recent
years is the evolution of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which has a unique role to play in
3
assessing, prioritizing, and mobilizing support for key
peacebuilding challenges that fall outside the core
competencies of a peacekeeping operation.

The Commission also works to ensure that the
efforts of the many actors involved in peacebuilding
are better coordinated, including with respect to the
mandate of United Nations missions. The holding of
regular briefings is a good start, but closer and more
substantive interaction between the Council and the
Commission is needed. Canada would therefore
recommend that the Security Council cooperate
systematically with the Peacebuilding Commission
earlier in the post-conflict period.

In conclusion, I would like to thank you again for
having convened this meeting, Sir. Reform of the
Security Council's working methods is an ongoing
process to which all Member States must continue to
contribute. However, it is also an area in which early
action is possible in order to achieve tangible results to
the benefit of Member States. Canada looks forward to
continuing to engage constructively in this process in
the months ahead.

