Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom, too, is delighted to see the Spanish
Prime Minister here among us in the Security Council,
speaking about this extremely important subject. I must
commend my Spanish colleague for achieving
something in 32 days that I was unable to do in 18
months: to bring his Prime Minister to the Council to
speak about counter-terrorism.

Once again, the Prime Minister has underlined for
us the importance of the global approach to terrorism.
Individual States acting in isolation - however
powerful they may be - cannot deal with the problem
of terrorism on their own. The work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) has been to establish a
global coalition on the basis of 100 per cent
comprehensive action against terrorism throughout the
United Nations system, and it shows once again how
uniquely placed the United Nations is to support and
facilitate a global approach of that kind.

We believe that the Security Council has a
responsibility to ensure that every Member State of the
United Nations takes action to combat this threat to
international peace and security. The policy we are
following is superbly encapsulated by resolution 1373
(2001), which retains its unique power even 19 months
after its adoption. Now, under Spain's stewardship, the
Committee is tackling the global challenge of
terrorism, and I commend Ambassador Arias for the
vigour of his chairmanship so far. The United Kingdom
will sustain its commitment to supporting the
Committee and to helping to eradicate terrorism.

But we need to have a focus for the next stage,
and the Prime Minister's address has given us some
very important pointers in that regard. We must step up
the emphasis on assistance, quickly and vigorously
given to the States that need it; we need to identify
needs and to match them with donors. The regional
organizations have a very important part to play here,
because the provision of assistance is a key test of the
success of the whole CTC approach, and it is vital to
change the reality on the ground in each Member State
that needs to raise the bar of its activities against
terrorism.

A very important part of our mechanism now is
our group - our corps, as it were - of experts, who
are increasingly gaining a clear picture of the global
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). They have
identified gaps in implementation, and - as I think the
Spanish Chair recognizes - it is now necessary that
the CTC, with the advice of experts, take action with
respect to States that are falling behind on
implementation. That requires a sharper critical
analysis that may have its political aspects but is
nevertheless essential for the CTC to engage in.

An increasingly experienced and professional
Counter-Terrorism Committee must bring its concerns
to the Security Council - as resolution 1456 (2003)
requested, following our ministerial meeting in
January. And in turn, the Council - not just the
Committee - will need to be prepared to respond.
Although we must continue our contacts with States
through the exchange of letters, I think the time is
approaching when we need to more systematically
organize visits by CTC experts to Member States that
could benefit from such visits and would be willing to
receive them, and where the experts could help clarify
areas of expertise and assistance in situations where
that would be of benefit.

In that context, I was very interested to hear what
the Prime Minister had to say to us about invigorating
the CTC. I warmly support all his points, although I
offer a word of caution about the drawing up of a list of
global terrorist organizations. That will be possible
when we have a fully agreed definition from the
General Assembly of what terrorism is. But short of
that point, there are difficulties with regard to drawing
up a list within the Counter-Terrorism Committee, and
I would advise a certain amount of reservation on that
point.

In January the Council also discussed the dangers
inherent in a world where weapons of mass destruction
and terrorism coexist. The pointers that Prime Minister
Aznar gave us on that are extremely welcome. We look
forward to the meeting of the CTC on 15 May with the
technical agencies and organizations whose activities
relate to the control and use of these materials, and we
hope that that contact will inform the CTC's future
work programme.

Finally, I welcome the Prime Minister's emphasis
on mainstreaming counter-terrorism into all United

Nations activities and programmes where it is relevant.
I especially welcome the symbolism of his presence
here in pointing to the need for sustained political
support and momentum from capitals if the CTC is to
succeed.

