Mr. Kamanzi (Rwanda): This being the first time
my delegation has taken the floor in the Security
Council in the month of February, I would like to begin
by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council.

I would also like to thank you, Sir, for calling a
meeting to discuss the progress report of the Secretary-
General on the recommendations of the Security
Council mission to Central Africa (S/2004/52). Further,
I thank the members of the Security Council for their
continued interest in and concern for the Central
African subregion.

Last week a Kenyan military observer serving in
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), Major
Peter Wachai, was killed while on duty in a village near
Bunia in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. My
Government joins others in expressing its condolences
to the Government and the people of Kenya on that
loss, and in calling for the killers to be brought to
justice.

Rwanda witnesses with much encouragement and
interest the ongoing peace processes in which its
neighbouring countries of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Burundi are engaged, despite the many
challenges they still face. In this regard, Rwanda
wishes once more to pledge its unwavering support for
these processes and is looking forward to the
renaissance ofthe two countries as stable nations.

My Government hailed the establishment of
transitional institutions in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo last year. We believe that this not only
fulfils an important requirement of the Lusaka
Agreement, but also paves the way for a genuine
reconciliation process. My Government has since
begun the process of normalizing relations with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

As highlighted in the report, the Rwandan
Foreign Minister visited Kinshasa last October to meet
with President Kabila and other Congolese officials to
express the Rwandan Government's support for the
transitional Government and to express our desire that
the two countries work collaboratively to restore peace
and security and to promote development in the region.
Prior to this, at the invitation of the Government of
Rwanda, two Congolese Vice-Presidents, Mr. Arthur
Zaidi Ngoma and Mr. Azarias Ruberwa, attended
President Kagame's inauguration in September and the
Congolese Minister for Regional Cooperation,
Mr. Mbusa Nyamwisi, visited Kigali for talks in
October. Rwanda believes that these meetings are the
building blocks for the normalization of relations
between our two countries.

With respect to the situation in Ituri, my
Government is greatly concerned by the continued
lawlessness and violence in the province, which result
in suffering for the ordinary people. We welcome the
Security Council's decision to deploy the MONUC
Ituri Brigade with a Chapter VII mandate, as well as
the Mission's military expansion outside Bunia.

The continued presence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo of armed and dangerous former
Rwandan Army (ex-FAR) and Interahamwe militia will
be a threat to the security of Rwanda, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the entire region until they
are effectively disarmed and demobilized. In this
connection, however, we welcomed the voluntary
repatriation to Rwanda last year of about 100
commanders and men of ex-FAR. They were well
received and resettled in their villages in a spirit of
reconciliation and also with the intention of
encouraging others still in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to return to Rwanda.

We are, however, concerned by reports that
hundreds of other would-be returnees are being
prevented from doing so by extremist elements among
them. We appeal to the Security Council and to the
international community as a whole urgently to address
this issue. We also appeal to the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to provide
maximum cooperation to ensure that those who would
like to return to Rwanda are able to do so and that
those who choose to remain in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo do not present a security threat
to Rwanda.

The Government of Rwanda commends the
tireless efforts of the Government of Burundi, and
President Ndayizeye in particular, to restore peace and
security and to reconcile the people of Burundi. We
welcome the signing of the comprehensive ceasefire
agreement between the Government and the Conseil
national pour la defense de la democratie-Forces
nationales pour la defense de la democratie of
Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza in Dar es Salaam last November.
We also welcome the recent talks in the Netherlands
between the Government and members of Agathon
Rwasa's branch of the Forces nationales de liberation.
These are encouraging developments, which should be
recognized and welcomed by the international
community.

In his report, the Secretary-General stresses that,
despite the encouraging developments in the peace
process, there is a risk that hopeful signs could be lost
if there is no peace dividend in the form of improved
living conditions. Rwanda agrees entirely with that
assessment. We therefore call upon the international
community expeditiously to make the required funds
available for economic recovery and humanitarian
activities in Burundi.

On the final point of the Great Lakes conference,
my Government commends the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ibrahima Fall, for the
preparations undertaken so far and once again
reiterates its full support for the process. Preparations
for the conference are already under way at the
national level in Rwanda. Consultations by the national
coordinator and the national preparatory committee in
preparation for the conference are already under way.
Rwanda looks forward to the conference in the hope
that it will enable us to conduct frank and productive
discussions on the four main topic areas.

