Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Deputy Secretary-General Jan Elliasson and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Al Hussein,
for their briefings.

The General Assembly's commemoration on
1 July, organized by the Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
presence of the Secretary-General and the President
of the General Assembly, represented an extremely
powerful and moving and moment of gathering and
remembering. Today, it is the Council's turn to recall the
victims of the massacre and to show its solidarity with
the families who lost a loved one, friend or neighbour in
Srebrenica. It is important for us, too, to commemorate
the twentieth anniversary of the genocide in Srebrenica
and to pay tribute to all the innocent victims on all sides
of the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is also
essential to collectively learn from the past to improve
our future actions. When such a massacre takes place,
it always represents a terrible collective failure. The
United Nations shares responsibility because it failed
to fulfil its founding mission in Srebrenica for the
maintenance of international peace and security and for
the protection of the civilian population.

We know that prevention must be at the heart of
our actions when human lives are in danger. Since
the genocide in Srebrenica, the United Nations has
developed its own mechanisms to prevent such tragedies
from recurring. Preventing means above all warning.
A first step was the establishment of the joint Office
for the Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility
to Protect, now headed by Mr. Adama Dieng, which
I welcome. The Office acts as an early warning
mechanism for the Security Council by bringing to
its attention any situation that could degenerate into
genocide.

Prevention also means acting. The second step
was the adoption in 2005 by the Heads of State and
Government of the key concept of responsibility
to protect. Narrowing the scope of the concept or
questioning it would be irresponsible and an affront to
the victims of multiple massacres and genocides. Ten
years after the adoption of the Millennium Declaration
(General Assembly resolution 55/2) and the recognition
of the concept of the responsibility to protect, it is our
duty to continue to implement that principle.

Prevention also means judging. In 1948, the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide anticipated the establishment of an
international criminal court. Fifty years later, we finally
adopt the Rome Statute establishing the International
Criminal Court. Meanwhile, the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia has helped to bring to justice
the main perpetrators of violations of international law
in the territory of the former Yugoslavia committed
since 1991. At the heart of the reconciliation process,
the Court remains an essential vehicle for memory and
reparation.

Despite such progress, it is clear that there are still
many tragic situations in which the United Nations
remains powerless. In Syria, crimes against humanity
and war crimes are committed every day before our
eyes, and the Security Council remains paralysed. In
such critical situations, the Council must be able to
respond and assume its responsibilities. In is to that end
that France is pushing for the five permanent members
to voluntarily commit to renouncing the use of the veto
in cases of mass crimes. The use of the veto is not a
privilege; it is a responsibility. It is therefore up to the
permanent members first of all to show that they are
responsible within the framework of the Council.

Twenty years ago, on 11 July 1995, more than 8,000
adults and children were massacred in Srebrenica.
Those events have been described as genocide by both
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and the International Court of Justice, and mark one
of the most tragic and dramatic events in the Bosnian
war. To this day, as has been recalled, it is the worst
massacre in Europe since the Second World War.

Unfortunately, the Security Council today could
not adopt a draft resolution to commemorate the
twentieth anniversary of the Srebrenica genocide and
to pay tribute to all the innocent victims on all sides
of the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina. As I said
in my explanation of vote, France deeply regrets the
fact that Russia opposed a text, whose basic value of
which is commemorative, because of the fracture
lines which the local populations themselves want to
put behind them. The draft resolution would not only
commemorate the event, which is critical, but also
underline the importance of rapprochement among
the States of the region centred on a shared European
future. It was in that spirit that we helped to write and
supported the draft text, which recalls that the future of
the Balkan populations, like that of the entire European
continent, is not to perpetuate the problems of a tragic
and painful past but rather to build a common destiny
based on reconciliation.

As a French and European citizen, I welcome the
progress made in recent years in the region to ensure a
better future for the generations born after Srebrenica. I
also welcome the fact that all Balkan States are moving
towards the European Union and joining in a common
project based on peace and tolerance. These strong
values guided the founders of the European project,
whose aim was reconciliation from the outset. Sixty
years later, we have covered a very impressive distance
that is undoubtedly unprecedented in history. France,
with the European Union, hopes that all the Balkan
countries will become full parties to the European
project.

