The Secretary-General: It is a great pleasure to
welcome the Ministers attending this important
meeting. I thank Foreign Secretary Hague for using the
United Kingdom's presidency of the Security Council
to focus on the dramatic developments that have taken
place in the Middle East and that are still in motion as
we speak.

The remarkable events of the past year have
transformed the region and changed the world. We see
a newly democratizing Tunisia - the country that
produced the initial spark that has since spread far and
wide. We see Libya putting decades of dictatorship
behind it. We see Yemen with a newly elected
President. And we see people across the region -
women and young people in the vanguard -
continuing to call for freedom and human rights, for
dignity and opportunity, for accountable Government,
and for an end to corruption and monopolies of wealth
and power. The spontaneous and home-grown
democratic movements are a credit to the Arab people.

But we must also recognize that the cost in
human suffering and loss of life has been large. We
have reached a sober moment. In Egypt, we continue to
urge a peaceful and early transfer of power to a civilian
Government. In Bahrain, there remains a need for an
all-inclusive dialogue and meaningful reform process
In still other countries, people are standing up and
battling their fears to call for more political
empowerment and social justice.

In Syria, what started as a peaceful, popular call
for long-denied democratic rights has turned into a
2

dangerous spiral of violence leading both Syria and the
region into uncertainty. The Syrian Government has
failed to fulfil its responsibility to protect its own
people, and instead has subjected citizens in several
cities to military assault and disproportionate use of
force. These shameful operations continue. Sustained
attacks against Idlib, Horns and elsewhere in the
country have killed scores of people over the past
couple of days, including women and children.

I thank the Security Council for supporting
United Nations humanitarian efforts. The Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Ms. Valerie Amos, continues her efforts, following her
visit to the country, to gain the unhindered access
needed to respond to the devastation. The International
Commission of Inquiry for Syria concluded that Syrian
Government forces have committed widespread,
systematic and gross human rights violations
amounting to crimes against humanity.

And still the conflict deepens. Increasing
numbers have fled internally or sought refuge in
neighbouring countries. More groups are picking up
arms. It is urgent for the international community to
stop the violence. The General Assembly has spoken
clearly in supporting the calls of the League of Arab
States for a cessation of violence and a peaceful
political solution. Together with Arab League
Secretary-General Elaraby, I have asked former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan to be our Joint Special
Envoy and to use his good offices to facilitate urgent
achievement of these goals. He will be assisted by
Deputy Special Envoy Nasser Al-Kidwa.

As members will have followed closely, the Joint
Special Envoy has just visited Syria over the weekend.
Prior to that, he had intensive consultations with me
and others in New York, as well as in Cairo with
Secretary-General Elaraby and a wide range of
ministers attending the Arab League ministerial
meeting there. In Damascus, he met twice with
President Al-Assad, with part of the opposition and
with Syrian civil society, business and religious
leaders. All interlocutors in Syria welcomed
Mr. Annan's mission.

Mr. Annan held frank and comprehensive
discussions with President Al-Assad, and put concrete
proposals to the President. He urged President
Al-Assad to take immediate steps to bring an end to
violence and abuses, address the humanitarian crisis,
1245973
and embark with Mr. Annan's facilitation on a
peaceful, inclusive, Syrian-led political process that
would meet the legitimate and democratic aspirations
of the Syrian people.

I add my voice to that of Mr. Annan in urging
President Al-Assad to act swiftly, within the next few
days, in response to the proposals put forward by the
Joint Special Envoy. I appeal to the Security Council to
unite strongly behind ending the violence and
supporting Mr. Annan's mission to help Syria pull back
from the brink of a deeper catastrophe. This is vital for
the Syrian people and for the entire region.

I appreciate the recent initiatives of the Russian
Federation and China, including their engagement with
Syria and with the League of Arab States. At this
crucial juncture, it will be essential for the Council to
speak with one voice, and I hope that the Council can
find its way towards adopting consensus resolution that
sends a signal of strong resolve.

Let me also say a few words about the broader
picture in the region going forward. I see five crucial
points to bear in mind.

First, leaders must choose the path of meaningful
reform, or make way for those who will. People do not
want cosmetic changes that give only the merest taste
of democracy. They want accountable governance and
firm measures against corruption and cronyism.

Secondly, we must promote pluralism and protect
the rights of minorities. Inclusive Government should
be the watchword in the region's new democracies.

Thirdly, women have stood in the squares and
streets demanding change, and now have a right to sit
at the table, with real influence in decision-making and
safe from violence, intimidation and abuse. The deficit
in women's empowerment has held back the Arab
region for too long.

Fourthly, we must create opportunities for young
people. To absorb young entrants into the workforce,
Arab countries need to create 50 million jobs within
the next decade.

Fifthly, there must be regional peace. A regional
awakening based on the ideals of freedom, dignity and
non-violence cannot be complete without a resolution
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

Yet, the past year has not brought about new
momentum. The peace process continues to stagnate.
1245973

The situation in Gaza is yet again proving its
unsustainability. I am gravely concerned about the
latest escalation between Gaza and Israel. Once again,
civilians are paying a terrible price. Rocket attacks
from Gaza against Israeli civilian areas are
unacceptable and must stop immediately. I reiterate my
call on Israel to exercise maximum restraint.

I have appealed to Israeli and Palestinian leaders
to embrace regional changes and to show the courage
and vision needed to reach a historic agreement.
Together with my Quartet partners, with whom I met
this morning, we will remain engaged to assist the
parties in forging a way ahead. We must create the
conditions for meaningful negotiations that will resolve
the core permanent status issues - namely, with
regard to territory, security, refugees and Jerusalem -
and end the occupation that started in 1967. That is the
only way to achieve a just and lasting peace that will
realize the vision of two States living side by side in
peace and security.

The region would also benefit from an end to
tensions rooted in concerns over Iran's nuclear
programme. I urge all sides to exercise the utmost care
and restraint, commit to diplomatic efforts in good
faith and comply with all relevant resolutions of the
Council.

Two decades ago, a previous generation rebelled
against tyranny in Eastern Europe. The international
community was quick to help. Today, the international
community should engage once again. As we do so, it
will be crucial to move beyond some of the
assumptions that have often governed relationships
between Arab countries and their partners. One
damaging notion is that the Arab world is not ready for
democracy; another is that security must take
precedence over human rights.

Those assumptions have had the effect of keeping
unrepresentative Governments in power, with little to
show for democracy or security. The United Nations,
too, must update its approach to the region. We are
placing the full spectrum of our expertise and best
practices at the disposal of the countries in transition.
We are strongly committed to doing our part to enable
a profoundly changing region to achieve peace and
realize its potential.

