Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank you, Sir, for organizing today's
meeting and express our appreciation to the Chairs of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1540 (2004), Ambassadors Verbeke, Arias
and Burian, for their reports on the work of the
Security Council's counter-terrorist committees that
they head.

Today's briefings addressed major issues in the
work of the three committees in one of the most
important areas of the Council's work - strengthening
counter-terrorism security. We fully support their
general basic focus on assessing achievements in the
implementation of the relevant Council resolutions and
on addressing issues that might stand in the way
thereof, including through the joint efforts of the three
committees.

We are pleased to note the CTC's adoption of the
first Preliminary Implementation Assessments under
resolution 1373 (2001) for 50 States, which are now
being sent to capitals. Along with country visits, the
Assessments consolidate a genuine transition effected
by the CTC to new methods of direct and ongoing
dialogue with States on the question of implementing
provisions of the resolution so as to consider it in close
connection with providing the necessary technical
assistance.

We welcome the fact that, following lengthy and
complex discussions in the Committee on that issue, a
constructive approach ultimately prevailed. At the
same time, the CTC and the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate (CTED) will, of course, need to
make additional efforts to clarify for Member States
the format and procedures of the Preliminary
Implementation Assessments. In that regard, we
support the CTC's plan to convene a special meeting
with Member States.
Work on the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) must continue without interruption and
according to plan. The Russian Federation wishes once
again to confirm its position in favour of the prompt
completion of work on a comprehensive report on the
implementation of the resolution and its submission to
the Council for detailed discussion in late 2007 or early
2008. We believe that such a discussion would enable
us not only to clarify the real situation with respect to
the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), but also
to identify key directions of the Committee's future
work on the basis of fundamental global security
approaches to fighting terrorism. We expect the
Committee finally to be able to achieve agreement on
substantive aspects of the report in the near future, and
submit it to the Council.

An important milestone in the CTC's work was
the fifth special meeting with international, regional
and subregional organizations, held in Nairobi in late
October and devoted to the issues of strengthening
mechanisms for border security and curbing terrorist
movement. We are convinced that enhancing the
Committee's interaction with international and regional
partners is an important condition for the successful
resolution of issues concerning the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). The outcome document and the
action plan agreed to in Nairobi will serve as
guidelines for pursuing such cooperation and focusing
it on practical results. We hope that, as a result, all the
CTC's new partners among the international, regional
and subregional organizations will join that process.

In October, the CTC approved the second report
on the implementation of resolution 1624 (2005),
drafted on the basis of an analysis of 19 reports
received between September 2006 and July 2007. In
our view, such input is meagre and the pace of States'
work can hardly be called satisfactory. We therefore
believe that, in the light of the resolution's provisions,
dialogue with States needs to be enhanced. We foresee
additional occasions for that in the consideration of
States' needs for the technical assistance necessary to
implement the resolution and opportunities to provide
such assistance.

The CTC has reached an important threshold with
the forthcoming renewal of CTED's mandate. We feel
that its political and organizational frameworks will
fully meet the challenges of implementing
resolution 1373 (2001) and strengthening States'
capacities to resist the contemporary threat of
terrorism.

We continue to consider the 1267 Committee and
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
to be among the Council's effective and viable
mechanisms in its counter-terrorism work. We regret to
note the ongoing spread of extremist ideas and the
influence of the Taliban, both inside of Afghanistan
and out. In that regard, we stress the need for the
1267 Committee and the Monitoring Team to step up
their efforts to update the sanctions list to reflect the
true nature of today's terrorist threat. The importance
of that work was reflected in Security Council
resolution 1735 (2006).

We call on Member States to submit requests to
the Committee for the listing of individuals and entities
connected to the Taliban and Al-Qaida, as well as
existing additional information on such individuals. It
is precisely Member States' commitment to full and
conscientious compliance with their obligations that
will determine the success of our common effort to
counteract the real and changing threat to international
peace and security posed by the Taliban and Al-Qaida.

We attach great importance to strengthening the
cooperation of the Committee and the Monitoring
Team with Interpol and the relevant regional and
subregional organizations. It is essential to continue the
practice of the Committee's Chair and members of the
Monitoring Team of making country Visits, which will
allow them to verify on the ground States' commitment
to the cause of counter-terrorism and to learn about
best practices and methods in counter-terrorism. We
would call for closer coordination in this direction,
especially with CTC and its Executive Directorate.

The long-term challenge, which will not end upon
the expiration of the current mandate of the
1540 Committee, remains the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). It cannot be done all at once,
with one-time actions, and must be done within the
process of ongoing improvements to non-proliferation
efforts by members of the international community. We
would hope that, in spite of the scope and complexity
of the work to be done under resolution 1540 (2004),
through joint efforts under the auspices of the United
Nations, we would be able to close the remaining gaps
in national proliferation legislation and to strengthen
the foundations of the coordinated resistance to black
markets for weapons of mass destruction.

We are pleased to note that the 1540 Committee

is entering a new stage in its work, by providing

assistance to States that need it in implementing the

provisions of resolution 1540 (2004). At this stage, it

will be important to focus efforts on the weaknesses of

national monitoring systems, identified through

studying information on the measures taken by States,

as submitted in their national reports to the
1540 Committee.

Unfortunately, we must once again note the
insufficient pace of States' preparation of those reports.
In the last reporting period, only one State reported to
the Committee for the first time, and another 54, in
spite of the holding of many information and outreach
activities, still have not done so. Active work with
States that have still not submitted their first national
reports needs to be continued. In that regard, relevant
assistance to those countries that need it should be
provided on the basis of constructive dialogue, without
pressure or interference in the affairs of States and
without prejudice to legal, international, economic,
scientific and technological cooperation.

We would like to note the initiative, which we
actively supported, on the Chair sending letters to all
States with a request to update information on the
appended matrices on the basis of information
contained in national reports and other open and
official sources. We would hope that the unfortunate
and significant delay in sending all those letters to
addressees will not prevent Member States from
submitting the additional information requested within
deadlines that would allow for a qualitative preparation
of the April 2008 report on the results of the
Committee's work for the period from 2006 to 2008.

