Mr. Sen (India): At the outset I thank you,
Mr. President, for scheduling this open debate on an
issue that has, unfortunately, become a defining
element of our world. Terrorism grew steadily through
the twentieth century to become one of the leading
strategic, political and developmental challenges of the
twenty-first century.

India's advocacy of international cooperation in
order to fight the threat of terrorism predates most
measures taken by the Security Council or the General
Assembly; indeed, it predates serious consideration of
the issue of terrorism within the United Nations. That
is because India has been, and unfortunately remains, a
victim of international terrorism. In less than 25 years,
over 60,000 have been killed in various parts of India
as a direct result of terrorism, quite apart from the
concomitant impact upon our economy.

India therefore has an overriding interest in
greater and more meaningful international cooperation
to counter terrorism. That also underscores the
rationale behind our conviction that no political cause,
no argument, no belief can or should be used to justify
acts of terrorism. That Mahatma Gandhi preferred to
call off his mass movement and postpone the
independence of India rather than compromise with
violence at Chauri Chaura gives us the right to say this.

We continue to call upon the world to act as one
in denying terrorists, their ideologues and financiers
access to arms, funds and means of transportation of
their deadly goods, as well as safe havens.

However, as an unfortunate but inevitable result
of our tragic history of dealing with terrorism, India
has accumulated the expertise and experience for doing
so. Our own efforts utilize all available tools within the
arsenal of a democratic nation governed by the rule of
law. They run the gamut of efforts from surveillance
methods governed by law, monitoring financial flows
and effective legislation regarding dual-use items to
old-fashioned police investigation work. Yet we
recognize that no matter how comprehensive the effort,
there is always the chance of one catastrophic failure.
It is in recognition of this that we seek a
comprehensive international effort to counter
terrorism.

In that context, despite counter-terrorism being
taken up more seriously by the United Nations in
general and the Security Council in particular, there is
limited evidence of a genuinely common effort to
create a more unified international response to
terrorism. We have argued for over a decade, and we
continue to believe, that agreement on a comprehensive
convention on international terrorism should have been
a first step in any consolidated counter-terrorism
efforts within the United Nations. Such a convention
would provide the legal framework for an effective
counter-terrorism strategy. We remain convinced that a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism
must be agreed upon if we are to have a strong
interlocking network of Member States, international
organizations and specialized agencies functioning
together in unison to counter terrorism.
We do not need a philosophical definition of
terrorism. Paragraph 1 of draft article 2 enunciates
clearly the criminal law definition of terrorist acts.
Current proposals address effectively the question of
offences governed by international humanitarian law
and those governed by the convention. What is now
needed, therefore, is the political will to conclude the
convention. The Security Council's efforts could be
maintained on the basis of such a resolution passed by
the General Assembly.

Over and above our commitment to the early
conclusion of a comprehensive convention, which we
initiated at the Assembly's fifty-first session, we see
merit in a pragmatic approach to the various counter-
terrorism mechanisms and elements that already exist.
We have adopted such an approach in working with
and supporting the efforts of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) - we articulated our views at that time on
resolution 1540 (2004) - and their expert panels. Not
the least of those measures was welcoming a joint visit
of experts coordinated by the CTED, which included
experts from the Monitoring Team of the 1267
Committee and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC), to India in November 2006 and
sharing our mutual experiences. Our approach is
guided by the conviction that the sum of our collective
efforts can indeed be greater than the total of each
individual nation's part in the battle against terrorism.

Therefore, I should like to state for the record the
following. India welcomes the revised organizational
plan of the CTED, as contained in document
S/2008/80. We hope that it will bring about greater
flexibility of approach and effectiveness of operation.

We also look forward to greater efforts to bring
together interrelated aspects of the operational
mechanisms of the 1267 Committee, the 1540
Committee and the CTC, and dovetailing them with the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force. India
hopes that all those efforts within the United Nations
will be integrated more closely, with the core tasks
being taken forward by specialized bodies such as
UNODC, INTERPOL, the International Civil Aviation
Organization and the International Maritime
Organization.

Therefore, India strongly affirms the importance
of a collective effort to focus on technical assistance in
the larger struggle against terrorism, in helping States
implement the mandate of the CTC and related
instruments.

India is willing to provide all assistance in the
larger effort to counter the threat of terrorism. Our
commitment to do so is already on record, in India's
fifth report submitted to the CTC in March 2007, and
we are willing to share information with other relevant
United Nations mechanisms that work in those fields.
We are willing to render such assistance bilaterally or
multilaterally, especially in the instance of countries
that are themselves not directly threatened by terrorism
but whose participation is vital to the success of the
larger international effort.

We would, however, urge that there be greater
efforts to follow up on information obtained from
Member States as part of the effort against terrorism.
Pooling our collective knowledge and expertise is
desirable but can succeed only when there is adequate
evidence that it is both welcome and necessary.

The political and socio-economic programme of
fundamentalists is always deeply reactionary and
exploitative. History teaches us that to prevent
fundamentalist terrorist forces from occupying space
for dissent, democratic and secular forces must be
strengthened, not weakened. The larger effort to foster
international cooperation requires greater cooperation
between the members of the Security Council and the
larger United Nations membership. We hope that
today's exercise is the first of more efforts to build
closer cooperation within the international system.

In conclusion, allow me to also congratulate the
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
Mr. Jurica, and thank Mr. Mike Smith, the Executive
Director of CTED, both for his presentation today, on
which I have been briefed by my colleague, and for the
vigour and commitment he has brought to his post. We
wish him every success in making CTED a responsive
and flexible tool in the larger fight against terror.

(spoke in Russian)

Along with you, Mr. President, we know first-
hand what terrorism is. The cooperation of the
international community is an absolute necessity.
