Ms. Kang: I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to brief the Council on the
humanitarian impact of Boko Haram atrocities in
northern Nigeria and neighbouring countries. On behalf
of the Under-Secretary-General and Emergency Relief
Coordinator Valerie Amos, I would like to deliver the
following statement.

Despite several reports of suspected Boko Haram
attacks in Yobe, Gombe and Bomo states, I can report that
no additional humanitarian needs have so far emerged
as a result of the election. We will continue to closely
monitor the situation on the ground as the likelihood
of electoral violence around the announcement of the
results will remain high.

Since a state of emergency was declared in May
2013, the ongoing violent conflict in north-eastern
Nigeria and the Lake Chad Basin has forcibly displaced
at least 1.5 million people in Nigeria and its neighbours.
Boko Haram escalated its campaign throughout 2014,
and communities in northern Nigeria have increasingly
been caught in the crossfire between the insurgents
and the national army. The conflict has caused death
and injury on a large scale and destroyed homes and
infrastructure. Since the beginning of 2014, Boko
Haram has killed more than 7,300 civilians in the
three state-of-emergency states. This year alone 1,000
people lost their lives. More than 300 schools have
been severely damaged or destroyed. Less than 40 per
cent of the health facilities in the affected areas remain
operational. Gross human rights violations, including
sexual and gender-based violence and child trafficking,
are frequently reported.

The escalation of Boko Haram-related violence
in the region continues to hinder access to people in
desperate need of humanitarian assistance and is
limiting the scope of our response. An overwhelming
majority of the internally displaced persons (IDPs)
reside within host communities and in camp-like
conditions, clustered around schools, churches and
mosques. According to the International Organization
for Migration, only 10 per cent ofthe more than 1 million
IDPs are in identified and accessible Government-run
IDP camps in urban areas. Minimum humanitarian
standards for shelter, food, water, sanitation, health
and education are not being met in the camps, due to
a lack of camp-management and protection capacity.
The plight of civilians stranded or hiding in areas that
humanitarian organizations are currently unable to
reach is very worrying, especially those in areas still
under the control of Boko Haram.

As many as 3 million people in northern Nigeria
will not be able to meet their basic food needs after July
2015 unless they receive well-targeted humanitarian
assistance. While the federal and state authorities have
worked hard to provide assistance to many of those
fleeing the violence, the overall humanitarian response
in north-eastern Nigeria remains poor and fragmented.
Only nine operational partners, mostly international
non-governmental organizations, are currently active in
the three states most affected. In support of the national
and state-level emergency management agencies'
efforts, those humanitarian partners have undertaken
emergency protection programmes that include
providing psychological first aid and psychosocial
support and registration and support for unaccompanied
children, as well as other lifesaving activities in the
areas of water, sanitation, health and food distribution.
Those programmes, however, are limited in scope, since
they mainly target IDPs registered in the Government-
run camps.

In addition to insecurity, a lack of donor support
is constraining the expansion of the humanitarian
footprint. Humanitarian partners are ready to do
more and to scale up their efforts. If they are to do so,
donor engagement and continued financial support are
critical. In addition, accurate and reliable humanitarian
data and effective monitoring systems are needed for
informed humanitarian planning, effective advocacy
and sustained donor support. From 9 to 12 March, 12
emergency directors of the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee visited Nigeria to assess the humanitarian
situation and identify potential solutions for addressing
the current challenges in north-east Nigeria. As a result
of their visit, a three-month inter-agency action plan is
being developed to support the scaling up of critical
protection and lifesaving response efforts and the
humanitarian presence in conflict-affected areas in the
North-east.

The expansion ofBoko Haram's activities is having
a significant regional impact. According to the Office
ofthe United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
as of 25 March some 74,000 refugees had sought refuge
in the far north of Cameroon. Boko Haram cross-
border attacks from Nigeria into Cameroon have also
triggered the internal displacement of between 100,000
and 150,000 Cameroonians. In the Niger, 50,000 people
have been internally displaced, adding to the 100,000
Nigerian refugees and Nigerien returnees who have
sought refuge in the Diffa region of the Niger since
May 2014. In Chad, the Boko Haram incursion has
resulted in some 33,000 refugees and returnees, as well
as 14,500 IDPs, seeking refuge around Lake Chad. In
the three affected countries, insecurity and logistical
challenges have impeded access, which, in addition to
significant funding shortfalls, is preventing a scaled-up
humanitarian response. The three Governments have
requested international assistance to respond to the
most pressing needs, which include protection, food
assistance, water, non-food items, health and shelter.

The massive displacement caused by Boko Haram
cross-border incursions is placing immense strain on
the already depleted resources of host communities,
which in some areas are as vulnerable as the displaced
themselves. Food is more difficult to find in the market,
and in some instances prices have doubled or tripled. In
Diffa at the end of 2014, almost a quarter of children
aged between 6 and 23 months were suffering from
global acute malnutrition. In Chad, more than 30 per
cent of those in host communities were food insecure in
2014. In north-eastern Nigeria, an estimated 4.6 million
people are currently suffering from food insecurity, and
100,000 children are at risk of severe malnutrition. The
Boko Haram crisis is likely to have a broader impact on
the Sahel region, since Nigeria traditionally produces
almost half the region's cereals. On 15 March, the
Emergency Relief Coordinator approved $28 million
from the United Nations Central Emergency Response
Fund to address the regional humanitarian impact of
Boko Haram. We hope that more support from the
international community will follow in order to enable
humanitarian actors to continue to reach those in need
with lifesaving assistance.

The humanitarian community welcomes the
regional political commitment to tackle the ongoing
violence in the north-east. In the light of the current
discussion in the Security Council, it is critical that
the Multinational Joint Task Force, as a counter-
terrorism force, limit its focus to creating conducive
security conditions and an enabling environment for
non-military-related interventions, while adhering
to international humanitarian law and taking all
precautions to avoid civilian casualties.

As the Task Force is a de facto party in conflict, I ask
Council members to ensure that its operations remain
distinct from civilian-led humanitarian operations.
Maintaining distinction between the two is crucial in
order to safeguard the actual and perceived neutrality
and independence of humanitarian organizations.
In addition, the Task Force should not be involved
in facilitating the returns of refugees and internally
displaced persons, which must be carried out on a
voluntary basis in line with international humanitarian
law and the Kampala Convention, to which Nigeria is
a party.

The humanitarian situation in north-east Nigeria
and the conflict-affected areas in neigbouring
countries remains dire. The conflict continues to have
a devastating impact on women, children and young
people, as well as on many others who have been
traumatized by violence. Additional funding to address
the acute humanitarian needs of those affected by the
conflict is urgently needed.

So far, local organizations and communities have
carried the weight of this response. The Government of
Nigeria has stated its willingness and ability to shoulder
a significant portion of the operational and financing
needs to respond to the crisis. However, support from
the international community is also needed to help
respond to the urgent humanitarian situation in north-
east Nigeria. An international humanitarian presence
is needed to advise and help coordinate a complex and
fast-moving operation and support the provision of the
necessary protection measures for the civilians caught
up in the conflict.

