Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I
thank Special Representative Honore for her briefing,
which, together with the Secretary-General's report
(S/2016/225), clearly outlines the important strides
that Haiti has made in the past several years since the
earthquake, as well as the daunting challenges that it
continues to face.

I would like to begin by commending the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
for its efforts to promote the political process, strengthen
the rule of law and promote human rights. In particular,
we would like to thank the individual men and women
serving in MINUSTAH, as well as the troop- and
police-contributing countries, for their tireless efforts
on behalf of the Haitian people.

Today, I would like to focus on the immediate
issue that is critical to Haiti's future - the expeditious
conclusion of the postponed electoral process in Haiti.
Completing the electoral cycle is a critical step towards
not only installing an elected Government that reflects
the will of the Haitian people, but also re-establishing
fully functional democratic institutions in Haiti that can
make Haiti more stable and more secure. Without the
strengthening of democratic institutions and credible
democratic processes, there can be no genuine stability
or sustainable development in Haiti.

As the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General noted in her remarks, a political accord was
reached on 5 February, through a Haitian-led political
process, to hold the second round of presidential
elections on 24 April, followed by the inauguration of a
President on 14 May. In order to adhere to that timeline,
all Haitian political stakeholders need to commit to
swift implementation of the accord. Towards that end,
we welcome the commitment made by provisional
President Privert to advancing towards completion of
the electoral process enshrined in the accord, and we
note the important step that he took on 25 February
by naming a Prime Minister. But, while some positive
steps have been taken towards abiding by the timeline,
time is running short for completing the many tasks
that remain. One critical next step is to reconstitute the
Provisional Electoral Council as soon as possible. We
urge the Parliament to play its role in the implementation
of the 5 February agreement by voting on the Prime
Minister's Government policies without delay in order
to facilitate the completion of the electoral process.

Some political actors and observers spread a
narrative late last year that included allegations of
widespread fraud in the electoral process, challenging
the credibility of the elections. That narrative does the
Haitian people a real disservice. It was notjust unhelpful
but harmful, and greatly undermined the efforts of
the Haitian Government, assisted by the international
community, to give the Haitian people the opportunity
to have their voices heard through a democratically
elected Government. I want to note that neither we
nor the international observation missions sent by the
European Union and the Organization of American
States found proof of massive and widespread fraud.

Once the elections are successfully completed, Haiti
can focus its energy and resources on strengthening
democratic processes and institutions in Haiti, which
have been sidelined and overshadowed by the protracted
political crisis. For example, the Haitian Government
needs to urgently address problems in the justice
sector, particularly with regard to prolonged pre-trial
detention. Nearly 70 per cent of the prisoners in Haitian
prisons have not been formally charged.

Haiti now faces increasing challenges, including
drought, a depreciating currency and threats to its food
security, among others. Only an elected Government
can effectively work with Haiti's many international
partners to confront those and other challenges. The
strengthening of Haiti's institutions is also necessary
in order to sustain and eventually take over the work
of MINUSTAH and other international partners. As
MINUSTAH prepares to assess the conditions for a
further drawdown or reconfiguration of the United
Nations Mission, we commend the Haitian National
Police on their progress towards improving the country's
security environment. We note that the Haitian National
Police intends to reach its target strength of nearly
15,000 officers by the end of 2016, and we call for the
completion of the road map for the Haitian National
Police's growth and professionalization for the next five
years. We also call for the continued assistance of the
international community with those efforts.

The United States supports the strategic assessment
mission on the future presence of the United Nations in
Haiti, as requested in resolution 2243 (2015), which is
to be initiated following the completion of the elections
and the instalment of a new democratically elected
President. We also look forward to the joint transition
plan currently being drafted by MINUSTAH and the
United Nations country team, which will outline a
road map for future support by the United Nations,
the Government of Haiti and other international
partners. Along with the strategic assessment mission,
we welcome recommendations from MINUSTAH on
the future presence and role of the United Nations in
Haiti, and we emphasize that any reconfiguration of
United Nations presence should be based on thorough,
ongoing analysis of the security situation in Haiti.
Using such evidence-based analysis to inform decisions
on the United Nations configuration will help avoid
hasty changes that could compromise the progress
that the Haitian Government and people, along with
the international partners, have achieved over the
past decade.

The United States has been one of Haiti's
international partners for a long time. Working together
with the Government of Haiti and the international
community, we continue to support and will continue to
work to strengthen Haiti's overall security, democratic
development and economic growth. Progress on those
issues is especially hard when political uncertainty
prevails, which underscores the importance of holding
elections within the time frame identified in the
5 February accord. We call on all parties to commit to a
genuine, free and fair electoral process that is peaceful
and uninterrupted, so that Haiti can finally pivot
towards the bright future that it so richly deserves.

