Mr. Jinga (Romania) (spoke in French): Romania
associates itself with the statement to be made on
behalf of the European Union. I would like to make
some remarks in my national capacity.

Allow me to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
for organizing this open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, an issue that is central to
the Security Council's responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security. Protecting the
civilian population in armed conflicts is today a major
challenge. The two emergency meetings of the Security
Council on the humanitarian situation in Syria last
week demonstrate this.

We find the reports of the Secretary-General of
June (S/2015/453) and September 2015 (S/2015/682)
very helpful to our debate. The latter is based on the
relevant observations and recommendations of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations. I
also thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson and
the President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross for the very pertinent, albeit grim, briefings they
presented today.

As this is the first time that the Security Council
is discussing this subject after the adoption of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), I would like to express the satisfaction
of Romania, as an active promoter of the Agenda,
at the inclusion of Goal 16, on promoting peaceful
and inclusive societies for sustainable development,
providing access tojustice for all and building effective,
accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels. That
Goal has an important impact on the sectoral aspects of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

The many ongoing conflicts force us to stress once
again that the responsibility for protecting civilians
in times of war lies with the States, and that it is up
to States to prosecute those who commit violations of
international norms, including those of international
humanitarian law. That obligation applies equally to
all parties to conflict. We categorically condemn any
attack against civilians and call on all Governments
and warring factions to protect their populations and to
encourage the peaceful settlement of conflicts.

In situations where States have neither the will
or the ability to exercise their responsibilities, the
international community must immediately become
involved. It is the Security Council's duty to call on
the International Criminal Court (ICC) to enforce the
protection of civilians. Romania believes that the fight
against impunity is a fundamental instrument for the
protection of civilians. That is why we call on all States
that have not yet done so to ratify the Rome Statute
and cooperate with the ICC. It is also a sine qua non
condition to preventing genocide and atrocities.

Romania has been participating in peacekeeping
missions since 1991, and Romanian military and police
forces have never been involved in events related
to a lack of respect for the local civilian population.
That is because we maintain a zero-tolerance policy
for any abuse. In 2015, we participated in 10 out of
18 peacekeeping missions under the United Nations
flag, as well as in four missions of the Department
of Safety and Security. We intend to make further
contributions this year. Our men and women who go
on mission under the United Nations flag, and under
the flags of the European Union and NATO, receive
strict instructions during the three months before
their departure, including with regard to respect for
civilians and human rights, with particular focus on the
protection of women and children.
Romania has always maintained that the effective
protection of civilians in armed conflicts is increased
through the engagement of and cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations. Just two months ago, we
commemorated the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1631 (2005), the first resolution of the
Security Council on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations. As
the author of that document, Romania is pleased to note
in the Secretary-General's most recent report that we
have made significant progress in that area in recent
years.

