Mr. Fowler (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
warmly welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on
the role of United Nations peacekeeping in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR). We thank the
Secretary-General for his hard work in producing this
constructive in-depth analysis, which will go a long way
towards helping Canada and other members understand this
crucial aspect of peace-building.

This report gives a comprehensive account of many
aspects of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
that are of very great concern to Canada. In particular, we
appreciate the frankness with which the report describes
shortcomings - past and present - of these programmes
and we congratulate the Secretary-General for having
clearly and convincingly turned these weak points into
lessons that the Council can use in its work in post-conflict
situations. We eagerly await the proposals that the
Secretary-General will put before us in the future on this
subject and we ask him to keep Council members abreast
of future lessons learned by United Nations missions.

(spoke in English)

Canada has long worked to make disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration an accepted part of the
lingua franca of post-conflict peace-building. We are
proud contributors to many of the United Nations
missions that broke new ground in integrating
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
mechanisms into the work of peacekeepers and we have
financially supported the work of the United Nations
Lessons Learned Unit on the subject. We have
particularly emphasized the importance of turning lessons
learned into practice and have benefited greatly from the
wisdom gained in past missions, by ourselves and others,
in instilling these lessons into peacekeeping training, both
nationally and at the United Nations.

We are therefore extremely pleased to see from this
report that not only has it become an essential component
of peacekeeping training, but that there also now exists
genuine will on the part of Members to build on the
progress made and include within the practice of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration a number
of provisions critical to ensuring human security. We note
most specifically the inclusion in recent missions of
personnel dedicated to international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law, child and gender provisions, and
child protection advisers tasked with giving special
attention to war-affected children.

We fully support the Secretary-General's view on
the importance of integrating disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration elements from the inception of peace
agreements and on the importance of coordination among
peacekeeping operations and agencies and others with
expertise in the implementation of these programmes. We
also support this report's conclusion that a
multidimensional approach to post-conflict peace-building
is vital. To be successful, disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration must constitute part of a network of
activities that encourage confidence in the future and give
citizens, civilians and ex-combatants alike a stake in the
continued stability of their country. This requires a
commitment on the part of both the international
community and the Government and people concerned to
work together to improve governance, justice and human
rights and to build the necessary political and physical
infrastructure in support of this reform. Absent such a
commitment, post-conflict peace-building processes too
easily fall victim to the mistrust that causes conflict in the
first place and that only grows with time.

 

Many of the issues raised in this report are a function
of the United Nations capacity for rapid and effective
action. As the Secretary-General notes, the Security Council
must be prepared to act quickly to take advantage of
opportunities to promote the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants in post-conflict
situations. Swift and substantive United Nations
peacekeeping action lends credibility to the Organization's
own efforts and to national initiatives. In order to include
a meaningful disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
component in peacekeeping mandates, the Council must
show a genuine will to build a capacity for rapid and
adequate deployment. Canada sees the need for DDR as
one of the more persuasive reasons to work to ensure that
all components of the United Nations system are seized of
the imperative to afford peacekeeping operations adequate
mandates for conflict and post-conflict situations and the
necessary resource commitment to carry out their
increasingly diverse tasks. We look forward to the work of
the upcoming study on United Nations peace operations and
will encourage the panel to examine these issues and build
on the findings of the Secretary-General in this regard.

The need for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration is felt most keenly in peace-building processes
built on the tenuous trust of weary combatants. It is an
ephemeral opportunity that offers few second chances. Our
goal must therefore be to get it right the first time and to
commit ourselves early and fully to these programmes and
the peace processes that give rise to them. There are several
conflict situations in the world at this moment that may
soon require comprehensive disarmament and
demobilization initiatives. We believe that this report will
serve as an excellent means of informing the work of the
international community as it addresses the role of the
United Nations in post-conflict peace-building in these
circumstances.

