Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jan
Kubis, for his concise and comprehensive report on the
situation in Afghanistan. The sensitive functions and
responsibilities that he has assumed have our full
support. I should like also to thank Ambassador Zahir
Tanin, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, for
his analysis of the situation, presented from the point
of view of his Government. I wish to convey to him the
support of the Government of Colombia and our strong
wish that the transition process be efficient and
peaceful.

We are optimistic about the progress made in the
transition towards Afghan responsibility and leadership
in the area of security. It is significant that a growing
percentage of the Afghan population can now be found
in areas where the Afghan forces have assumed
control. However, it is important to continue to
increase the capacity and professionalism of the
Afghan security and police forces. To that end, the
contribution of the International Security Assistance
Force and the NATO training mission in Afghanistan
will be essential.

We must continue to work towards ensuring
Afghan responsibility in the area of security within the
framework of the agreed timetable, which is set to
conclude at the end of 2014, while taking into account
developments on the ground. The recent security
incidents and the regrettable episodes of violence to
which they led should not hinder the implementation of
prior agreements. In that respect, we support the talks
under way aimed at resolving differences, and we look
forward to a satisfactory outcome.

We wish to stress the importance of ensuring that
the transition focuses not only on security but also on
improving the living conditions of the Afghan people.
We agree with the Afghan Government that confidence
in State institutions and prosperity are fundamental to
the building and strengthening of stability. We
recognize in that respect that the progress made in the
area of security could be affected by weaknesses in the
areas of socio-economic development, governability
and the rule of law.

Violence remains one of the main factors
affecting the Afghan people. We reiterate our call on all
parties to the conflict to abide by their obligations
under international humanitarian law and human rights
and to take all of the necessary measures to ensure the
protection of civilians. Practices such as suicide attacks
and the use of improvised explosive devices are
ruining the process of dialogue and reconciliation. It is
important that all parties show clearly that they are
committed to the process in which the Afghan
Government is engaged.

We welcome the efforts of President Hamid
Karzai to ensure that progress in a credible process of
dialogue and reconciliation is a high priority for his
Government. We hope that the recent difficulties will
be overcome and that the Taliban will commit to
renouncing violence and terrorism and accept the
Constitution.

We deem very timely the comprehensive review
of the activities of UNAMA in implementation of its
mandate and hope that it will contribute to the
effectiveness of the activities undertaken by the various
United Nations entities with a presence on the ground.
The one United Nations approach, supported by the
Government of Afghanistan, has the support of my
country as well.

UNAMA must continue to focus its efforts on
critical areas so as to facilitate the political process
aimed at peace, reconciliation, security, governability,
economic development and regional cooperation. The
United Nations must continue to play a central role in
coordinating international efforts with national
authorities in order to ensure their coherence with the
priorities identified by Afghanistan and prevent any
duplication of effort.

The international community reaffirmed its
willingness to work with a stable, democratic and
prosperous Afghanistan at the Bonn Conference. To
that end, a number of mutual commitments were made
in the area of governability, security, the peace process,
economic and social development and regional
cooperation. The Kabul process and the national
priority programmes must continue to be the policies
that govern the commitments and responsibilities under
that process on the basis of the principles of Afghan
ownership and leadership and respect for the
sovereignty and unity of Afghanistan.

In that context, regional cooperation is very
relevant. We wish to stress the numerous initiatives
undertaken at the bilateral and subregional levels to
address and amicably resolve the various humanitarian
and security problems burdening Afghanistan and its
neighbours - efforts that also contribute to bolstering
the building of confidence.

