Mr. Danesh-Yadzi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Let me begin by congratulating you, Sir, on assuming
the presidency of the Council this month and thanking
you for having convened this public meeting on the
grave situation in the occupied Palestinian territory. I
should not fail to express my appreciation to the
Ambassador of France for his able and effective
conduct of the work of the Security Council in the
month of March.

Once more, another atrocious crime by the Israeli
regime has prompted the Security Council to hold
another emergency public meeting. The extrajudicial
killing of Mr. Abdel Aziz Al-Rantisi is along the line
of the nefarious attempts and ongoing State acts of
terrorism by Israel to hold onto the territory under its
occupation and to keep a people under its brutal control
for many decades - a people who have, in turn, no
option other than to continue their rightful resistance.

In this context, I need to stress that the situation
that Israel is mired in stems from the occupation and its
unlawful policies and practices. Therefore Israel's
attempt to attribute the problems it has created itself to
other countries in the region is a futile and
irresponsible exercise.

By committing the latest assassination, Israel
registered in its record yet another case of serious
violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention, which
amounts to another war crime. The continued criminal
acts, coupled with the recent announcement of its
annexation of part of the occupied territory, which
amounts to killing the road map, are indicative of the
fact that the Israeli regime has always sought to
preclude any just and viable peace in the region that
would presume the restoration of the basic rights of the
Palestinians. The Israelis are fully aware that each
crime they commit will be the onset of a new cycle of
violence of the kind they repeated and indeed
intentionally provoked in the course of the past several
years.

At a time when the international community
needs to pull together with a view to effectively
combating global terrorism, the Israeli occupation and
the criminal acts to sustain it, including extrajudicial
killings, undermine the rule of law and cooperation
among nations, which are the sine qua non in fighting
terrorism. There is no doubt that what Israel did and
has avowed to keep doing was a bonanza for the
terrorists like those who perpetrated the act of
terrorism in Madrid last month - acts that enable
global terrorism to unfortunately grow further.
Extrajudicial killings and targeted assassinations,
coupled with other Israeli war crimes and acts of State
terrorism such as the construction of the expansionist
wall, the announcement of land annexation, the wanton
destruction of homes, infrastructure and agricultural
lands, the detention and imprisonment of thousands of
Palestinians and the imposition of collective
punishment on the entire Palestinian population will
have the sole result of rendering the situation in the
region more tense and explosive.

The assassination of Sheikh Ahmed Yassin and
Mr. Abdel Aziz Al-Rantisi are two consecutive flagrant
crimes that have created more instability and could
plunge the region into another round of violence. They
are deliberate acts aimed at defeating any attempt to
bring peace to the region.

While strongly condemning this latest criminal
Israeli act, we believe there is an absolute need for the
international community to heavily weigh in and
prevent Israel from carrying out its nefarious designs
against Palestinians that will further jeopardize peace
and security in the whole region. This Council
especially shoulders the heaviest responsibility and
should act with a view to preventing Israel from
continuing to flout the will of the international
community, incorporated in numerous United Nations
resolutions.

It is very sad that this Council has yet to reach an
agreement on the way to prevent Israel from
committing numerous crimes. It is all the more
unfortunate that only one delegation keeps preventing
the Council from pronouncing itself on such an
important issue that relates to international peace and
security in one of the most important and sensitive
regions. We hope that all members of the Council
recognize the need to take decisive action in the face of
the new tension in the region and do not choose to
allow further paralysis of the Council and erosion of its
authority as a result of failing to address the grave
situation created in the wake of the recent extrajudicial
killings by Israel.

