Mr. Ghanem: I am most grateful for this
opportunity to brief the Council today on what the
World Bank is doing in the Sahel. I would like to express
my special thanks to Mr. Thiaw, Special Adviser of the
Secretary-General for the Sahel, with whom we have
been working very closely.

Our engagement in the Sahel takes place at a time
when sub-Saharan Africa is experiencing a growing
number of people living in poverty. Tragically, this is
partly driven by fragility and insecurity. Indeed, violent
conflicts have spiked dramatically since 2010 and the
fragile landscape in which we all operate is becoming
ever more complex. Peace and stability are necessary
for economic development, but the inverse is also
true; there can be no lasting peace without economic
development, without opportunities for young people
and without hope for a better future. There is a need to
address the economic and social drivers of conflict in
the Sahel.

That is why we at the World Bank have committed
more than $9 billion to the development and resilience
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel)
countries ~ Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania and
the Niger - over the past five years. We have been
able to do this thanks to the support of the international
community through the International Development
Association - the Bank's fund for the poorest. This
financing, along with policy advice and technical
assistance, tries to address the social and economic
drivers of fragility and conflict faced by the Sahel.
The most notable among these drivers are low State
legitimacy and presence in certain areas where we see a
lack of many basic services, high youth unemployment
and limited opportunities. Beyond the numbers, we
are also changing our way of working to reflect the
challenges posed by such fragility. We are putting more
emphasis on a special approach for rapid results that
concentrates activities in defined locations selected
to support and unlock opportunities created by the
stability brought by security forces. We have tried to
follow the security forces and stabilize the areas that
are being liberated.

Secondly, we are putting more of our people on the
front line through a stronger presence on the ground
in our country offices. Thirdly, we are improving
supervision of our operations, including through
satellite-imaging and mobile-based monitoring. Our
new approach concentrates the activities of several
existing projects led by the World Bank and other
donors in the locations most at risk. This approach has
been tested in the town of Konna, in the centre of Mali.
Here, rehabilitation of the fishing port - which is the
key hub of economic activity in the area - is being
supplemented by additional investments that range from
the installation of solar panels and the construction and
rehabilitation of rural roads to the introduction of cash
transfers for those most in need and the development of
income-generating activities.

I take this opportunity to thank the United
Nations; France, through the Agence Francaise de
De'veloppement; and Germany, among others, which
have been key partners in the application of this model.
This new approach holds promise and will be replicated
beyond Mali.

In July 2017, the Sahel Alliance was launched by
France, Germany, the European Union, the African
Development Bank, the United Nations Development
Programme and the World Bank. Italy, Spain, the
United Kingdom and Luxembourg have now joined this
important initiative, strengthening our already close
partnership. A memorandum of understanding between
the Sahel Alliance and the G-5 Sahel, which was
signed in October, is laying the groundwork for better
synergies between security and development. Together
we are developing multisectoral and rapid response
interventions in selected areas, as I havejust highlighted.
I am pleased that the World Bank commitments today
account for more than half of the projects monitored by
the Sahel Alliance. We have pledged $1.2 billion to the
G-5-supported Priority Investment Programme, which
was agreed upon last month in Nouakchott.
In conclusion, I am more convinced than ever that,
together, we can support the Governments and people
of the Sahel to build a pathway to peace, stability and
economic development. With the support of the Council,
the World Bank is committed to sustaining such efforts
for the months and years to come.

