Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): Mr. President, we
thank you for allowing us to participate in today's open
meeting and to share our views on the situation in
Timor-Leste. We especially welcome the presence of
the President of Timor-Leste, Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, at
today's debate. My delegation is also grateful to the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2009/72) and for
his participation in this meeting.

South Africa is pleased with the progress made by
Timor-Leste since the 2006 crisis. Both the people and
the political leadership of Timor-Leste have risen to
overcome those events, and many strides have been
made towards restoring normalcy and bringing
sustainable peace and stability to their country. We
particularly applaud the personal efforts of President
Ramos-Horta in leading his nation throughout a period
of uncertainty and enormous challenges.

South Africa notes with appreciation that the
current report of the Secretary-General reflects many
positive developments in Timor-Leste. On the political
front, my delegation is encouraged by and supports
ongoing efforts to foster dialogue and national
reconciliation in Timor-Leste through various
mechanisms, in particular the High-level Coordination
Committee meetings, the Trilateral Coordination
Forum and the good offices of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Khare.

We are also encouraged that some of the critical
challenges noted during the Security Council visit to
Timor-Leste last year were resolved in an amicable
manner. In this regard, we welcome the approach taken
by the Government of Timor-Leste in addressing the
issues of the internally displaced persons and the
petitioners.

South Africa underlines the continued importance
of a comprehensive approach to security sector review
and reform in Timor-Leste with a view to achieving the
country's full national ownership of the sector. In this
regard, we need to ensure a clear separation of internal
and external security roles and responsibilities between
the national police and the military. We are confident
that the Government of Timor-Leste will enhance its
efforts to that end.

We believe that the significant strides made thus
far in Timor-Leste now require that its people, in
partnership with the international community, focus on
the economic development of Timor-Leste and help
launch that nation on a path to sustainable and long-
term development and security. There can be no
security without development.

The international community must make a long-
term commitment towards assisting the Government
and people of Timor-Leste to achieve sustainable peace
and prosperity. It is also crucial that bilateral and
multilateral partners continue to assist the country to
develop and strengthen its institutions and further build
capacities in various sectors, in line with the country's
national priorities. For its part, the leadership of Timor-
Leste should continue to seize the opportunity of
working with all segments of society in building
national unity and reconciliation and in promoting
human rights, justice and peace.

In conclusion, we wish to commend efforts made
by the United Nations and, in particular, Special
Representative Khare and the entire team of the United
Nations Interim Mission in Timor-Leste for their
invaluable work in Timor-Leste. We would also like to
thank you, Mr. President, and your delegation for your
leadership on this issue in the Security Council.

Working with other partners, South Africa is
ready to join the international community in assisting
the people of Timor-Leste in their efforts to consolidate
the progress made thus far. We are convinced that
Timor-Leste can succeed only to the extent to which
the international community can provide political
support and much-needed resources for development.

