Ms. Lajous (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Before
I begin, I should like to join all the Council members
who have thanked Mr. Hedi Annabi, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for the
information he has presented to us. Most especially, I
should like to express my appreciation for the
comments of the Deputy Prime Minister of the
Republic of Serbia, Mr. Neboj sa Covie, who has left us
with a very clear message: time is short, and we must
carry forward two urgent tasks - building the area's
institutions and constructing a multi-ethnic society.

At the beginning of this month, the Kosovo
Assembly ratified the agreement reached by the main
parties of the province to establish a Provisional Self-
Government headed by President Ibrahim Rugova and
Prime Minister Bajram Rexhepi. Mexico welcomes this
achievement, because it will help facilitate the transfer
of power from the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to the
Provisional Institutions, in conformity with resolution
1244 (1999). This will certainly contribute to
stabilizing the region. A very delicate phase will also
begin - that of ensuring, to the greatest extent
possible, that the Government's responsibilities are
transferred to the local authorities within the existing
Constitutional Framework. We must remember that we
have a long path ahead of us, but hopefully we will
reach the end soon.

The province continues to be one of the most
backward areas in Europe in economic terms, and
many things must still be done to establish fully the
rule of law in order to combat organized crime more
effectively and promote economic growth. This will
require the political will and maturity of all actors
involved. A harmonious Kosovo implies that trust will
prevail among all residents of the province and requires
that the rancorous memories of the past be left behind.
This is a prerequisite to the full implementation of the
concepts of democracy and respect for human rights.
The trust that can be developed among all of the social
groups, without external exclusion or intrusion, will be
the basis for a prosperous Kosovo strengthened by
unity.

The return to their homes of internally displaced
persons and refugees will show that progress is being
made on this path. We have taken note of UNMIK's
efforts to bring back to the province the Albanians who
were held in Serb prisons and of measures taken to
liberate persons whose sentences could be considered
invalid.

The international community is observing with
interest the activities of UNMIK and of the various
United Nations organs and regional security
organizations that have provided an example of
strategic association to build a durable peace in
Kosovo. Mexico encourages UNMIK and all
international agencies that work in the province to
continue their altruistic and fruitful work for
international peace and security.

We welcome the proposal made by several
delegations that Mr. Steiner should address the Council
during the month of April and tell us about the progress
achieved, particularly as regards border issues with
Macedonia.

Mexico takes note of the document on the first
steps towards the redefinition of relations between
Serbia and Montenegro, signed on 14 March in
Belgrade, in particular as it relates to resolution 1244
(1999).

