We thank Ms. Deborah Lyons, Ms. Waly and Ms. Akbar for their insightful briefings. We also welcome Ms. Deborah Lyons as the new Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). She may rest assured that Indonesia will continue to support her and UNAMA. I also welcome my sister, Ambassador Adela Raz, to this video-teleconference. The beauty of speaking after my co-penholder from Germany is that my work is much easier, since he has alluded to our joint efforts to help Afghanistan in achieving peace. I think many points have been stated by my co-penholder, Germany, so I will just add a few additional points. Since the last briefing on UNAMA in March (see S/2020/274), we have witnessed greater energy put in by domestic, regional and international stakeholders to push forward the Afghan peace process. These common efforts speak to the necessity of continued cooperation in staying firmly on the path to peace, which the people of Afghanistan eagerly await. The opportunity is here. Let us intensify the momentum to capitalize on it. Having listened to the briefers, Indonesia underlines the following. First is safeguarding the peace process and nurturing reconciliation. Indonesia welcomes the political agreement between President Ghani and Mr. Abdullah. We hope that the Cabinet will form soon so as to also streamline a strengthened response against the coronavirus disease, which is exacerbating the challenges. The political agreement augurs well for a united stand in intra-Afghan peace negotiations too. The intra-Afghan negotiations should follow without delay. All parties must avoid any provocations that could hamper the talks. The enhancement of mutual trust and understanding by putting only the well-being and long-term interests of ordinary Afghans as the top priority is crucial. Indonesia encourages continued confidence-building in that regard, and we welcome the prisoner releases by the Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban. Indonesia stands ready to further support the peace process. We will also be relentless with our ongoing assistance programmes to enhance women's participation in nation-building and various public-sector capacities. The second issue is ending violence and strengthening the protection of civilians. We are deeply concerned that the Afghan conflict remains extremely devastating for civilians and children. We are saddened to hear the report of Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons just now that children have been victims of barbaric attacks. It must stop. Terrorism and attacks are exacting a heartbreaking toll on humanitarian, media and human-rights workers too. The latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/549) also mentions increased violence against women. The violence must stop, and it must stop now. Indonesia urges the Government to intensify the protection of civilians by holding the violators fully accountable. Combating narcotics is also essential to cutting the terrorists' financing. Increased cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and other relevant agencies is important. Violence to further one's political agenda is counter-productive. It also leaves deep psychological impacts, with a lingering resentment in generations whose support is essential to nation-building. Third is the role of Afghan women and preserving human rights. Indonesia welcomes greater women's representation in various public institutions over recent years. The inclusion of four women in the team for the intra-Afghan peace negotiation is also encouraging. Indonesia is a firm believer that the meaningful participation of women is indispensable for reconciliation and enduring peace. Our Foreign Minister also emphasized that when female leaders from Indonesia exchanged best practices with Afghan women in Kabul last February. Through the recent launch of the Afghanistan- Indonesia women solidarity network and other avenues, Indonesia will remain focused on enhancing Afghan women's participation in the Afghan peace process. It is important that the Security Council also monitor Afghanistan's constitutional gains concerning human rights and fundamental freedoms. The country must be assisted in order to not revert backwards. Let me close by underscoring Indonesia's long-standing position of supporting an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process. We pray to have a violence-free, stable and prosperous Afghanistan. /nsha''Allah, with the singlemindedness and good faith of all sides, we will witness that soon.
