Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-
Pierre Lacroix, Mr. Sma'i'l Chergui, the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, and Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women,
for their detailed information about their joint visit to
South Sudan.

The Russian Federation has consistently held
the view that the situation of women, like that of the
country's entire civilian population, will significantly
improve as the South Sudanese peace process advances.
The key to stabilizing the Republic of South Sudan lies
in a sustainable ceasefire and the start of an inclusive
national reconciliation process. In that regard, we
attach great importance to the signing by the parties
on 12 September of the revitalized peace Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. Needless to say, the agreements reached will
still require a significant clarification of the details,
but that makes them no less important. The main thing
is that the South Sudanese parties have shown their
willingness to reach a compromise and their desire to
settle their existing disputes by peaceful means.

I would like to once again pay tribute to the
coordinated mediation efforts of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), which made
it possible to reach a successful conclusion to the
revitalization process for South Sudan's peace
Agreement. The countries ofthe region have essentially
achieved the impossible by restarting the negotiation
process from scratch and for more than a year patiently
helping the parties to find points of convergence. IGAD
kept the initiative to revitalize the Agreement moving
forward even when many of us had lost hope.

We note that today the parties in the region continue
to demonstrate the same united approach to the
settlement in South Sudan as before, which is extremely
important for further support to the peace process.
Considering the South Sudanese people's sentiments
and their increasing hopes for peace and welfare that
the Ambassador of Sweden shared with us, we would
like to urge all our Security Council colleagues to
genuinely and practically continue to support the
Sudanese peace process and the relevant efforts of
regional organizations.

We also welcome the desire of the guarantors of
the Agreement to assist with the implementation of
the peace Agreement by providing national troops
from the Sudan, Uganda, Djibouti and Somalia to the
Regional Protection Force. That represents a practical
embodiment of the principle of African solutions to
African problems, as well as an opportunity for effective
cooperation between the United Nations, the Security
Council and regional organizations. We are aware of
the regular contacts between the General Chiefs of
Staff of the IGAD countries on issues relating to the
implementation of the Agreement, and we are ready to
consider substantive proposals for the organization of
the Regional Protection Force.

We have noted the first efforts of the South
Sudanese to implement the revitalized Agreement,
and we urge the country's politicians to demonstrate
goodwill in ensuring full compliance with its
provisions. Ultimately, the welfare of ordinary South
Sudanese depends on them.

We realize that the timetables agreed on by the
parties are fairly ambitious, but the fact is that only
complete and comprehensive fulfilment of their
commitments will help to foster mutual trust among
the parties and spare them a recurrence of the mistakes
made in the efforts to achieve a South Sudanese
settlement in the past.

