Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): Like
other colleagues, I am very grateful to Mr. Morris for
his detailed and very sober briefing on the food
security situation in Southern Africa and for his
comprehensive assessment, which I thought
successfully set out the context of the situation as he
sees it following his visit.

It is sad, but it is true, that hunger remains a
major feature in many African countries. This year,
despite a better-than-average harvest overall, there are
significant crises, both looming and actual, in several
countries. The United Kingdom noted carefully what
the Executive Director said about the situation in
Darfur and elsewhere, and we have to take account of
that in our policies.

The underlying causes of hunger are very
complex, but there is no doubt that there are links both
to governance and to peace and security - and these
are the principal concern of the Security Council. If I
may quote the Executive Director, "A lethal mix of
AIDS, recurring drought and failing governance is
eroding social and political stability" (supra). That is
the situation we confront. The forthcoming September
summit will provide a major opportunity to take a step
forward on development and to try to secure, on time,
the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals. But essentially, development is a bargain
between donors and recipients. The former must do
more, and they must do it better; and the latter must
tackle governance and corruption and have the policies
to achieve the Goals. But governance is itself an
indicator of the political state of a country. Bad
governance can be a sign of a lack of democracy, of
declining respect for human rights or of a potential -
or even actual - conflict. Food shortages and the
inadequate distribution of food are known causes of
instability and can contribute to increasing the
potential for conflict. Again, as Mr. Morris put it,
hunger is both a cause and an effect of conflict. That is
put very succinctly, and the duality of that relationship
is clear.

Moreover, bad governance is itself a cause of
food insecurity. Food crises are often related to access
to food and linked to policies of Government. It is not
always solely agricultural production. And it is often
poor governance and mismanagement rather than
drought that are the cause of a crisis. Lack of food;
poverty; increasing disease through lack of
immunization: these can lead to increased refugee
flows. And the impact on regional peace and security
or, as Mr. Morris put it, on stability, is evident.

Zimbabwe is an obvious example. The crisis
there is particularly distressing. The international
community is already gearing up to increase assistance
in response to another poor harvest in that country. The
poor communities there have been devastated not just
by low food production but by the continuing
economic collapse which has undermined their ability
to buy food and other staples. Now we are also
responding to an additional crisis, a crisis caused by
the Zimbabwean Government's crackdown on the
poorest communities in that country. Up to 300,000
people have been made homeless, and thousands of
children have been forced to abandon school. It is
important to realize that this particular crisis has been
caused by the action of the Zimbabwean Government;
it is a man-made, not a natural, phenomenon. The
economic collapse in Zimbabwe is the result of bad
policies and bad governance.

No less a figure that Amartya Sen has argued that
the role of democracy in preventing famine is now well
known. He has pointed out that the great famines have
invariably taken place under authoritarian regimes. So
we, like others, look forward to the report to be
produced by the Secretary-General's Special Envoy,
Anna Kajumulo Tibaijuka, on her visit to Zimbabwe,
and we hope that the Council will give it due
consideration.

As for the United Kingdom, in response to the
current crisis we have already given more than
$570,000 through United Nations agencies, in addition
to a contribution since September 2001 of $100 million
for relief and HIV/AIDS programmes in Zimbabwe.
For our part, we will consider further contributions if,
sadly, they prove necessary.

It is right that members of the Council should
express concern about the impact that food security has
on conflict, on peace and on wider security. But we
must highlight, too, that bad governance and a failure
to work with the international community to prevent
food insecurity, as in Zimbabwe, is a legitimate
concern for the international community.

If I may, I would like to make some precise
points relating to what we think might be proposals for
future action. First, the Executive Director described
the so-called triple threat of food insecurity, HIV/AIDS
and weakened governance capacity. We agree very
much that the HIV/AIDS pandemic has increased the
vulnerability of many poor communities in Africa and
has weakened the ability of many Governments to
respond. The international community needs to do
more to help.

Secondly, the evidence of changing climatic
patterns in Africa needs to be monitored closely for the
long-term impact on food production and other natural
resources. That should help us to predict possible food
insecurity, and to take preventive action.

Thirdly, humanitarian access is crucial and the
Executive Director touched on the real problems that
his personnel have had and the tragedies that have
befallen them. Jan Egeland also made the point, when
we were debating the protection of civilians, that,
where there are crisis hunger situations, we must make
clear that it is the responsibility of Governments to
provide the World Food Programme and all other
humanitarian agencies and non-governmental
organizations with full cooperation and access to those
in need.

Of course, that is a secondary responsibility of
Governments, in a way. Their primary responsibility is
to protect their own people and to put in place policies
which safeguard them so as to try to avoid such
problems.

Fourthly, the persistent nature of hunger in Africa
means that we all now need to look particularly hard at
how the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals can be secured more quickly than is happening
at present. The year 2150 is not acceptable. Where
hunger is the result of chronic poverty rather than an
unforeseen crisis, we need to help African
Governments provide a long-term response, instead of
relying on an emergency system. Again, Mr. Morris's
figures on Ethiopia were very revealing. That emphasis
on the need to tackle child hunger by feeding and
educating children in their places of origin is a good
example of how to prevent crises.
My last point, which I am addressing to
colleagues in the Council in general, is that prevention
is so much better than cure. The primary role of the
Council is to preserve and ensure international peace
and security, and to do that we have to be better at
predicting and preventing conflict before it happens.
When humanitarian crises, injustice, oppression and
bad governance come together, we risk instability and
conflict, and then it is the responsibility of the Council
and of the United Nations more widely to address such
situations and try to help.

