Mr. Kim Sam-hoon (Republic of Korea): Allow
me, Mr. President, to convey to you my heartfelt
appreciation for your leadership in conducting this
open debate of the Security Council on small arms and
light weapons. The scourge of small arms and light
weapons is abominable, but it is an unavoidable issue
that deserves the attention and care of the international
community no less than that of weapons of mass
destruction. My delegation is happy to note that the
Security Council, as the organ with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, continues to address this issue with
unswerving determination and vigour. We also
commend the Secretary-General for his tireless efforts
to deal with the question of small arms and light
weapons, specifically through the 12 updated core
recommendations contained in his report to the
Security Council (S/2005/69).

The Republic of Korea attaches great importance
to the ongoing negotiations to develop an international
instrument to enable States to identify and trace illicit
small arms and light weapons quickly and reliably. We
are pleased to note that, through dedicated and
intensive discussions, considerable progress was made
at the first and second substantive sessions of the
Open-ended Working Group on that matter. We hope
that the Working Group will resolve all the outstanding
issues, including the nature of the instrument and the
question of ammunition, and that it will reach a
successful conclusion at its June negotiating session. A
viable and effective international instrument on
marking and tracing, working in tandem with the
existing relevant international instruments, including
the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components
and Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
and the United Nations Programme of Action on small
arms and light weapons, would be a powerful tool in
preventing and eliminating the scourge of illicit small
arms and light weapons in both conflict and criminal
situations.

We encourage the Security Council to devote a
share of its attention to the issue of illicit brokering in
small arms and light weapons. Pending the outcome of
the work of a group of governmental experts on illicit
brokering, to be established by the Secretary-General
by 2007, we would welcome an opportunity to
participate in any meaningful discussions to further
study and identify the nature, scope and character of
illicit brokering in small arms and light weapons. In
that regard, we appreciate the efforts of the Department
for Disarmament Affairs in convening open-ended
informal forums on this issue.

While we support all 12 core recommendations,
we attach particular importance to the following points.

First, we are of the View that smooth and
effective implementation of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes
in post-conflict situations is of the utmost importance,
especially in connection with United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We also support regional
initiatives in that regard. We believe that DDR is not
only crucial to freeing affected regions from the yoke
of illicit small arms and light weapons but also
essential for reordering and rehabilitating societies in
distress.

Secondly, if we are to cut off the sneaky routes of
illicit arms transfers and stop the illicit flow of arms to
conflict zones, we must achieve full compliance with
all relevant Security Council resolutions on sanctions.
Thirdly, we recognize the need to identify further
the links among the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, the illicit exploitation of natural and other
resources and the trade in illegal drugs. We share the
view that innovative measures should be developed to
prevent precious natural resources from becoming a
source of revenue for sinister purposes.

Fourthly, we recognize the urgent need for States
to establish legislative and other measures, including
the use of authenticated end-user certificates, to ensure
effective control over the export and transit of small
arms and light weapons. We believe that well
established export-control systems, together with
sound legislative structures, are imperative for
combating and eradicating the illicit transfer of small
arms and light weapons.

Last but not least, we also support broader
participation in the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms and the United Nations System for
the Standardized Reporting of Military Expenditures.
In particular, we welcome the expanded coverage of
the Register to include man-portable air defence
systems (MANPADS). The reckless use of MANPADS
by terrorists is an increasing threat to global security,
and this concern should be duly reflected in the
Register.

The Republic of Korea's active participation in
the worldwide campaign against illicit small arms and
light weapons is well known. We would be happy to
share our knowledge, expertise and technology for the
safe and responsible management of firearms. In
addition, we are eager to contribute further to
eliminating or lessening the problem of small arms and
light weapons in those regions most seriously affected.
In this vein, we plan this year to invite renowned
African experts to our country to deepen mutual
understanding on this issue and to seek ways for us to
work towards the noble goal of ending the problem of
illicit small arms and light weapons in Africa.

