Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I wish to thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan
Eliasson and Assistant Secretary-General for Human
Rights Ivan Simonovie for their respective briefings.
I also thank the Permanent Representative of Ukraine
for his participation in today's meeting of the Security
Council.

Argentina is following with great concern the
unfolding of the situation in Ukraine. The delegation
of Argentina once again reiterates the fundamental
importance of adhering to the principles that we have
all subscribed to as Members of the United Nations.

For Argentina, it is essential to respect the primacy
of the principle of the territorial integrity, sovereignty
and political independence of all States. Therefore, in
speaking in support of the draft resolution that was
put to a vote on 15 March, I said that my country had
sustained that principle throughout its history, even
before the existence of the United Nations, and it will
continue steadfastly to do so.

Argentina does not comment on the internal
developments in Ukraine that have led to the current
institutional crisis in the country because we understand
that all countries should refrain from intervening
militarily, economically or politically in the internal
affairs of other States and should adjust its actions
so that they are in strict compliance to international
law and the Charter of the United Nations. In that
context, we urge that human rights and international
humanitarian law be scrupulously observed and that
the rights of all minorities - be they ethnic, linguistic,
cultural or religious - be upheld.

We are concerned about the past violence and
the current violence - and the possibility that it
might worsen. We regret that, despite repeated calls,
the rhetoric of confrontation has not been abandoned
in Ukraine. It is incumbent upon all of us to refrain
from encouraging dissent or escalating confrontations
that could become a threat to international peace and
security. Indeed, it is the most influential actors who
should be calling for constructive diplomacy.
Finally, we support the mediation efforts that are
being undertaken by various United Nations officials,
as well as the good offices of the Secretary-General.
We understand that this situation cannot be resolved
by unilateral acts. We therefore stress that actions that
complicate the situation and that lead us further away
from a political and peaceful solution to the crisis must
be avoided.

