Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Today's meeting of the Security Council
opens a new chapter in the contemporary history of
Iraq. We have just adopted three resolutions lifting the
majority of Chapter VII restrictions placed on that
country. This was possible as a result of the planned
and joint work of the Iraqi authorities and the
Council's members.

Iraq is gradually acquiring the international status
it possessed before August 1990. We welcome this
process. The Iraqi people, however, still have a great
deal to do in order to build a secure, stable, united and
democratic State based on the rule of law and respect
for human rights, living in peace and harmony with its
neighbours.

One cannot but be concerned over the security
situation in Iraq. The terrorist threat has not abated.
Armed groups are active. Ethnic and religious friction
is periodically exacerbated. In such conditions, it is
especially important to ensure a sustainable and
broadly representative political process and the
consistent normalization of relations between Iraq and
other States of the region.

We are pleased that the Iraqi political forces have
achieved agreements on establishing their highest
governing bodies. The urgent challenge now is not to
delay the final formation of the Government, which
must fully reflect the concept of a national partnership.
It is important in practice to ensure the contribution of
political groups and broad segments of the population
in the work of the organs of governing power;
otherwise, attempts to normalize the internal political
situation and to maintain Iraq's territorial integrity will
be jeopardized.

Having adopted today's resolutions, we wish to
emphasize once again that Russia's position on
arrangements for withdrawing from sanctions
restrictions remains consistent and unchanged. We
support the phased review by the Security Council of
the provisions of the relevant resolutions, and the
lifting of those that have been implemented or become
irrelevant. We are prepared to do further work on
assessing the implementation of Iraq's remaining
obligations on the basis of the mechanism enshrined in
resolution 1859 (2008).

The international community expects Iraq
promptly to ratify the additional protocol to the
safeguards agreement of the International Atomic
Energy Agency and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-
Ban Treaty. Work must also be completed on the
harmonization of Iraqi legislation with international
norms regarding export controls and control of dual-
use items.

Iraq must settle a number of issues with
neighbouring States. In welcoming the improvement in
relations between Baghdad and Damascus and the
positive momentum in relations with other regional
partners, we call for the unconditional observance of
the Iraq-Kuwait borders, the recognition of the finality

of their demarcation, and the clear-cut implementation
of the border infrastructure support project. Iraq needs
to enhance its cooperation with Kuwait towards
achieving qualitative progress in the search for missing
Kuwaitis and Kuwaiti property, including the archives.
That will entail further relevant work by the Iraqi
authorities. The prevailing positive potential must still
be converted into concrete results. Of full and ongoing
use is the work of the High-level Coordinator, whose
mandate is solely humanitarian in nature.

Given all the existing problems on the Iraqi
political scene and the withdrawal of the foreign
military contingent, the role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq has increased considerably.
We deeply appreciate the Mission's humanitarian
efforts in helping to establish Government agencies,
resolving internal border issues, and constructively
involving Iraq's neighbours in the settlement process.
We look forward to further effective work of the
Mission, within its mandate, with the leaders of the
parliamentary caucuses towards agreeing future
amendments to the country's Constitution. It is
important to ensure substantive assistance for the
future electoral process and the upcoming census of the
population.

It will be impossible to meet all those challenges
without appropriate security for Mission personnel. A
significant share of the responsibility for that falls to
the Iraqi authorities. For our part, we are prepared to
continue to help Iraq to address the challenges ahead.

