Mr. Radomski (Poland): I should like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock and Special
Representative Virginia Gamba for their impressive
briefings. We deeply appreciate their dedicated service.

Even as we meet today to discuss once again
the humanitarian situation in Syria, military logic,
unfortunately, continues to drive developments on
the ground. We still face unceasing and widespread
violence as well as violations of international law,
including abuses of human rights and international
humanitarian law. The most striking examples of this
were the recent events in the south-west de-escalation
zone, where more than 55,000 children remain deprived
of access to humanitarian assistance, and a total of
100,000 internally displaced persons (IDPs) have fled
the recent wave of violence.

Taking into consideration those recent events,
we strongly condemn the intensification of military
operations. Unhindered, safe and sustainable
humanitarian access must be secured, as called for in
resolution 2401 (2018). Unfortunately, even after the
Syrian Government has retaken control of many areas
of the country, we still lack regular access to areas
in need.

We express our grave concern about the
humanitarian situation in south-west Syria as well as
in the north-western part of the country. The military
operations led by Government forces, with the support
ofRussia, have already displaced thousands of civilians,
the majority of whom are moving towards the northern
part of the country. As we heard in the briefing, Idlib
governorate is struggling with a new significant influx
of IDPs, leaving it with the highest total number of
displaced persons in Syria.

The humanitarian imperative should be our primary
priority. We would like to reiterate our strong call on all
parties with influence on the situation on the ground to
take all actions necessary to achieve a full cessation of
hostilities throughout the Syrian territory in order to
avert tragic scenarios such as those we have already
witnessed in eastern Ghouta, eastern Aleppo and Dar'a.

Let me emphasize the importance of protecting the
most vulnerable groups, especially children, women
and religious minorities, who are too often affected by
the conflict in Syria.

Let me also stress the need for the protection of
refugees. We support the safe, voluntary and dignified
return of the Syrian people under a United Nations-
led framework once conditions allow. In this context,
I should like also to express our concern about the so-
called Syrian Law No. 10, on property rights. We are
deeply worried by its possible significant repercussions
on the future return of Syrian IDPs and refugees. That
is why we underline the need for the Security Council
to remain seized of the matter.

This seventh year of the armed conflict in Syria
means that millions of children have known only life in
fear. They suffer from malnutrition and are deprived of
their fundamental rights, including the rights to food,
water, sanitation, education and medical care. The
denial of humanitarian access to children has traumatic
consequences. There is also a need to accelerate
humanitarian mine-action programmes by prioritizing
areas to which civilians are returning in order to address
the growing number of child victims.

We are very concerned at the impact of the conflict
on education. With more than 2 million Syrian children
out of school and one third of schools unusable, the
conflict has devastated the lives of a generation of young
people. The lack of access to education and the trauma
experienced by children, including that due to sexual
violence, has created a lost generation in Syria, which
will affect the future of the country and that of the whole
region, undermining prospects for the reconstruction
and recovery of a free and democratic Syria.

Therefore, we want to stress the importance of
ensuring funding for protection programmes to support
children affected by the conflict, as well as quality
education for all children, including girls, at all levels.
In that regard, we strongly condemn the continued
attacks on schools and the use of schools for military
purposes. Let me recall that this year's annual report of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2018/465) listed 67 verified attacks on schools
and education personnel in 2017, most of which were
air strikes.

In conclusion, let me stress the necessity of
maintaining the unity of the Council on the question
of the full implementation of the relevant humanitarian
resolutions throughout Syria, especially as we again
face an increase of violence, this time in the northern
part of the country. The adoption of resolution 2401
(2018) was just the beginning of the process. We again
call on all stakeholders with influence on the ground
to take the necessary steps to ensure that the fighting
stops, the Syrian people are protected and, finally,
urgent humanitarian access is provided.

