Mr. O'Brien: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the humanitarian
situation in South Sudan. I thank the previous
briefers - the Chairperson of the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission and Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Lej - for their very
clear remarks.

When I briefed the Council last month, I drew
attention to the deepening humanitarian crisis in South
Sudan. Some 6 million people - more than half of the
population - are currently in need of humanitarian
assistance. Of these, a staggering 2.8 million people
are severely food insecure, over 2 million people have
been forced to flee their homes, and more than half of
all school-aged children are not attending class.

Despite the Council's presidential statement
S/PRST/20l6/l of 17 March, calling on all parties to
protect civilians, allow people to move freely and to
facilitate timely, full, safe and unimpeded humanitarian
access, yet again I have to report that the situation
remains dire. Civilians continue to be targeted, attacked
and displaced, and acute humanitarian needs persist,
exacerbated by recurrent access challenges. In addition
to the unimaginable individual and community abuses
that the people of South Sudan have sustained, I must
also highlight the fact that, despite the call for a cessation
of hostilities in the Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, the geographic
scope of the conflict has grown. In recent months,
as we have just heard from Special Representative
Lej, we have seen new outbreaks of violence in areas
around Western Bahr el-Ghazal, Western Equatoria,
Jonglei and Malakal. Such violence has resulted in the
displacement of well over 150,000 people, with many
forced to flee their homes repeatedly - some more
than 10 times.

By way of example, on the same day that I briefed
the Council last month, fighting erupted in Pibor and
surrounding areas, resulting in the displacement of
around 13,000 people. Further, some 8,000 internally
displaced people seeking refuge in Mboro, Western
Bahr el-Ghazal, were forced to flee that area again
when fighting erupted on 21 March. A woman who had
sought refuge in Mboro and then had to flee to Wau
said, "We survived on leaves and turmeric; all our
belongings, including food, were looted".

Let us not forget that nearly 200,000 people continue
to seek protection inside United Nations protection of
civilians sites, as they still do not feel that it is safe
enough to return home. Regrettably, the sanctity
of these sites has not been respected, and more than
25,000 people remain displaced as a result of the events
in Malakal. Humanitarians and the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan continue to work together to
make the conditions in these sites as decent as possible.
However, the sites will never be a replacement for the
places that people call home.

Children remain particularly vulnerable to the
expanding conflict. In recent months, children have
been separated from their parents while trying to flee
the fighting, including 84 documented cases following
the events in Malakal. Moreover, schools and health
facilities, which are inviolable under international
humanitarian law, have been damaged or destroyed,
denying children access to education and health care.
These new conflict-afflicted areas are the same locations
where people are most desperate for help. Displaced,
food insecure and vulnerable, these are the populations
we must be seeking to aid and protect. However, they
cannot be reached by aid workers owing to a host of
impediments that continue to hamper aid operations. In
2015, more than 900 access incidents were reported by
humanitarian partners in South Sudan, representing a
14 per cent increase from the previous year and a 68 per
cent increase from the year before that. This year the
trend continues.

In the 14 days since the adoption of the presidential
statement of 17 March, more than 17 incidents of
obstruction of access for humanitarian activities have
been reported, comprising interference by parties
from individual armed actors through to national
authorities. The true number is likely to be far higher,
given that some humanitarian partners are reluctant
to report every incident out of fear of retribution or
harassment. For example, last week in Unity, local
authorities demanded free transport to Juba aboard the
contracted plane of an international non-governmental
organization (NGO). When the pilots refused, citing
their duty to uphold humanitarian principles, a truck
loaded with armed men arrived at the airstrip and
threatened to detain the pilots if they did not oblige.
Such action compromises the ability of humanitarians
to safely and effectively deliver humanitarian assistance
and is simply unacceptable.

In Malakal, after the horrific violence in
mid-February, humanitarians were denied river access to
Wau Shilluk for over one month, disrupting the delivery
oflife-saving assistance to more than 27,000 people. In
a location where homes and businesses had been looted
or destroyed, leaving only minimal resources, the denial
of access presents a genuine threat to lives. Access was
finally granted when the remaining water and nutrition
supplies were days away from exhaustion and schools
had already closed, as supplies had run out. The lifting
of restrictions came only after interventions from the
humanitarian community, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, and visits by
several ambassadors from various countries to Malakal
to speak with the Governor.

Delays in the delivery of assistance cost lives and
expend precious resources. What humanitarians need
is timely, unimpeded access to those we assess to be
in vital need, not ad hoc, case-by-case considerations
after much attention, pressure and persuasion.

The challenge in South Sudan represents an
increasing disconnect between the assurances at the
national level and the actions of local groups. All
too often, even when official assurances are received
at the national level, they are not respected by local
actors. Illegal exactions and taxes remain rampant,
and humanitarian convoys are consistently subjected
to demands for payment at checkpoints. Despite the
Government's statement that humanitarians should
not pay at such points, authorities at the local level
have conveyed a very different message, noting that
humanitarians should "expect" to make such payments.
Convoys travelling from Juba to Bentiu by road
recently reported more than 50 checkpoints, with each
truck required to pay a total of more than 30,000 South
Sudanese pounds, or about US $1,000, in exactions.
Such extortions are unacceptable and must stop.

The United Nations Department of Safety and
Security has also been denied access to conduct
security risk assessments in areas where fighting
has taken place. Since January 2016, security risk
assessment missions have been denied six times in
Central Equatoria alone. These risk assessments are a
critical first step to assessing, preparing and enabling
effective humanitarian action.

In addition to the expanding geographic scope of
the conflict, new drivers of crises are emerging and
vulnerabilities are being exacerbated, resulting in
additional humanitarian and protection needs. Most
notably, the deteriorating economic situation is driving
instability. As a result of the economic crisis, the
monthly cost of food and clean water for an average
family now amounts to more than 10 times the salary of
a teacher. Such pressures are felt most acutely in urban
and population centres. In the north-western areas of
Northern Bahr El Ghazal and Warrap, heightened food
insecurity, compounded by an economic downturn
and growing unrest, has resulted in the flight of some
38,000 people into East and South Darfur since the end
of January.

On average, more than half of the access incidents
reported involve violence against humanitarian
personnel or their assets. When I briefed the Council
last month, I reported that 47 humanitarian staff had
been killed since December 2013. I am appalled to
report that this number has now risen to 49. The most
recent case is that of Mr. Yien Malouth, an integrated
community caseworker for Save the Children, a husband
and the father of two children, who was tragically shot
in Akobo, Jonglei. Greater action must be taken to
ensure the safety of humanitarian workers.

Since the beginning of2016, there have been at least
four major instances of the destruction or looting of
humanitarian supplies and facilities. These have taken
place in Malakal, Pibor and Western Equatoria. Vital
goods such as nutritional supplements, educational
materials and water-treatment supplies have been
burned or deliberately destroyed. A conservative
estimate places the value of humanitarian losses since
the beginning of 2016 at around $10 million, including
more than $5 million in damages to the Malakal
protection-of-civilians site.

Much more important than the monetary losses is
the loss of human life that results from these wanton
attacks against humanitarian facilities and assets. Each
time a facility or a compound is damaged or destroyed,
and each time supplies are looted, vulnerable civilians
are denied vital assistance.

Despite the challenges, humanitarian partners
continue to stand in solidarity with the people of South
Sudan. In 2015, and despite the access challenges
presented to them, partners were able to reach more
than 4.5 million people with assistance, often in the
most remote areas. In the first two months of 2016
alone, partners reached more than 1 million people.
Humanitarians continue to find innovative ways to save
lives, even in areas where formal access is not granted.
For example, partners reached more than 100,000
people with life-saving assistance in Unity last year
amid violent conflict and access denials.

However, despite the courageous efforts of our
colleagues on the front lines and the intensive work
of humanitarian partners to scale up their capacity, a
critical lack of funding continues to severely hobble the
humanitarian effort today. Of the required $1.3 billion
earmarked to reach more than 5 million people, only
9 per cent - yes, only 9 per cent - of the funding has
been received from the international community. Amid
a food and nutrition security crisis, NGO partners are
scaling down nutrition and health programmes because
they simply have not received the funding needed to
operate. The small window of opportunity afforded
by the dry season will close in the coming weeks, and
the funding received has allowed humanitarians to
pre-position only 35 per cent of the required supplies
across the country. As a result, more supplies will have
to be moved by air during the rainy season, increasing
the cost of delivery by up to six times.

The Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights
will speak in greater detail to the human rights violations
and grave protection concerns in South Sudan, but what
is clear from the humanitarian perspective is that both
parties have failed to abide by their obligation to protect
civilians and civilian facilities and simultaneously
failed to allow full, safe and unimpeded humanitarian
access to those in critical need.

The terms of the peace agreement have clearly
not been enough to halt the rapidly escalating and
worsening situation and its implications for millions
of civilians across the country. We need action. To
this end, I ask the Council to call on the parties to
the conflict and all armed actors operating in South
Sudan to uphold their obligations under international
humanitarian and human rights law to protect civilians,
allow free and unhindered humanitarian access and to
protect humanitarian workers and their assets.

Let my message to the Council today be unequivocal.
Since my last report, since the Peace Agreement, the
hideous facts on the ground are that the humanitarian
situation has severely worsened in that short time and
continues to worsen, and the only measure I am using is
the lives, the suffering and the deaths of the millions of
innocent women, girls, boys and men caught up in the
horrendous fight between two sides that have no care
for the people they claim to represent. In that light, I call
upon Security Council members to stand in solidarity
with the people of South Sudan and to advocate within
their areas of influence to seek an end to the unfolding
humanitarian catastrophe.

