Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me, Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and to
express our personal pleasure at seeing you, the
representative of the fraternal Russian Federation, in
that position. We would also like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Norway for the active
role he played while presiding over the Council last
month and for his full cooperation with us during his
presidency, in the course of which Security Council
resolution 1402 (2002) was adopted.

The Security Council is meeting today at the
request of the Arab Group and of the Non-Aligned
Caucus. We highly appreciate that request. We express
our appreciation to all the members of the Council for
their serious and immediate handling of the grave
situation resulting from Israel's new, bloody act of
aggression against the Palestinian people, the
Palestinian Authority and President Yasser Arafat. We
specifically appreciate the Council's quick adoption of
its important resolution 1402 (2002) on 30 March.

Three days ago, Mr. Ariel Sharon delivered yet
another insane statement to be added to other ominous
statements, starting with that in which he rejected any
final settlement of the Palestinian question, continuing
with that in which expressed his regret that he had not
killed Chairman Arafat years ago, and ending with that
in which he said that the only remaining open road is
that of inflicting the greatest number of casualties on
the Palestinian people. Mr. Sharon spoke of war and
war alone in that statement. It seemed as if he were
determined to take all of us in the Middle East to the
precipice. He rejected a ceasefire and once again
categorized the only potential partner for peace on the
Palestinian side as an enemy. Yesterday Mr. Sharon
added yet another insolent and insane statement when
he suggested that President Arafat could leave his
country and homeland.

Alongside that statement, the Israeli occupation
forces broadened the scope of their military attacks and
aggression against our Palestinian people, which
started six days ago. They reoccupied the cities of
Qalqilya, Tulkarm, Beit Jala and Bethlehem, and today
Jenin was added to the list. The Israeli forces continue,
particularly in the city of Ramallah, to carry out
heinous crimes, including war crimes and State
terrorism. The Israeli occupation forces have killed
many Palestinians, including five members of the
Palestinian forces in an apartment three days ago; some
of those killed had surrendered two days earlier. The
occupation forces have shelled individuals and sites
with heavy weaponry and helicopter gunships. They
have attacked churches and hospitals and have
prevented ambulances and medical teams from
reaching their destinations.

In Bethlehem, the Israeli forces have imposed a
military siege against the Church of the Nativity, where
Christ, peace be upon Him, was born. Can Council
members imagine that? Tanks surrounding the Church
of the Nativity? God forbid that the world might be
witnessing the devastation of the Church of the
Nativity in addition to previous massacres, such as the
carnage at the Sabra and Shatila refugee camps.

The occupation forces have prevented any media
presence in Ramallah, They have declared the city a
closed military zone and have shot at journalists. They
have shut off water and electricity throughout the city's
neighbourhoods and have imposed a curfew. They have
broken into homes, rounding up men and youths and
taking them to detention centres, where they are
pressured, beaten and humiliated.

It is difficult for us to enumerate all the
developments, taking into consideration the insane
escalation caused by the Israeli forces. The Israeli
forces have caused destruction in all our cities, which
is escalating by the hour. We welcome the international
community to a scene recalling Warsaw under Nazi
occupation, or any other European city occupied by the
army of Nazi Germany.

Furthermore, the Israeli occupation forces
continue to occupy President Arafat's headquarters
after destroying most of it. They continue to lay siege
to the small office within the headquarters; they
continue to shoot at the office and try to tighten their
grip over it in every way. Once again, we strongly warn
of the dangers inherent in these practices that threaten
Mr. Arafat's personal safety. He is the symbol of the
Palestinian national identity and of the Palestinian
struggle for liberation and independence.

Certain Israelis have insolently declared that the
Israeli military attacks will continue for weeks. That
would take us to the point of no return. It should be
rejected decisively by the international community. But
frankly, this Israeli position reminds us, unfortunately,
that influential international players have provided
cover for the whole series of Sharonic positions. We
hope this will end soon so that we can truly put an end
to the tragedy and return to the path of peace.

Yesterday Mr. Sharon also attempted, along with
many other Israeli officials, to link what Israel is doing
against the Palestinian people with what the United
States had done in Afghanistan. That is cheap political
prostitution that exploits the suffering in the United
States following 11 September and that erodes the
legitimacy of the fight against international terrorism.
Our position against all terrorist acts, including the
bombings in Israel, is clear and explicit. We condemn
them in their entirety.

But Israel remains an occupation force. It has
occupied our land for more than 35 years, during which
it turned the occupation into a colonial settler
occupation in which it transferred hundreds of
thousands of Israeli citizens to the occupied territories
and built settlements on our land. Israel rejects our
people's rights. It has worked against the realization of
our right to self-determination and to the establishment
of our independent State. Israel is the only occupying
Power in the world. Israel is the country and the army
that has committed war crimes and State terrorism. It is
the State that continues to violate international law,
international humanitarian law and relevant Security
Council resolutions.

The main difference between what is occurring on
the Israeli side and on the Palestinian side is that in the
first case it is being carried out by a State army under
Government orders, including war crimes and State
terrorism, while in the second case it is being carried
out by illegal groups that are condemned by the
Palestinian Authority, which considers their acts to be
against Palestinian national interests. That is the true
picture. Failure to recognize this lacks ethical, political
and legal validity; such a position can only seriously
compromise the international community's task,
including working to build peace throughout the world,
and particularly waging the fight against terrorism.

Mr. Sharon's statement to which I referred earlier
was his response to Security Council resolution 1402
(2002). We believe that, in the face of that response,
the Security Council must seriously follow up on
implementation of the resolution in order to ensure the
immediate implementation of all its provisions. The
immediate implementation of resolution 1402 (2002) is
the only way to put an end to the rapid deterioration of
the situation and to begin to get back on track.

In view of the fact that the resolution has not
been implemented, the Arab Group has asked for the
submission of a draft resolution demanding the
immediate implementation of the provisions of
resolution 1402 (2002). Some Council members have
said that it is too early to adopt such a new resolution.
For a people under siege there is no such thing as too
early while the suffering, the siege and the
humanitarian tragedy continue, along with their
political repercussions. We appeal to the members of
the Council to adopt such a draft resolution as soon as
possible.

We are also convinced that following the
implementation of resolution 1402 (2002), the Council
must consider a way by which it can assist in moving
things forward. There is no doubt that one of the means
available would be the presence of an international
third party on the ground to assist both parties in
implementing the Tenet plan and the Mitchell
recommendations, advance the peace process and
provide protection to the Palestinian people.

We would like once again to express our
appreciation for the efforts made by the Secretary-
General to end the ongoing tragedy and to get the
situation back on the path to peace. We appreciate his
initiative to meet with the Security Council, as well as
the important statement he made to the Council. We are
confident that the Secretary-General and his Personal
Representative in the Middle East will continue their
efforts in coordination with the Security Council. In
this respect, we fully welcome the positions of the
Secretary-General with regard to the immediate
implementation of resolution 1402 (2002) and to an
international third-party presence, as well as with
regard for the need for a comprehensive approach that
includes both the political and security dimensions. We
call on the Security Council to respond positively and
to adopt the same positions, which would truly lead to
an end of the current tragic situation in the occupied
territories and put the situation back on the road to
peace.

I would like once again to thank all the members
of the Council.

