Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank the United Kingdom for
having taken the initiative of convening this meeting
in the extremely deteriorated humanitarian context of
which we are all aware and which Mr. Lowcock has
just described. His warnings and expectations are very
clear, and we must all act with a sense of urgency in the
light of what he told us. For months, we have seen the
ongoing deterioration of the humanitarian situation in
Yemen. War, extreme poverty and economic collapse
have created such a high degree of systemic weakness
of society and the State that we are today at the brink
of catastrophe.

Since our last meeting in the Council a month ago
(see S/PV.8361), the situation has been exacerbated by
the continued fall of the rial, the ongoing fighting in
Al-Hudaydah and a decline in the amount of foodstuffs
unloaded in Al-Hudaydah since September. In addition,
in the south-eastern province of Al-Mahrah, there was
damage caused by tropical cyclone Luban. The result,
as the Special Envoy described, is a risk of widespread
famine that could affect more than 22 million people,
a large-scale cholera epidemic and the possibility that
several generations of Yemenis will be deprived of
an education.

Secondly, in this extremely difficult situation, we
must pursue our efforts to ensure respect ofinternational
humanitarian law, the protection of civilians, and
humanitarian and commercial access and delivery,
as well as to promote the recovery of the Yemeni
economy. Those points are included in the Council's
21 September presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/18)
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We
must implement them in Yemen. Two immediate
concrete goals are to ensure the protection of civilians
from bombing and artillery fire, particularly in a
city as densely populated as Al-Hudaydah, and to
allow civilians to move freely and safely. Civilian
infrastructure must also be protected.

We must continue to strive to achieve other goals
often mentioned in the Council.

First, we must protect humanitarian personnel,
including those working in the rapid response
mechanisms in Al-Hudaydah province and elsewhere in
Yemen, who operate in a very dangerous environment.
They must be able to plan their operations in advance
and implement them safely. I once again convey to them
the full support and admiration of France.
Secondly, humanitarian and commercial access
must be ensured. The ports of Al-Hudaydah and Saleef
must remain open and accommodate at least as many
essential commodities - including food and fuel - as
they did before December 2017. A solution is urgently
needed so that the World Food Programme can access
silos containing essential foods for the population and
then transport them to Al-Hudaydah province and the
rest of the country. The same is true for fuel. The main
artery between Al-Hudaydah and Sana'a must remain
accessible, and we call on the parties to do everything
in their power in that regard.

Finally, it is essential to intensify efforts to contain
the soaring inflation of prices for food items, the
collapse of the rial, and the lack of compensation for a
large majority of Yemenis. There is an urgent need for
progress in the negotiations led by the Special Envoy for
Yemen, Martin Griffiths, with the Yemeni Government
and the Houthi rebels on this topic, particularly with
regard to the restoration of the Yemeni Central Bank.
The work of the international financial institutions
must also continue to make the recovery of the banking
and financial system feasible.

In that context - and I will conclude here 4 France
reiterates its call on the parties to engage fully with
the Special Envoy in order to reopen the dialogue
and move the political process forward. We know
that only a political solution will make it possible to
put a permanent end to the suffering of the Yemeni
people. The search for that solution is becoming more
and more urgent every day. United Nations mediation
is the only way to revive discussions with a view to
reaching an agreement on the management of the port
of Al-Hudaydah, resuming talks, achieving a durable
cessation of hostilities and defining the parameters for
a political solution.

