Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me first of all join
other speakers in welcoming the Presidents and the
Prosecutors of both Tribunals to the Council and in
thanking them for their respective reports and
insightful briefings. At this opportunity I would also
like to pay tribute to Ms. Carla Del Ponte whose term
is coming to an end soon, for her outstanding work,
dedication and important service in the cause of
justice.

Indonesia reiterates its support for the effective
contribution of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) in bringing
those who were responsible for crimes against
humanity in the former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda to
justice.

My delegation underlines the importance of the
completion strategies, which are instrumental in the
streamlining of the final phase of the functioning of the
ICTY and the ICTR. We therefore commend both
Tribunals for the concrete steps they are taking to
ensure the timely implementation of the completion
strategies. We also note that they have made significant
progress towards completion of their work.

With a View to focusing on their legacies and on
mechanisms that will remain in place following the
completion of the work of the Tribunals, my delegation
stresses the importance of possible residual functions.
We are of the View that the issue of residual functions
is multi-faceted and involves legal and political
considerations. The Security Council, for its part,
should appropriately address the issue and discuss it in
a systematic and comprehensive manner and in the
framework of a broad and inclusive process involving
related States, similar tribunals and civil society. It
would also be useful to consider lessons learned from
the residual functions of the post-Second World War
international military tribunals.

In the View of my delegation, the most essential
residual function to which the Council should pay
special attention is the trial of fugitives. We believe the
two Tribunals cannot fully complete their work until
they bring the principal indictees to justice. That
requires full cooperation on the part of all States
concerned, with a view not only to bringing them to
justice, but also to regaining stability in the regions
concerned.

Another significant feature of the two Tribunals'
completion strategies that relate to the residual
functions is referral of cases to national courts. My
delegation recognizes the merit of and challenges
posed by such a step. In that regard, we attach
particular importance to capacity-building programmes
for national courts. We commend the efforts of the
Tribunals to continue in the strengthening of their
cooperation with respective national authorities, in
particular with domestic courts of Rwanda and the
States of the former Yugoslavia. We support in that
regard the continued assistance of the international
community to develop the domestic judicial capacity of
relevant States, so as to ensure that all referred cases
are conducted in full compliance with the standards of
due process.

Finally, let me reiterate our firm commitment to
continue to cooperate with the Tribunals to ensure that
their mandates are fully discharged, including in the
implementation of the respective completion strategies.

