Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation is grateful for the convening of this meeting.
We would like to thank Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), and the other briefers for
their presentations.

Peru is committed to maintaining and sustaining
peace in the Central African Republic. We contribute
to MINUSCA through our deployment of a division
of engineers from our armed forces, which gives
us yet another reason to follow the situation in the
Central African Republic with special attention.
The humanitarian crisis remains urgent and the
deteriorating security situation in most of the country
has hindered consolidation of the modest progress that
has been made in the political process. With that in
mind, I would like to discuss three specific aspects that
require our attention:

The first is the urgent need to end the violence. We
are concerned about the permanent state of conflict in
most of the country, the inter-ethnic violence, the attacks
on the civilian population, MINUSCA personnel and
humanitarian workers, and about armed groups' access
to weapons. To that must be added the clashes over the
control of various areas and the exploitation of natural
resources. Transhumance corridors have become spaces
for illegal business and crime. We commend the efforts
of MINUSCA and the European Union to help build
military and police forces capable of dealing with these
threats, and we emphasize the importance of advancing
programmes for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants.

My second point is the importance ofreconstructing
and consolidating the State and extending its presence
throughout the country. That in turn implies the
importance of promoting a peaceful, inclusive society
focused on sustainable peace and development. In that
regard, we welcome the efforts of the African Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation, launched by the African
Union, which has been facilitating dialogue between
armed groups and civil society. We believe that it
should include groups of women and young people,
with a view to establishing institutions oriented towards
sustainable peace. We also consider the consideration
ofthe issue of incitement to violence by resolution 2399
(2018) f the most recent resolution on sanctions for the
Central African Republic - to be a positive step.

We emphasize the importance of arriving at
agreements and commitments that will enable progress
to be made in implementing the plan for expanding
the prefectures with a view to improving the country's
stability, security and development. One of the
underlying causes of the conflict in the Central African
Republic is the difficult socioeconomic reality, which
contributes to its instability. It will be crucial to to find
ways to create jobs, particularly for young people, order
to prevent extremism and relapses into violence. The
international community should therefore support the
National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan.

My third point is the importance of doing more
to protect the civilian population. We recognize the
efforts of the Central African Republic authorities to
strengthen the judicial system and combat impunity,
particularly their authorization of the Special Criminal
Court. However, we deplore the recurrent shameful
violations of human rights in the country. Firm action
must be taken to investigate and prosecute abuses in that
regard, including sexual violence and the widespread
participation of children in the conflict.

Peru acknowledges and supports the work that
MINUSCA is doing to protect civilians and provide
humanitarian assistance, as well as its efforts to uphold
the political process, despite the adverse environment
and complex operational situations that may arise.

We believe that the Mission's operational capacities
should be strengthened. We note with concern that
100 per cent of the authorized force has not yet been
deployed, and stress the need to ensure the safety of the
Blue Helmets on the ground. In that regard, and finally,
we wish to express our support for the Secretary-
General's decision to address this problem, which is a
cross-cutting issue in many peace operations.

