Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): I think
we have nothing to add to the picture of the situation
painted by Mr. Miyet. We know the situation is bleak.
There have been ceasefire violations recently. Some time
ago a report from the International Committee of the Red

 

Cross described in very distressing terms the situation
prevailing in the north-eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where clashes between tribes over
the occupation of land resulted in thousands of people being
killed.

So we are more or less silent witnesses to a situation
that we all know to be catastrophic, and we all know that
it requires a response from the Council - an ongoing
response, not just a few resolutions or debates from time to
time. It should be a real, concrete effort.

At the same time, we as members of the Security
Council, wish to be serious. We know that the decisions we
take will be accompanied by risks to observers and to
members of a peacekeeping operation. Of course, given this
situation, how can one not understand the reaction of those
who ask the Council to reflect and recall what has
happened in other parts of the world, in Africa as well as
in Europe. These past events explain why they, their
Governments and their legislatures are asking for more
reflection, and why they are calling on us to delve even
deeper into all the facts of the situation before taking a
decision.

I understand all this full well. I understand the
explanations that have been offered in this connection by
those representatives who are being accused of foot-
dragging. Further, I think that these kinds of explanations,
this rationale can also be applied to other situations and
other resolutions. Certain countries might legitimately wish
that further consideration be given to such other resolutions
before they are voted on, given the doubts that one might
have about whether they could actually be implemented. All
such thinking seems normal to me.

However, we could also ask ourselves what we can do
immediately in order to try - I will not say to take up the
challenge, but to deal with the immediate dangers in the
region, dangers that, I repeat, are leading to losses of
human life.
First, we should urge the Secretariat to continue its
efforts to produce a concept of operations. This was a point
made by Mr. Miyet, and I believe that this is the simplest
and most specific issue that we face. An explicit request to
the Secretariat from the Council should lead the Secretariat,
in conjunction with the Joint Military Commission (JMC)
and the Organization of African Unity (OAU), to produce
a report on a concept of operations that could be
implemented in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Mr.
Miyet spoke about producing such a report in early January,
and I think, given the current schedule, this is a very
reasonable time-frame; in the meantime, we eagerly and
impatiently await this report from the Secretariat on a
concept of operations.

I think that such a report will truly enable the
Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities in full
knowledge of the facts. I hope the Council will act
vigorously, because even if the situation is bleak, there
are some encouraging signs. We can be pleased at the
decision that was finally taken to appoint a very
distinguished, highly respected and wise person - the
former President of Botswana - as facilitator. I also
think we have to welcome the arrival in Kinshasa of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Morjane, who has an excellent reputation.
We hope that he will be able to do some very solid work.

Simple actions might perhaps be taken to contribute
to respect for the ceasefire. Given the current situation I
would ask Mr. Miyet whether it might not already be
possible for the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) to
provide some military assistance to the Joint Military
Commission by providing it with staff officers to help the
Commission do its work.

I also wonder whether the JMC might not be able to
provide reports to the Security Council on decisions that
the Commission is taking. This relates to one of the
requests made yesterday regarding better relations, better
cooperation, between the OAU and the United Nations. I
think that if the Security Council wants to become
actively and genuinely involved in dealing with the crisis
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, it must have all
the available information, so it is entitled to expect the
JMC to provide some information, some reports. This
would, in fact, respond to the wishes expressed for greater
coordination between the regional organizations and the
United Nations.

Once again, despite all the references that have been
made to the complexity of the situation, I think we have
to keep our heads and not lose all optimism. We can take
heart in recalling similar situations. Certainly, three or
four years ago the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo was less disturbing, given that fewer people
were involved, but fundamentally the situation was
extremely serious. There was a crisis.

France knows something about this, because we
played a role in getting the United Nations to deal with

 

the crisis in the Central African Republic. This was not
easy. We came up against a lot of scepticism, a lot of the
same reactions we are now hearing as regards the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We were told that we
risked becoming involved in a "dubious enterprise".

Over time, we can see that the operation in Central
African Republic was concluded - perhaps not
successfully, but at least to our relative satisfaction. In this
connection, all the countries that were to finance that
operation might examine their consciences to find that they
may have been responsible for certain arrears in relation to
that operation as well.

And yet, the situation was not simple there. Let us
take another example: Sierra Leone. That was not an easy
situation. We all know that the Lome Agreement was not
respected. The danger is there, and yet the United Nations
agreed to deploy a large peacekeeping operation of some
6,000 men, which proves that, in the final analysis, when
we wish to do something, we take the decision to do it.

We hope that, with the actual deployment of that
peacekeeping operation, we will be able to correct the
situation in Sierra Leone. I say this to indicate that, despite
the magnitude and gravity of the crisis, we must not lose
hope. Let us remember some happier examples of situations
in which the United Nations succeeded in Africa. Let us pin
our resolve on the decision we adopted in resolution 1279
(1999) - which we have yet to implement - and on the
information - which we hope will be accurate and
rigorous - to be provided by the Secretariat in early
January along with its concept for the operation.

I conclude by welcoming the programme of work
proposed by the future President of the Security Council. It
is a good programme and a heavy one that will require
great assiduity and presence here on the part of the
President. I believe, however, that the stakes are high
enough that your example, Sir, will be followed and prove
itself convincing.

