Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke inArabic): Atthe outset,
I would like to congratulate you, Madam President, on
presiding over the Council this month. I would also like
to thank you for convening this open debate on a topic
of major importance for the international community.
We also welcome Mr. Andrzej Duda, President of the
Republic of Poland, who presided over the discussion
this morning.

Threats to international peace and security are
greater today than ever. Some refuse to fulfil their
obligations under international law. That serious
challenge is compounded by weak levels of cooperation
in containing those global threats and peacefully
resolving conflicts and crises. Impunity also helps to
aggravate such crises and constitutes a serious violation
of international law, international human rights law and
international humanitarian law. Experience has shown
that the international community cannot counter threats
to international peace and security without cooperating
and working collectively in strict adherence to
international law, something that we have seen in the
context of our common fight against terrorism, for
example, which has shown us very clearly that respect
for international law adds value to such efforts.

International law and the relevant institutions
concerned with its implementation reflect the profound
will of States, which is the basis on which the United
Nations was created, as well as of other bodies,
particularly the various tribunals and legal entities
that have made respect for international law possible.
Thanks to international law, humankind has made
strides forward, but every time it is breached or ignored,
the credibility of international institutions is called into
question. That in turn affects our ability to cope with
international challenges and crises and jeopardizes
international efforts to maintain international peace
and security. We are also seeing serious contradictions
in the world today. While the reality in many areas is
very promising, at the same time we are very worried
about the conflicts that are increasing and worsening
day by day, with the international community unable to
resolve them. We should therefore work to enable our
international institutions to implement their mandates
and thereby ensure respect for international law.

Now more than ever, given the magnitude of the
danger emanating from those threats to international
peace and security, we need to strengthen the
mechanisms created by the international community in
the area of collective security in order to end the various
conflicts and resolve international crises. Any attempt
to change the status quo illegally has to be stopped.
We must avoid any undermining of international
peace and security, uphold Article 1 of the Charter
of the United Nations and dissuade any party trying
to violate international law. We have to make sure that
the sovereignty and security of States are respected
and that the use of force in international relations is
prohibited. We should also respect the right of people
to self-determination, and we must prevent conflicts,
resolve them peacefully and act in conformity with
Article 8 of the Charter.
Today, as the Council is discussing respect for
international law, we can see that the Palestinians,
unarmed as they are, have gone undefended for several
days while under attack in the Gaza Strip as they
peacefully and legitimately protest. That is a serious
violation of international law, and the State of Qatar
denounces it in the strongest possible terms. Given
the serious nature of the violations committed by
the Israeli occupying forces, we call on the Security
Council and the international community to shoulder
their responsibility by protecting Palestinian civilians
on the basis of the relevant international instruments.

Maintaining international peace and security is a
collective responsibility, which is why no efforts should
be sparedto findjust solutions to our common challenges.
The State of Qatar has always acted in accordance with
its obligations within the partnership we have with the
international community to fulfil the purposes and
principles of the Charter. We have undertaken a number
of measures within the framework of the international
community to strengthen dialogue and mutual
understanding, promote tolerance and cooperation,
fight extremism and terrorism and work to bring an end
to impunity. We have called for accountability for those
who commit mass atrocities and have made numerous
efforts, which have been documented and welcomed
by the Council, to ease tensions, prevent conflicts and
resolve them peacefully. We have been guided in that
by the Charter, international law and the resolutions of
the General Assembly and the Security Council.

Despite that record of regional and international
cooperation to fulfil the aims and purposes of the
Charter, for almost a year the State of Qatar has been
a victim of an unjust blockade and other questionable
unilateral actions that contravene the provisions of
international law and human rights and disregard
principles of cordial relations, which could have
grave consequences for regional and international
peace and security. Ensuring respect for international
law 4 the very law that the Security Council is
defending today 4 is the shared responsibility of all
Member States in our efforts to achieve international
peace and security. That cannot happen when countries
institute policies based on threatening to undermine
and violate other States' integrity and on fabricating
non-existent crises in order to promote their illegal
aims. International law and the United Nations Charter
must be upheld, especially in regions that are mired in
conflicts and crises, as is the case in the Middle East.

Lastly, the State of Qatar reiterates its commitment
to respecting our cooperation with the international
community, upholding international law and rising
to our common challenges within the framework of
the Security Council mandate, which is to maintain
international peace and security.

