Mr. Fowler (Canada)(spoke in French): Canada
would like to express its gratitude to the Special
Representative, Mr. Vieira de Mello, for his efforts. We
take great pleasure in seeing him again at this table.

Mr. Vieira de Mello deserves praise for having
involved the Timorese very closely in the work of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) and for having endeavoured to
develop local capacity in matters of security and
administration, especially through the creation of the
National Consultative Council. In this regard, we
welcome the fact that East Timor will soon be
administered by a Government made up of the
Transitional Administration and the National Council
of Timorese Resistance (CNRT) during the period of
transition to complete independence of the territory.

(spoke in English)

Canada shares the concern of many in this room
that the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has felt
compelled to suspend activities in three of the largest
refugee camps in West Timor because of increasing
violence and intimidation. Attacks such as those
perpetrated against UNHCR staff last week are, as both
Mr. Vieira de Mello and Ambassador Holbrooke just
said, nothing less than unacceptable. We agree that
militia leaders must honour their commitments not to
interfere with the safe return of refugees.

In this regard, I would be grateful if Mr. Vieira de
Mello might comment on the extent to which progress
is being made in separating militia elements from the
general population in these camps and, more
specifically, on what additional security guarantees we
might anticipate that could usefully be agreed so as to
reduce the level of violence and intimidation in the
camps and along the border.

As I have pointed out on many occasions in this
Chamber and next door, Canada believes that it is
essential for the Council to receive advice from
military experts before taking important decisions on
security matters affecting the operations we have
dispatched abroad. I would therefore like to support the
request made last month by Ambassador van Walsum
for a briefing, perhaps by the Force Commander,
before any decision is taken with regard to downsizing
UNTAET's military component.

I would like very much to thank Ambassador
Greenstock for allowing me to switch speaking
positions with him, so as to allow me to catch a one
o'clock plane. While I must speak and run, I assure
you, Mr. President, that my delegation will follow this
debate on the points I have raised this morning closely.
I thank you for your flexibility in allowing me to
switch.

