Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. Minister, and Nigeria for taking the initiative of
organizing today's open debate. I am grateful to
Deputy Secretary-General Migiro and Ms. Sarah Cliffe
for their respective briefings. I particularly welcome
the priority the World Bank attaches to the issue of the
nexus between security and development and,
particularly, the very inclusive dialogue that the World
Bank is conducting with stakeholders in the United
Nations in preparation for the World Development
Report.

In many parts of Africa conflict prevention,
conflict resolution, peacekeeping and peacebuilding to
prevent relapse into conflict is not a linear progression
but rather a circuitous and often overlapping process.
Even after a ceasefire agreement is reached, it has
proven to be a challenge to escape the vicious cycle
created by poverty and recurring conflict.

In order to meet the challenge, it is essential to
implement an integrated approach encompassing
security and development. We must also strengthen our
efforts to build nations based on a comprehensive
development agenda that includes poverty reduction
and creation of employment opportunities, especially
for the youth. The United Nations must engage actively
in both preventive diplomacy and development
assistance, particularly in Africa, as we are discussing.
The primary responsibility rests with Africans
themselves for preventing conflict and maintaining
peace and security in Africa. Many African countries
have recently celebrated the fiftieth anniversary of
their independence. We have full confidence that
African national leaders will continue their stride to
promote democratic elections, security sector reform,
good governance and the rule of law.

In parallel with national efforts, the African
Union (AU) and subregional organizations have in
recent years been increasingly proactive in conflict
prevention and crisis management. Their active
engagement in preventive diplomacy deserves high
praise. For example, the AU and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) have
taken a clear stance by issuing a statement that they do
not tolerate unconstitutional changes of Government
and that they expect a Government to accept
international norms and standards for good governance
and the rule of law. It was an important qualitative
change in the preventive diplomacy efforts of the AU
when its operating principle progressed from
non-interference to non-indifference. That principled
approach has produced positive results in many African
countries.

Japan also welcomes the steady progress in
developing the AU peace and security architecture,
including the early warning system. Worthy of note in
this connection is the African Peer Review Mechanism,
the system that was created with a View to enhancing
good governance.

What is the role of the United Nations
international community? It is to encourage and
support those African-led good offices activities
through the United Nations, the World Bank and others
institutions. The international community should
strengthen, in particular, support for the capacity-
building efforts of the AU and subregional
organizations.

The Secretary-General's good offices and
preventive diplomacy have frequently proved effective
because they can be launched swiftly and flexibly at
his initiative and within his authority under the Charter.
To ensure that they have maximum effect, the United
Nations should expand a reserve of experienced United
Nations envoys and mediators who will act on behalf
of the Secretary-General, who cannot be everywhere at
once. The strength and advantage of the United Nations
is its extended presence on the ground, through
peacekeeping operations, integrated peacebuilding
offices and regional political offices. The Secretary-

General and his representatives may make full use of
those field offices for detecting any warning signs at an
early stage and taking political initiatives to prevent
escalation of tensions, crisis and conflict. For instance,
the consolidated United Nations office to the African
Union in Addis Ababa was established this month. We
hope that this new setup will help to strengthen the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union.

In West Africa, where the countries in the region
share the challenges posed by cross-cutting security
issues such as drug trafficking and small arms, the
United Nations Office for West Africa is playing an
important role in facilitating collaboration among all
relevant players and preventing and mediating conflicts
in cooperation with ECOWAS. We believe that in the
Central African region, a similar regional office will
prove as useful in promoting regional security and
preventing conflict, in the light of recent developments
in the subregion. We should be mindful of resource
implications, but we believe also that the costs can be
largely offset by savings in peacekeeping operations in
the region. The proposal by the Secretary-General has
been pending since the beginning of the year. The
Security Council should make its formal approval
without further delay.

Another advantage is that the United Nations has
the legitimate authority and capacity to mobilize all
stakeholders in a timely manner. This impartial
convening power should be useful not only in
emergency and crisis but also in building confidence
among concerned parties to defuse tensions. With such
efforts, even if a conflict breaks out, the parties will be
able to accept and engage in a continuation of
dialogue, which might under normal circumstances be
interpreted - or misinterpreted - as interference.
Long-term engagement and perseverance are essential,
because conflict resolution requires carefully nurturing
trust and building confidence among key players.

What is the specific role of the Security Council?
It is to provide effective support. The Council should
encourage and support the efforts of the Secretary-
General, the AU and subregional organizations, and,
when appropriate, the Security Council should adopt a
decision or issue a statement in support of the
Secretary-General's efforts and urge the parties
concerned to settle their dispute peacefully. When the
Council expresses its position on a crisis in a timely
manner, it puts pressure on the parties concerned and
influences the international community.

The key question for the Council is how early it
should engage in supporting the preventive diplomacy
of the Secretary-General. In the light of the importance
of drawing the attention of the Council to early
warning signs, I suggest that we might request the
Secretary-General to provide Council members with a
regular political and security briefing, focusing on
potential risks of conflict erupting or recurring. It
might also be useful to organize an informal interactive
meeting with concerned countries before a conflict
breaks out.

Among other tools available, the Council tries to
prevent the recurrence of conflicts when it deploys
peacekeeping and political missions. But sanctions on
those who hamper efforts at preventing conflict can
also be an effective tool for conflict prevention and
resolution. A mechanism to prevent illicit use of
national resources, such as the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme for instance, would also be
helpful.

To conclude, I would like to congratulate Nigeria
on the adoption of today's presidential statement. In
future, the Security Council should focus as much on
preventive and anticipatory measures as it does on its
reactive measures.

