Ms. Clark: I thank the Council for the invitation to
brief it on this topic.

Since the peacebuilding architecture was
established, in 2005, the United Nations has made
important progress in improving its approaches to
peacebuilding, building on lessons learned and practical
experience on the ground. Today, peacebuilding is
mainstreamed across the United Nations system and
is used in different contexts and situations affected by
conflict and violence.

Peacebuilding has also been a driver of reform and
initiatives such as the relatively new United Nations
global focal point for police, justice and corrections.
Individual United Nations agencies have developed
their own peacebuilding strategies on the basis of their
mandates and programmes.

However, there continue to be some important
challenges in United Nations support for peacebuilding.
For members of the United Nations Development Group,
a more inclusive approach to peacebuilding than we
often see today is a key priority. Achieving sustainable
peace requires the engagement and participation of
all social groups, beyond the main protagonists to
a conflict, and urban centres. It requires meaningful
participation by women, youth and other marginalized
groups.

It also requires that we maintain a sustained
presence at the local level in order to understand and
respond to the immediate and longer-term needs of
communities, including on the issues of livelihoods,
basic social services, the provision of security and
justice for victims. In that respect, the United Nations
worked with local authorities in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo in 2013 to investigate
five recent incidents of serious crimes affecting 900
victims of sexual and gender-based violence, murder
and pillage and to bring those responsible to justice.

Institution-building is closely linked with
peacebuilding. However, we need to take a less narrow
view of that nexus and to strengthen our understanding
of how a valid social contract can contribute to peace
and how international actors can support such a contract
developing. Without both responsive and inclusive State
institutions and a vibrant civil society, there is unlikely
to be either sustained peace or a basis for long-term
development.

An example of an approach that addresses both
those elements is to be found in Somalia, where the
United Nations is working with the Federal Government
to assess and strengthen its capacities to perform core
State functions. At the same time, we are also focusing
on supporting governance at the local level - the
level at which people most frequently engage with the
authorities and to which they are most likely to turn for
services and support.

Our efforts in Somalia have enabled local
Governments and municipalities to collect property and
business taxes. That revenue is now funding municipal
services for people in approximately 16 districts across
the country. Local elections are being held, waste is
being collected and roads are being maintained. If trust
in Government institutions is to be built following a
conflict, the local level is a good place to start.

Peacebuilding requires predictable and sustained
international support on the basis of clear and focused
priorities and mutual accountability. In recent years,
Governments and international actors have agreed
on compacts or mutual accountability frameworks
to provide that basis and for the ongoing monitoring
of progress and dialogue. The United Nations has
supported such mutual accountability processes in
Afghanistan, Yemen, Sierra Leone and Somalia. We
hope that more countries will engage in that way.

By setting clear and realistic goals that cover the
whole peacebuilding spectrum, including building
inclusive politics, security, justice, livelihoods and the
delivery of social services, and by agreeing on how to
deliver on those goals, we can help to strengthen the
credibility of peace processes and peacebuilding and to
ensure effective delivery and results.

For that approach to work, both national and
international actors must be fully committed to
delivering on shared goals and be willing to work
together. That will help to reduce the risk of failure and
to strengthen the chance ofpeace processes succeeding.

Nonetheless, success can never be guaranteed, nor
will every individual programme in a post-conflict
context produce results. Such situations are inherently
risky and setbacks are frequent.

It is therefore important to better integrate risk
management in peacebuilding approaches and to ensure
that we are better at balancing the risks of failure of
individual programmes with the importance of trying
to make a difference where we can. Discussions on
managing the risks of operating in such difficult
environments needs to be ongoing with national
Governments and with donors.

Pooled funding is one important way of sharing
and managing risks together. The United Nations
recently established multi-partner trust funds in Mali
and Somalia to enable donors to channel funding
towards the programmes that may be more difficult
for individual donors to support directly. Those pooled
funds enable stronger risk mitigation and management
through a shared platform and divide the residual risk
among several participants. The Mali Stabilization
Fund has already had an significnat and positive impact
on the situation in the country.

When setbacks occur in countries, as they have in
such a traumatic way in the Central African Republic
and South Sudan in recent months, it is important that
we at the United Nations maintain our capability to
support and work with local partners and to protect
countries' capacities to deal with and respond to the
crisis themselves.

So often, funding for vital early recovery work with
communities is squeezed out during crises and local
communities lose the ability to support themselves.
Then, when peacebuilding opportunities arise, we are
forced to start all over again from a worse position.
We must find ways to address that conundrum and to
ensure predictable funding for early recovery.

Let me conclude by emphasizing the paramount
importance of national ownership and leadership
in peacebuilding processes. At the end of the day,
sustained peace and long-term development, led and
fully owned by countries themselves, is always the goal
of peacebuilding. We must support countries to make
progress towards that goal as rapidly as possible.
That is why it is important to strengthen inclusion,
institution-building and mutual accountability as
crucial elements in peacebuilding and as foundations
for national ownership. While crisis and conflict create
many obstacles to such objectives in the short term,
we should never lose sight of that long-term goal. I
hope that that goal will remain a major priority in
the discussion of how to strengthen United Nations
peacebuilding and prepare for the review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture in 2015.

