Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
There has been escalation recently in the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. Recent suicide bombings inside
Israel have resulted in heavy civilian casualties. The
Israeli side, however, has resorted time and again to the
excessive use of arms, closing the Orient House by
force, which houses the office of the Palestine
Liberation Organization in East Jerusalem. For a time,
it even sent troops to occupy the self-governing
Palestinian city Jenin on the West Bank of the River
Jordan, leading to further exacerbation of the situation.

These latest developments have caused deep
concern in the international community. We support the
Security Council in convening this public debate today.
The United Nations should make active efforts to end
the bloodshed in the conflict between Israel and
Palestine and to ease tension in the region as soon as
possible. The Chinese delegation condemns all violent
activities leading to the escalation of the conflict and to
civilian casualties. We strongly appeal to the two sides
to exercise restraint and to stop all forms of violence.
We call on the Israeli Government to return the Orient
House and other occupied Palestinian buildings to the
Palestinian side immediately. With help from the
international community, the two sides should
implement, as soon as possible, the relevant
recommendations of the Mitchell report and create
favourable conditions for the resumption of peace
talks.

In recent years, the Security Council has held
discussions and has adopted resolutions and
presidential statements on issues such as the prevention
of armed conflict and the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. Now, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is
escalating. The international community has placed
high expectations on the United Nations. It is our hope
that Council members will be able to make an active,
practical and constructive effort in the spirit of
resolutions and presidential statements already adopted
to hold serious consultations on the grave situation of
the violent Israeli-Palestinian conflict, as well as adopt
necessary measures to be immediately taken.

Council members should put differences aside
and work to achieve a consensus as soon as possible so
as to send a strong message to both sides of the conflict
and the entire international community that violence
must be stopped and tensions eased. The Security
Council has already held much discussion on sending
international observers to the region. The idea has
gained more attention and support from the
international community. We hope that the Israeli side
will respond positively to the appeals and advice of the
international community and take this recommendation
into earnest consideration.

Faced with the serious situation whereby the
Israeli Palestinian conflict is getting worse, we believe
that efforts from a third party, especially from those
with influence on both sides of the conflict, are vital to
make the two sides cool down, stop violence and return
to the negotiation table. This is clear to every outsider.
We also believe that, as the United Nations body that
shoulders the primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security, it is only right and
natural for the Security Council to pay close attention
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We also support the
Secretary-General in continuing to play an active role
in this issue.

Finally, I would like to thank colleagues for the
kind words addressed to China on its presidency last
month.

