Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, we would like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary- General, Ms. Helen La Lime, for her important briefing, and all United Nations personnel for their tireless work and dedication. I would also like to thank Ms. Marie Yolene Gilles for her update on recent developments in the situation in Haiti. We are confident that the people of Haiti can determine their own future, which the Security Council is supporting through the presence of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) as a special political mission in Haiti. The challenges are tremendous. However, putting in place a functioning Government also gives the Haitian people the chance it deserves to be an independent and thriving State. On that note, I would like to bring the following three points to the attention of the Council. First, with regard to inclusive national dialogue, we note with deep concern that the mandates of the lower house of parliament, at least a third of the Senate, and all elected municipal officials expired on 13 January 2020, without any renewal. This basically leaves a vacuum in the promotion of dialogue between executive and legislative bodies. The Marriott and Kinam Accords are important steps in the right direction. However, these agreements are not enough. We need a more sincere, effective and concrete plan for inclusive national dialogue. We share the Secretary-General's concern about the urgent need for constitutional and structural reforms in Haiti to deliver economic opportunities and services to its population and improve the legitimacy of its State institutions. Secondly, with regard to economic and social challenges, as stated in the report of the Secretary- General's report (S/2020/123), during the 2018-2019 fiscal year, Haiti's gross national product contracted 0.9 per cent, its national currency depreciated by 22 per cent, and inflation reached 20 per cent by the end of the fiscal year. Right now, 3.7 million Haitians are food insecure, including | million people in emergency status. Meanwhile, 2.1 per cent of children are affected by severe acute malnutrition, and 3 million children are unable to go to school. The prolonged political standoff, aggravated by the ensuing economic downturn, is creating a downward spiral that encourages gang violence and other related social issues. We also need to address these challenges immediately in order to prevent any undoing of progress made towards the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Thirdly, with respect to BINUH's benchmarks, 33 per cent time of the Integrated Office's mandate has already elapsed, but it is still far away from achieving most of its benchmarks. We need to accelerate progress by further strengthening BINUH's engagement to reach every level of Haiti's Government. We believe that fulfilment of the benchmarks is not BINUH's responsibility alone. BINUH and the United Nations country team serve as catalysts for the country's improvement. The Government and people of Haiti should exercise full ownership and responsibility in striving to fulfil the benchmarks.We believe there is still hope for Haiti. We welcome the implementation of the 2018 law on legal aid and the finalization of the new national social protection and promotion policy, which aims to reduce poverty and inequality. We also commend the efforts made by the Haitian National Police to maintain stability in the country, including in the war against gang violence, despite the lack of resources, personnel and equipment. Much has been done, but there are still, of course, many challenges that need to be addressed. The international community needs to continue encouraging and supporting Haiti so it can achieve stability and prosperity.
