Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for taking the initiative to
organize this very timely briefing on sanctions. I also
thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman and
Jiirgen Stock, Secretary General of INTERPOL, for
their detailed briefings.

With the latest additions of sanctions, on Yemen
and the Central African Republic, we now have a total
of 15 sanctions regimes. While that is the highest
number in history, sanctions remain a rather exceptional
measure taken by the Security Council under Article 41
of the Charter with a view to maintaining or restoring
international peace and security.

Whether intended to coerce, constrain or deter,
sanctions can serve their underlying purpose only when
they are properly targeted and implemented. Even the
best-designed sanctions regime will not have the desired
effect when gaps persist in communication and the
capacity to implement, or where there is a lack ofpolitical
will to pursue that implementation. Communication,
outreach and transparency in the work of the sanctions
committees are paramount. My delegation believes that
sanctions committees should actively engage with the
countries concerned, consulting on the expectations
and requirements in regard to sanctions implementation
,as well as in response to the needs and difficulties that
arise as countries set out to implement the sanctions.

Ongoing interaction is required, and not only with
the country that gives its name to a sanctions committee
and its immediate neighbours. The wider United Nations
membership needs to be informed and engaged. Public
briefings by chairs of sanctions committees should be
standard, not an exception, and we are pleased to note
that more chairs have chosen to hold public briefings
this year. Only yesterday an open briefing by the
Argentine Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan (see S/PV.7320) reinforced that upward trend.

Results-oriented communication also requires
readily accessible online information. We welcome
and encourage further progress in developing sanctions
committee websites available in all official United
Nations languages. The regular use of press releases on
sanctions committee work, available in languages other
than English, is important. Visits by chairs of sanctions
committees and assessment missions to the countries
concerned should also be encouraged as a useful tool
for enhancing awareness of sanctions regimes and
compliance with them.

Regarding the committees' work, we have found it
useful to engage with the Secretary-General's thematic
Special Representatives, including those on children
and armed conflict and sexual Violence in conflict, and
with his Special Advisers on the prevention of genocide
and the responsibility to protect. We also see added
value in contacts and exchanges between relevant
sanctions committees, panels of experts and the Office
of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
as well as relevant commissions of inquiry. Close
cooperation with INTERPOL, the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO) and other specialized
bodies has been very useful and needs to be further
developed.

Likewise, we have also found it useful to hold joint
meetings with other relevant subsidiary bodies of the
Council, such as, for example, a joint meeting of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014) on Yemen, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and the Committee established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities. We believe such
practice and synergies between relevant committees
should be further explored and encouraged.

With regard to implementation, we believe a change
of attitude towards sanctions is needed so that sanctions
regimes are taken as an opportunity for national and
regional capacity-building. Better use should be made of
reporting on sanctions implementation and committee
dialogue with the countries concerned so as to identify
countries' capacity, training and technical assistance
needs and enable them to seek practical help. Improved
sanctions implementation capacities can also add to the
overall improvement of countries' ability to respond
to wider security concerns. For example, assistance
to border or financial controls in relation to sanctions
implementation would also strengthen the capacity
to tackle threats arising from terrorism, international
organized crime and trafficking in and illicit flows of
arms.

In that regard, my delegation sees merit in establishing
a dedicated unit within the Security Council Affairs
Division tasked with improving the coordination and
integration of sanctions implementation. In addition to
providing better support to sanctions committees, such
a unit would also improve the mobilization of technical
assistance and capacity-building in response to needs
articulated by individual Member States. That latter
aspect would be particularly useful, since there are
many potential assistance providers within the United
Nations system, including the United Nations Office
for Disarmament Affairs, the United Nations Mine
Action Service, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force, as well as specialized agencies such as ICAO
and the International Maritime Organization, along
with INTERPOL, the World Customs Organization, the
Financial Action Task Force and others.

With regard to the panels of experts and monitoring
groups, even if sanctions regimes differ, in our view
there is distinct added value in sharing relevant
information, good practices and lessons learned,
including on establishing patterns of trafficking of
natural resources, illegal financial and arms flows,
and identifying the movements, interdependence and
affiliations of armed groups. Again, the existence of
a dedicated unit would enable us to do that in a more
coherent and systematic way.

Periodic reporting on sanctions implementation
by the Secretary-General would also be useful to
highlight implementation challenges and in discussing
how the Council can better address the coordination
of sanctions regimes with other peace and security
mechanisms and providing recommendations for
improving coordination within the United Nations
system and support to Member States.

I would like to conclude by commenting briefly on
the due-process mechanisms related to the sanctions
regimes. In our view, due process must be a basic
standard and an imperative in all such regimes. As has
been noted on many previous occasions, the Office
of the Ombudsperson is an important mechanism for
improving the credibility of measures taken within
the Al-Qaida sanctions regime. Providing similar
mechanisms for review or redress would be important
to all existing sanctions regimes, either by extending or
replicating the Ombudsperson's mandate or by applying
other mechanisms to the same effect.

