Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We express our gratitude to the Permanent
Representatives of Germany, India and South Africa
for their reports on the work of the Committees under
their leadership. We see the work of the Committees
and their increased cooperation as significant
preconditions for strengthening the effectiveness of the
Security Council's contribution to countering global
terrorism, which remains one of the main threats to
international peace and security.

We welcome the Security Council's leadership on
counter-terrorism, as affirmed by the Security Council
meeting on 4 May (see S/PV.6765). The adoption of
presidential statement S/PRST/2012/ 17 at that meeting
sends an important signal for the strengthening of joint
efforts to counter the existing terrorist threat. The need
for such an effort was further underscored by today's
terrorist acts in Damascus, in which many civilians,
including children, were killed. We call on the Security
Council to resolutely condemn that dreadful crime.

We note with satisfaction that the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) has continued to monitor
the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) through
the preliminary assessments of implementation and
country visits. There is still room for improvement
under those mechanisms. The CTC will address such
issues, but, in principle, the existing capacities affirm
their effectiveness. Through those efforts, the
Committee has also demonstrated the specialized
experience gained by States. In that context, we set
great store by the CTC's proposed visit to Russia.

One of the main outcomes of the Committee's
work was the adoption of the global survey of the
implementation of resolution 1624 (2005), which
sought to counteract incitement to terrorism and its
ideological support (see S/2012/16). The review was
carried out pursuant to resolution 1963 (2010) and is an
important element in implementing the CTC plan of
action and resolution 1624 (2005), as initiated by
Russia.

Russia actively participated in drafting the report
on that important topic. The main findings in the
document encouraged the international community, the
Security Council, the CTC and the CTC Executive
Directorate (CTED) to strengthen their efforts to
pre-empt and prevent terrorism and violent extremism
and to combat the radicalization of society.

We note that in the review, as in other decisions
of the Security Council, mention is made of the use of
the Internet for terrorist purposes. This problem
requires particular attention and the development of
universal legal standards under the auspices of the
United Nations.

We also welcome the review's stress on issues
related to enhancing intercultural dialogue and
interfaith understanding. We View this important long-
term undertaking in the context of combating the
ideological breeding ground of terrorism and
preventing new supporters from joining terrorists'
ranks. We continue to support the strengthening of
contacts between the CTC and international and
regional organizations with a view to the further
establishment of an extensive network of counter-
terrorist cooperation under the auspices of the United
Nations.

We take note of the close and regular contacts of
the CTC and the Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004) with the
Meeting of Heads of Special Services, Security
Agencies and Law-Enforcement Organizations on
terrorism-related issues, which was initiated by the
Russian Federal Security Service. Another briefing was
held early this year with the representatives of the
Meeting to the CTC. We are determined to continue
this useful practice.

We welcome the role of the CTED in rendering
assistance to the CTC. We support the participation of
the Directorate on the basis of the existing mandate, as
well as the efforts of the United Nations Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force and its
cooperation with the expert groups of the specialized
Committees of the Security Council.

We note once again that the updated mandate
contained in resolution 1963 (2010) sets significant
challenges for the Directorate and calls on CTED as a
whole and its leadership to continue to work tirelessly.
We had hoped that the modifications made last June to
the sanctions regime of the 1267 Committee and the
splitting off from it of the anti-Taliban component
would help promote national reconciliation in
Afghanistan. Sadly, at this time that is not happening,
as Taliban activity is continuing.

We continue to believe that drawing a clear line
between Al-Qaida and mere Taliban supporters is very
complex. Al-Qaida does not seem to be about to leave
Afghanistan or break off its ties with the Taliban. One
can argue that the two organizations have different
agendas, but no one can deny that they still have close
terrorist ties and cooperation. Against that backdrop,
the Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) remains one of the most
effective mechanisms of the Security Council in the
field of counter-terrorism, and its sanctions list should
duly reflect the threat emerging from Al-Qaida, which
is spreading to new regions. We support the proposal to
include additional individuals on the list.

However, the practice of the application of
sanctions against entities and individuals involved in
terrorist activities should continue to be done on a
case-by-case basis and in compliance with due
procedures. The expanded powers of the
Ombudsperson on delisting and new procedures for the
consideration of requests for delisting have ensured an
optimal level of transparency for the Committee's
procedures thus far.

In considering issues related to further procedural
improvements, we must not be carried away by
populism or try to involve the Committee in functions
that are outside its remit, but rather work on the basis
of fully upholding the fundamental principles and
expeditiousness of its work.

Another important task is enhancing the
effectiveness of the sanctions mechanisms, which fully
depends on the implementation by States of their
international commitments in that area.

Regrettably, we are once again forced to note that
in that respect outstanding problems remain. The
Stockholm-based website Kavkaz Center - the
information portal of the terrorist organization Caucus
Emirates, which was listed in July 2011 - remains up
and running. That is in breach of paragraph 6 of
resolution 1989 (2011), whereby this site should be
subjected to financial sanctions leading to a cessation
of its activities. The Swedish authorities have still not
implemented that resolution, effectively allowing the
site to continue propagating the ideas of terrorism and
religious intolerance.

The prevention of any possibility of weapons of
mass destruction, their means of delivery and related
materials falling into the hands of terrorists is an
important task facing the international community. A
key international legal instrument for its implementation
remains resolution 1540 (2004), which encourages
States to strengthen national systems for monitoring and
control in the sphere of non-proliferation.

Russia calls for the full implementation of the
resolution by all countries, taking into account the
comprehensive long-term nature of its requirements.
We welcome the work done by the 1540 Committee
and its experts during the reporting period. In particular,
we note the adoption of the report on the annual review
of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), which
takes stock of the progress achieved in 2011 and sets
new objectives. We welcome the determination of its
Chair to give the activities of the Committee a regular
and systemic nature.

The Committee must continue prioritizing issues
related to the provision of assistance to States in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) by playing a
coordinating role in the activities of the international
community towards that end. For our part, we are
willing to continue actively to support efforts in the
area of assistance, including in the context of our
cooperation on issues related to resolution 1540 (2004)
with the States members of the Commonwealth of
Independent States. We hope that very soon we will see
the establishment of a group of experts for that
Committee and that it will once again enjoy full expert
support.

In conclusion, I should like to note that the idea
of the Secretary-General to create the post of a special
representative on counter-terrorism issues merits
thorough consideration by the States Members of the
United Nations during the upcoming review of the
Global Strategy. Its implementation could enhance the
coordination of the activities carried out in this sphere
of the numerous organs both within the United Nations
system and outside. However, it should not lead to any
changes in the mandates of those organs or be
detrimental to them. That applies above all to the
counter-terrorist structures of the Security Council.

