The President (interpretation from Russian): As this
is the first meeting of the Security Council for the month
of July, I should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute,
on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Antonio
Monteiro, Permanent Representative of Portugal to the
United Nations, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of June 1998, and to his delegation.
I am sure I speak for all members of the Security Council
in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Monteiro
and his colleagues for the great diplomatic skill with which
the Council's business was conducted last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Croatia

Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Police Support Group (S/1998/500)

The President (interpretation from Russian): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Croatia, in which she requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Greie' Polic'
(Croatia) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (interpretation from Russian): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Police
Support Group, document S/ 1998/500.

I should like to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document S/1998/589, which contains the text of
 

a letter dated 29 June 1998 from the Charge d'affaires ad
interim of the Permanent Mission of Croatia to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General of 11 June 1998
(S/1998/500) pursuant to its resolution 1145 (1997)
of 19 December 1997.

"The Security Council notes that the overall
security situation in the Danube region is relatively
stable. It also notes that the generally satisfactory
performance of the Croatian police in the region is
largely due to comprehensive monitoring by the
United Nations Police Support Group and the special
attention paid to the situation by the Ministry of the
Interior of the Republic of Croatia. However, the
Council is concerned that, despite the large presence
of the Croatian police, ethnically-related incidents,
evictions and housing intimidation cases have not
been stopped, and that such incidents have increased
in the recent period.

"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern that a large number of Serb residents and
displaced persons have emigrated from the Republic
of Croatia since late 1996, mainly because of
continued security incidents, ethnically-related
intimidation, a dire economic situation, bureaucratic
hurdles, discriminatory legislation and a stalled
return programme. A continuation of this trend could
have a seriously negative effect on the restoration of
a multiethnic society in the Republic of Croatia. The
Council, therefore, welcomes the adoption by the
Government of Croatia, on 20 June 1998, of a
nationwide 'Programme for the Return and
Accommodation of Displaced Persons, Refugees and
Resettled Persons' (S/1998/589) and calls for its
prompt and full implementation at all levels,
including the abolition of discriminatory property
laws and the establishment of effective mechanisms
allowing owners to recover their property. It stresses
the importance of the prompt and full
implementation of the Programme on Reconciliation
at all levels throughout Croatia and of preventing
and responding to incidents of harassment and
unlawful evictions.

 
"The Security Council reiterates the continuing
obligations of the Government of Croatia under the
Basic Agreement on the Region of Eastern Slavonia,
Baranja and Western Sirmium (S/1995/951, annex) as
well as under international conventions and other
agreements. It notes with satisfaction that the
Government of Croatia has met the majority of its
obligations concerning the provision of public services
and employment Within the public sector, set out in
the Basic Agreement. The Council, however, reiterates
that a number of obligations have yet to be fulfilled in
such areas as the implementation of the Convalidation
Law and the Amnesty Law, the functioning of local
municipalities and the permanent funding of the Joint
Council of Municipalities. In this regard, the Council
stresses the significance of the Article 11 Commission,
formed under the provisions of article 11 of the Basic
Agreement, as a key instrument in encouraging the
Government of Croatia to meet its obligations fully
and in underscoring continued international
commitment to the successful completion of peaceful
reintegration.

"The Security Council calls upon the
Government of Croatia to improve police response to
ethnically-related incidents, evictions and housing
intimidation cases and to take other measures to
strengthen public confidence in the police, including
through public information and police preventive
action. In this context, the Council stresses the
importance of the implementation of the guidelines
issued by the Ministry of the Interior on 9 January
1998 and the institution of a community policing
programme by the Ministry.

 

"The Security Council fully supports the
activities of the United Nations Police Support
Group and the United Nations Liaison Office in
Zagreb. It welcomes the decision of the OSCE
Permanent Council of 25 June 1998 to deploy
civilian police monitors to assume, from 15 October
1998, the responsibilities of the United Nations
Police Support Group. It also welcomes the
invitation by the Representative of the Secretary-
General to the Head of the OSCE Mission in Croatia
to begin planning for the intended transfer of the
police monitoring function in the region to the
OSCE. It supports the establishment of a timetable
for the handover of the functions of the Support
Group to the OSCE and agrees with the intention of
the Secretary-General to reduce gradually the
number of civilian police monitors, under the
conditions specified in his report. The Council looks
forward to a report by the Secretary-General by mid-
September detailing the arrangements for the
termination of the Support Group mandate by 15
October 1998."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1998/19.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.20 pm.

