Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I am pleased to brief the
Security Council in my capacity as Chair of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission. I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Aristides Ocante da Silva, Minister of
National Defence of Guinea-Bissau, and to His
Excellency Mr. Manuel Domingos Augusto, Secretary
of State for Political Affairs of the Ministry of External
Relations of Angola and Chair of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP). I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, for his briefing and for his work
as head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS).

Since I last briefed the Council (see S/PV.6489),
the configuration has continued to closely follow
political developments in Guinea-Bissau and has
directed its efforts towards generating synergies that
could be instrumental to security sector reform. The
configuration also continues to support the country's
efforts to consolidate the rule of law, to combat drug
trafficking and impunity and to address social issues, in
particular concerning youth and women. We have not
lost sight of the importance of encouraging job creation
and of promoting a more vigorous economy as crucial
elements of an integrated peacebuilding strategy.

The situation in Guinea-Bissau has improved in
many areas, as we have just heard from the briefing by
Mr. Mutaboba. On the political side, it is important to
note that stability has taken hold. The current
11-39059
Government has been the most stable and long-lasting
since 1997. The Government continues to show
commitment to security sector reform. After the
endorsement of the road map of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP)
in March, a task force was created to oversee its
implementation. The basic legislation setting the
structure of the armed forces has been approved.

The configuration acknowledges the initiatives
taken by international partners to support security
sector reform and encourages further external
assistance to ensure the successful implementation of
the road map in Guinea-Bissau. In that connection, the
launching of a pension fund for the military is certainly
one of the main security sector reform priorities in
Guinea-Bissau. In that regard, at yesterday's meeting
of the configuration, we welcomed the announcement
by Minister Aristides Ocante da Silva that the
Government of Guinea-Bissau will allocate financial
resources to the fund in the amount of $4.5 million.
That is a clear indication of the political will to move
forward on the reform. We also welcomed the pledge
of $63 million to security sector reform in Guinea-
Bissau during the ECOWAS summit. It is important
that international partners come together to build upon
those pledges and to make the fund operational as soon
as possible.

There have also been positive developments in
the fight against drug trafficking. The Government of
Guinea-Bissau has implemented its commitments
under the West African Coast Initiative by appointing
the Management Board and the Chair of the
Transnational Crime Unit (TCU). The TCU in Bissau is
expected to move into its new premises by the end of
the month. Another positive step was the adoption by
the Council of Ministers of the 2011-2014 operational
plan to fight drug trafficking and organized crime,
conceived by the Ministry of Justice with the support
of UNIOGBIS and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime.

It is now essential that the international
community provide timely and steady support in terms
of technical expertise and financial resources to make
the TCU operational so as to ensure tangible progress
on the basis of common and shared responsibility,
whereby the countries of origin, transit and final
destination join efforts in the fight against the scourge
of drugs.

On the economic side, the implementation of
public administration and public finance reforms,
including efforts to improve fiscal discipline, have
yielded positive results. A growth rate of
approximately 4 per cent is forecast for 2011, which is
also due to the positive prospects for cashew nut
exports and public infrastructure works. After a visit to
Bissau last March, the International Monetary Fund
noted that the country's performance had been
satisfactory and that the prospects for compliance with
benchmarks in the Extended Credit Facility programme
for January to December 2011 were promising. In
addition, under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Debt Initiative, the Paris Club creditors announced
$283 million in debt relief for Guinea-Bissau last May.

The international community needs to encourage
and to support such positive developments, which
reflect a clear political commitment on the part of
Guinea-Bissau to the implementation of the necessary
measures to consolidate peace in the country. In that
context, we welcome the approval by the
Peacebuilding Fund Joint Steering Committee of the
revised version of the 2011-2013 Peacebuilding
Priority Plan for Guinea-Bissau. We expect the timely
disbursement of up to $16.8 million in support of
security sector reform, political dialogue and
reconciliation, as well as job creation as a peace
dividend, with particular attention to women and
youth.

We must take advantage of the positive
momentum and persevere in our collective efforts to
support Guinea-Bissau as it addresses key
peacebuilding challenges. National authorities must
steadily pursue efforts to fully restore international
confidence. In turn, international partners should look
beyond the setbacks of the past and should support
long-term political and economic stability in the
country. We call on all stakeholders to take advantage
of the progress made so far and to lend enhanced
support for sustainable peace and development in
Guinea-Bissau.

