I would like to thank High Representative Valentin Inzko for his twenty- fourth regular report to the Secretary-General (S/2020/1052, annex) since assuming his post in 2009. We commend his work, in particular, as the tasks that he tackles remain closer to 100 per cent, although his team's size and budget have considerably decreased in recent years. Estonia would like to state its full support for a robust and effective Office of the High Representative, which is necessary in order to fulfil its mandated responsibilities. In addition, we align ourselves with the statement submitted by the European Union (EU) (annex XVIII). The European Union-led Operation Althea is a strong contributor to the country's work in maintaining a safe and secure environment, and we fully support its continued executive mandate. It is of concern that the authorities of the Republika Srpska have continued divisive rhetoric and resorted to frequent actions targeting the country's sovereignty, territorial integrity and even its Constitution. All political parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina should refrain from any actions or policies that could destabilize the country. It is high time to put aside differences and focus on uniting to face the common challenges. As we learned from the High Representative's last report (S/2020/1052, annex), the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has disrupted the economy of Bosnia and Herzegovina, with serious and potentially long-lasting consequences. Estonia stands in strong support of the EU's solidarity with the Western Balkans and its mobilization of a substantial financial support package of €3.3 billion to help the region to overcome the COVID-19 crisis. We commend the work and support of all others who have provided assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina during the pandemic, such as the United Nations Resident Coordinator and the United Nations Development Programme. This July, we commemorated the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Srebrenica genocide. The downplaying of that tragic historical event in any way is unacceptable. Spreading nationalist and provocative rhetoric, denying war crimes or glorifying convicted war criminals is not in line with the country's Euro-Atlantic perspective. We welcome the adoption of the Revised National War Crimes Processing Strategy by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers and encourage the authorities to implement it. A functioning Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court is of vital strategic importance for the country, and we fully support its members, particularly its international judges. We call on all political parties in the country to implement the important decisions of the aforementioned Constitutional Court and the European Court of Human Rights. We strongly underline the need for the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities to work towards strengthening the rule of law, fight against corruption and implement binding judicial decisions. We hope that the municipal elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina on 15 November will be free and fair. We welcome the progress made during the past few months, in particular the adoption of legislative amendments for the local elections in Mostar, which must lead to their organization on 20 December, for the first time since 2008. That is a major achievement. Estonia is certain that Bosnia and Herzegovina's future is adjoined with the Euro-Atlantic path, in line with the legitimate aspiration of its citizens. We stress the importance of continuing with the implementation of the 14 key priorities of the European Commission's opinion on Bosnia and Herzegovina's application for membership of the European Union. To move forward, all the country's political leaders should deliver concrete results and implement fundamental reforms. On the occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the signing of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, we call on all levels of Government to work in solidarity and unity.
