Mr. Cohen (United States of America): We
welcome the President in the Security Council today;
it is excellent to have him back with us. We thank
Special Representative Ruiz Massieu for his briefing.
We look forward to his leadership as we begin the next
chapter in the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia. We also thank former Special Representative
Jean Arnault for his outstanding contributions to the
peace process in Colombia. We warmly welcome our
close partners in the Colombian Government, High
Counsellor for Post-Conflict Archila and Foreign
Minister Trujillo Garcia. We thank them for joining
us today.

On 24 November, Colombians commemorated
the second anniversary of the Final Peace Agreement.
Since the signing of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace,
Colombia has been an inspiration for peace, not just in
the region, but around the world. The gains of this peace
are irrefutable. Over the past two years, Colombians have
put aside over a half-century of fighting, held peaceful
and inclusive elections, set up transitional-justice
institutions and extended development and governance
to remote areas of the country.

We believe the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia has been vital to this success, and we
welcome the Colombian Government's support for the
United Nations. Despite this progress, now is not the
time to become complacent, as evidenced by the deadly
car bombing in Bogota last week. We strongly condemn
this attack and offer our condolences to the victims
and their families. Ensuring meaningful justice and
accountability for those responsible for serious crimes
committed during so many years of armed conflict is
vital to reconciliation, as is the need to tackle violence
and poverty in the conflict-affected areas.

We remain concerned about the persistent instability
and the violence related to illicit activities, security
vacuums and a lack of meaningful State presence in
so many rural areas. We trust that the Government will
continue its efforts to protect vulnerable populations
and human rights defenders, and to expand its presence
in conflict-affected areas so as to keep illegal armed
groups and criminal organizations from replacing the
Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comun and
creating a new source ofviolence. Effective military and
civilian agencies that provide security and Government
services in remote areas are critical to sustained peace.
We encourage the Government to continue its efforts
to protect, support and empower displaced Colombians.

President Duque well knows the challenges that
face Colombia. We are encouraged by his strong resolve
and his Government's partnership with the United
States on matters ranging from counter-narcotics and
security to the humanitarian response to the Venezuela
regional crisis.

The success of the peace accord and counter-
narcotics efforts are intrinsically linked. We are
committed to partnering with our Colombian friends
to dismantle criminal organizations and to curtail
narcotrafficking. In the United States, President Trump
has made substance abuse prevention a priority for his
Administration, issued a global call to action on the
world drug problem and chaired a high-level event on
counter-narcotics during the high-level week here at the
United Nations in September last year.

The United States continues to work with the
Colombian Government to cut coca cultivation and
cocaine production in Colombia by half by the end
of 2023. Together we can achieve sustainable results
for the people of both countries through increased
resources, the effective use of all available tools and an
integrated whole-of-Government approach.

Colombia has shown its strength as a regional
leader. The United States is grateful for Colombia's
generosity in hosting more than 1.1 million Venezuelans
fleeing the man-made crisis in their country. We are
proud to support Colombia's response to the crisis
by committing $92 million to assist the Venezuelan
people and the communities hosting them in Colombia,
including $55 million in humanitarian aid and more than
$37 million in bilateral development funding. We have
also provided more than $39 million in humanitarian
assistance for the protection of and assistance to
Colombians forcibly displaced throughout the region,
including internally displaced persons inside Colombia.

The United States stands firmly with President
Duque and the people of Colombia as they continue
to preserve the hard-won peace and build a strong and
prosperous future for generations to come.

