Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for her briefing, which has
given us an overview of what has taken place since
2006 and the creation of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT). The representative
of the European Union will shortly make a statement,
and France associates itself with that statement.

I wish to make a few comments. I am pleased to
note that the Secretary-General's report (S/2010/522)
and the statement by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General have characterized the situation in
Timor-Leste as calm. The political and security
stability in the country is a result of the responsible
positions taken by the elected officials in the
Government and the opposition. What better proof can
there be of the political maturity gained by the
Timorese and of the solidity of their young institutions.

As we progress beyond tensions and violence we
must keep in mind the goal of peacebuilding in Timor-
Leste. From that standpoint we can only be encouraged
by the controlled transfer of the duties with regard to
law and order to the national police force in Timor-
Leste. The transfer has been carried out in 10 out of the
13 districts without seeing an increase in incidents in
those areas. The remaining transfers in Dili and in the
border districts must not be carried out in haste. They
must be done based on criteria established by local
authorities and the United Nations.

This process is accompanied by a progressive
reduction in the number of United Nations police
officers deployed individually and that reduction is to
be pursued in 2011. The drawdown should be
supported through technical assistance and training.
Strengthening police capacity is a priority but we must
not lose sight of the fact that in the medium term all
security sectors must benefit from these efforts.

Peace will only take root if the Timorese have
faith in their justice system. In particular, fighting
impunity for crimes carried out in the past is an
essential condition for lasting reconciliation. The
certification process of Timorese police officers is
incomplete, and there are some 200 cases still pending.
Moreover, the Secretary-General's report points out
that there has been little progress in trying those
individuals responsible for crimes and human rights
violations committed during the incidents of 2006. We
hope that those efforts will be pursued in line with the

Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation.
We have taken note, as have others, of the decision by
the President of Timor-Leste to commute the sentences
of some individuals who are responsible for political
violence. Although that decision is constitutional, it
does not send a good signal. We therefore encourage
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
remain actively involved in this matter, in accordance
with the mandate entrusted to her by the Security
Council.

We have also noted the economic forecasts
contained in the report. They show that there is
impressive growth of 10.4 per cent, and a drop in the
poverty level as well. It is encouraging that in this
context the Timorese authorities have set their
long-term priorities within a national development
strategic plan, which is now, thanks to the Prime
Minister himself, under consideration throughout the
country.

The year 2012 will see the end of the UNMIT
mandate in its present configuration and it will also see
general elections. The United Nations must be able to
have on site the material and human resources required
to facilitate the holding of the elections. They must
take account of that important deadline in their security
transfer strategy. The renewal of the UNMIT mandate
in February 2011 should also lead us to reflect on the
future presence of the United Nations. We are open to
the modalities that must reflect the progressive
assumption by the Timorese of the tasks now being
carried out by UNMIT and the objective of lasting
peacebuilding.

The upcoming Security Council visit to Dili, in
which we will participate, will be another opportunity
for us to see how much has been done and to reflect on
the future relationship between Timor-Leste and the
United Nations.

I wish to conclude by reaffirming France's
support for UNMIT and for Special Representative.
Ms. Haq had just assumed her responsibilities in
February 2010. Since then she has shown how skilled
she is and she has met all our expectations. We need
her skill and good will, because the months to come
will be crucial for the future of Timor-Leste and also
for the United Nations and its capacity to bring a
country to peace and stability.

