Mr. Bamrungphong (Thailand): I would first like
to thank Argentina for convening today's open debate
on the important issue of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, and for the comprehensive concept
note (S/2013/447, annex). I would also like to extend
our special thanks to the Secretary-General, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
the Director for International Law and Cooperation of
the International Committee of the Red Cross for their

informative briefings.

The concept ofthe protection of civilians has a firm
foundation in international humanitarian law. However,
a shared understanding among all the actors involved is
key to its successful implementation. Thailand hopes
that this debate will provide us with an opportunity
to better understand the concept and discuss how to
translate it into effective action.

Killing, injuring or displacing innocent civilians in
situations ofarmed conflict is unacceptable, particularly
when they are deliberately targeted or subject to
blatant violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law. Thailand shares that concern and
therefore supports the efforts of the Security Council
and the international community to protect civilians.
There will never be legitimate reasons for targeted
attacks on civilians, but especially not when they are
for strategic military or political purposes. Thailand
calls on all parties to conflicts, including non-State
armed groups, to strictly uphold international human-
rights and humanitarian law and to implement all the
relevant Security Council resolutions. The military
code of conduct and the principles of distinction,
proportionality and precaution in attacks must be
respected at all times and in all circumstances. In order
to ensure the safety ofinnocent populations, all parties
to an armed conflict must refrain from using civilian
premises.

However, we still regularly witness the violation of
international law and universal principles. In order to
combat such violations, the international community
must send a strong message to those who commit violence
against innocent people, especially the most vulnerable
groups, and must hold them accountable. At the national
level, Governments must raise awareness about respect
for human rights and the protection of civilians, put in
place human-rights mechanisms, strengthen judicial
systems and institutions and incorporate international
legal principles and the concept of the protection of
civilians into the curriculums of military academies.

In situations of armed conflict, host Governments
and all parties to a conflict must give particular attention
to humanitarian assistance. Timely and unimpeded
humanitarian access to affected civilian populations,
regardless oftheir social, ethnic or political affiliations,
is vital. It is essential that the international community
and the United Nations explore every possible means
of delivering aid effectively to affected areas. Host
Governments must shorten lengthy customs procedures
and work shoulder to shoulder with their partners, as
well as make full use of civil society networks, in order
to ensure that humanitarian supplies reach those in
distress. At the same time, humanitarian work must be
done in a transparent and neutral manner.
Thailand is also concerned about increasing
casualties among humanitarian actors and the
destruction of essential social facilities, particularly
hospitals, school and drinking-water resources.
Attacks on humanitarian actors and facilities are clear
violations of international humanitarian law. They are
unacceptable. Thailand calls on all parties to conflict to
ensure that humanitarian personnel and their facilities
are protected and their work facilitated.

Peacekeeping operations with a mandate to protect
represent important tools for protecting civilians
in armed conflicts. Peacekeepers must therefore be
well trained, with a knowledge of international law
and an understanding of other cultures. It is also
important that peacekeepers have clear mandates, clear
responsibilities, a clear chain of command and a clear
code of conduct on the protection of civilians under
specific circumstances, particularly when the use of
force is necessary to ensure the mission's credibility
and success. Predeployment training must focus on all
such issues. The Council must also assess situations on
the ground and review the scope of mission mandates
on a regular basis.

No one should have to experience an armed conflict
or continue to fall victim to them. The best way to protect
civilians is to prevent conflict. I would therefore like to
reiterate Thailand's continuing readiness to contribute
and render all necessary support to international
efforts to prevent conflict and promote the protection
of civilians.

