Mr. D'Alotto (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation wishes to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate on the important question
of the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We
would like also to reiterate to the Secretary-General
our appreciation for his fourth report on this matter
(5/2004/431), as well as to express our support for the
recommendations it contains.

The six months that have passed since the
previous open Security Council debate on this item
have witnessed the fulfilment of the most pessimistic
forecasts on the situation of civilians in armed conflicts
in various regions. Given that scenario, we would like
to reiterate that no security issues can prevail over the
primary responsibility of States to comply with the
norms of international humanitarian law contained in
the Geneva Conventions and their Additional
Protocols. The fight against terrorism, a priority of the
international community which my country shares,
must be waged in respect for international law and
human rights. We reaffirm our support for the Security
Council's cooperation with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in
promoting unfailing respect for human rights that are
seen as inalienable, in a context in which,
unfortunately, we continue to hear accusations of
steady movement in the opposite direction. The
obligation to respect the civilian population within the
framework of international humanitarian law also
extends to other non-State actors seeking international
legitimacy, whatever the justness of their claims may
be.

Attacks against civilian populations or other
protected persons and the commission of systematic,
flagrant and widespread violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law in situations of
armed conflict can constitute a threat to international
peace and security and require appropriate
consideration and response by the international
community. Here, we would like to recall that the
Council has expressed its readiness in that regard to
consider situations affecting refugees and internally
displaced persons, and when necessary to take the
necessary steps to create a secure environment for
civilians endangered by conflict, as well as to consider
the appropriateness and feasibility of establishing
temporary security zones and corridors to protect
civilians and provide humanitarian assistance.

In a significant number of conflicts, humanitarian
personnel continue to face obstacles in discharging
their tasks. Safe and unimpeded access by
humanitarian personnel, including those locally
recruited, to civilians in armed conflicts is essential.
States affected by conflict as well as neighbouring
States must cooperate with the United Nations to
facilitate such access. We condemn the ongoing
aggression that humanitarian personnel continue to
suffer, and we advocate the expansion of the protection
given under the 1994 Convention on the Safety and
Security of United Nations and Associated Personnel
as well as ensuring that the Convention become
universal. We support efforts within the United Nations
system to improve practical aspects of the safety and
security of personnel, a matter currently being
considered by the Fifth Committee of the General
Assembly.

As we reiterate our deep concern and
condemnation of the harmful and widespread
consequences of armed conflict on civilians, we must
also refer specifically to the impact of armed conflict
on women, children and other vulnerable groups. In
this regard, it is crucial to adopt strategies to ensure
broader implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security, and resolution 1539
(2004), on children in armed conflict, among other
relevant norms.

As noted in the Secretary-General's report,
specific areas exist within a conflict on which action
can be undertaken at the regional level to protect
civilians. These include the question of refugees,
illegal trade in natural resources, smuggling,
disarmament and small arms trafficking. In that
context, regional organizations may have a role of
great value to play as they have a better understanding
of the local difficulties and a more realistic perception
of possible solutions. Here, we support the
recommendation on the establishment of a framework
within which the United Nations can engage more
systematically with regional organizations on
humanitarian issues such as protection and access.

During next year's debates on the occasion of the
fifth anniversary of the Millennium Declaration, we
will undoubtedly have an opportunity to analyse the
question of the responsibility to protect. In that
connection, we believe it necessary to give appropriate
consideration to proposals contained in the report of
the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and
Change (A/59/565), entitled "A more secure world: our
shared responsibility". At the same time, it is essential
and relevant also to underscore the responsibility borne
for military or other armed actions that harm civilian
populations.
Just two weeks before we once again join the
Council as a non-permanent member, Argentina would
like to reiterate its commitment to the daily task of
protecting civilians in armed conflict and to say that
we stand ready to work within the Council to ensure
full implementation of resolutions 1265 (1999) and
1296 (2000), bearing in mind the various tools that
exist, such as the aide-memoire (S/PRST/2003/27, annex) and the 10-point platform of action, to ensure
the effective protection of civilian populations and
respect for their essential rights.

