Mr. Richardson (United States of America): My
Government has always believed that the goal of peace in
the Middle East is one of vital interest to the international
community. This is a view we share with most members of
the international community, and I know it is deeply felt by
all Member States gathered together in this Chamber. The
terrorist outrage earlier today demonstrated just how real is
the threat posed by the enemies of peace. Only a few hours
ago, a bomb exploded in a crowded cafe in Tel Aviv,
killing at least three people and wounding many others,
including young children. As President Clinton said earlier
today in Helsinki, we strongly condemn this act of terror.
There is no place for terror or violence in the peace
process. No circumstances can justify the resort to violence
or terror against innocent civilians.

My Government welcomes the condemnation of this
tragic incident issued today by Chairman Arafat. As
President Clinton has also noted, there must be absolutely
no doubt in the minds of the friends or enemies of peace
that the Palestinian Authority is unalterably opposed to
terror and unalterably committed to preventing such acts. I
would also like to offer my personal condolences, and those
of the American people, to the families of the Israelis killed
or wounded in this deplorable crime.

During the Security Council's earlier debate on the
controversy over Har Homa/Jabal Abu Ghneim, and
throughout the subsequent debate in the General Assembly,
we all listened to the views of Member States at length and
in detail. The position of the United States should be clear
to all, so I will be brief. While my Government shares the
concerns expressed here and in the Assembly about the
decision of the Israeli Government to begin construction
at this site, we disagree on the best method of addressing
this situation and moving beyond the present controversy
in a way that will support the Middle East peace process.
That is why the United States must vote "no" on the draft
resolution before us.

Simply stated, the United States does not believe that
the Security Council or the General Assembly should be
in the business of inserting themselves into issues that the
negotiating partners have decided will be addressed in
their permanent status talks. Such interference can only
harden the positions of both sides, and make their work
even more difficult. In doing so, the Security Council
would add to existing tensions in the region, complicate
the efforts of all parties to get the negotiations back on a
productive track, and distract attention from the main
objective, which is making progress towards a peaceful,
prosperous Middle East.

No one should interpret the opposition of my
Government to this draft resolution as an expression of
support for the construction now going on at Har
Homa/Jabal Abu Ghneim. It is not. We have repeatedly
stated our belief that construction at this site is not helpful
to the peace process. As President Clinton, again, said
earlier, we would have preferred that this decision had not
been made. It undermines the trust and confidence so
badly needed in creating the appropriate environment for
successful negotiations, especially on the difficult issues
involved in the permanent status talks.

As I noted during our earlier debate on this subject,
the achievement of a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace in the Middle East requires an honest negotiating
process. The parties must take special care to avoid
pre-emptive actions that can be seen to prejudge the
outcome of negotiations, while working hard to nurture an
atmosphere of trust and confidence that will make
productive negotiations possible.

The decision on Har Homa/Jabal Abu Ghneim does
just the opposite. We regret that it was taken.

But this controversy will not be resolved by
interference from this Council, the General Assembly, or
any other outside party. It can only be resolved by the
parties themselves. They have demonstrated time and time
again in the nearly six years since the Madrid Conference,
at times of high hope and optimism as well as moments
of dark despair, that they can overcome the problems and
differences that divide them, and move forward. They

 

have done this by relying on their own reserves of strength
and determination, and on the active support and
encouragement of the international community. Today's
Council action lacks this spirit of support and
encouragement.

Frankly, rather than addressing this issue in a forum
that is inappropriate for the real work at hand, let us
concentrate instead on finding a way to support Israelis and
Palestinians as they try to cope with a difficult situation and
to restore the confidence, trust, hope and dialogue essential
to resolving differences, reaching and implementing
agreements, and forging a just and lasting peace.

