Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me, Mr. President, to express to you and to your
friendly country, Cameroon, our sincere thanks and
appreciation. We are pleased to take part in this
meeting under your presidency to discuss an issue of
such great importance to the African continent - an
issue that threatens its children, hundreds of thousands
of whose lives are claimed each year in wars and
conflicts as a result of the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons.

The effectiveness and the credibility of the
Security Council are derived not only from its being
the mechanism that was chosen by the entire world
more than half a century ago to maintain international
peace and security, but also from its ability to address
new challenges to peace and security, to respond to
them and to develop procedures to confront them. The
Council has become aware of the danger posed in
recent years by the illicit proliferation of and
trafficking in small arms and light weapons, of their
impact on humanity and of the urgent need to face this
challenge seriously and effectively, in a manner
commensurate with the danger.

As the Council has considered the changes and
planned its activities accordingly, the General
Assembly has taken concrete steps to consider the legal
and political aspects of the issue of small arms and
light weapons and the dangers that they pose. The
Assembly has done that through the creation of more
than one panel of experts, the holding of the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in all Its Aspects, and the adoption
there of an ambitious Programme of Action that we
should make every effort to implement over the next
four years.

I should like to express my delegation's
appreciation for the valuable report of the Secretary-
General on small arms (S/2002/1053) and for the
recommendations that it contains. On behalf of the
Egyptian delegation, I should like to make a few
remarks on the issue now before the Council.

First, the fact that hundreds of thousands of
people fall victim each year to small arms and light
weapons clearly makes it necessary for the Security
Council to address the issue of the proliferation of such
weapons within the framework of its main
responsibility: the maintenance of international peace
and security.

Secondly, the new measures adopted in that
regard by the Council over the past few years - such
as the establishment of independent panels of experts
and of monitoring mechanisms for implementing arms
embargoes - have had limited success in dealing with
the illicit trade in and the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons. That limited success can be
attributed in some cases to the practical difficulties of
accurately monitoring arms exports and to an absence
in the Council of the political will to enforce certain
embargoes and to verify their implementation - as had
been the case with regard to Somalia for the past 10
years, until the Council finally took measures to ensure
the implementation of the arms embargo imposed
against that country under resolution 733 (1992).

Thirdly, the Egyptian delegation endorses the
Secretary-General's recommendation that the exchange
of information between the Security Council and the
General Assembly be improved in order to bring about
better coordination between the strategies of the two
bodies in the field of small arms and light weapons,
giving due consideration to the differences between the
role and mandate of the Council, on the one hand, and
the more comprehensive role played by the Assembly,
on the other.

(spoke in Arabic)

Fourthly, there is no doubt that, in addition to the
adoption of specific measures to deal with the excess
of small arms and light weapons and their destruction,
the Security Council should include in the mandates of
peacekeeping operations clear provisions with regard
to the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
into civilian life of former combatants.

Egypt recommends that the committee on
peacekeeping operations of the General Assembly
should look into the possibility of promoting the
United Nation's role in the DDR programmes and in
financing activities through the budgets of
peacekeeping operations.

In conclusion, the delegation of Egypt fully
endorses the Secretary-General's recommendation
urging the Security Council to give more attention to
the implementation of arms embargoes and arms
exports to regions and countries that face armed
conflicts or are actually undergoing them, in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter of The
United Nations. It should also consider the possibility
of adopting certain measures against countries that
deliberately violate Security Council resolutions on
arms embargoes.

The Security Council has an important role to
play in the field of small arms and light weapons, in
light of its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security in accordance with
Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations. While
we stress the responsibility of the Security Council in
this regard, we would like to draw attention, once
again, to the natural right of States, individually or
collectively, to self-defence, and to the right to self-
determination for all peoples, particularly those under
foreign occupation.

