Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The Chinese delegation would like to thank Special Envoy Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Ambassador King, Chair of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), for their briefings. China has been closely following the security, political and humanitarian situations in Yemen. We commend the United Nations for its vigorous efforts to advance the political process and improve the humanitarian situation in Yemen. We support the 2140 Committee and the Panel of Experts in carrying out their mandated work. Recently, there have been fighting in several areas in Yemen and an escalation of military operations, which is of concern. At the same time, we note that, against that backdrop, the Yemeni Government and the Houthi representative recently reached an agreement in Amman, the capital of Jordan, on a large-scale prisoner exchange. That demonstrates that both sides are willing and able to ease tensions in Yemen. China welcomes that development and commends the efforts of both the United Nations and the International Committee of the Red Cross. We hope that the prisoner release will take place as soon as possible. We also call on all parties to the conflict to engage in broad dialogue and consultations in order to make progress with regard to a ceasefire, the cessation of violence and the building of mutual trust, among other elements. Despite the many challenges, the political settlement of the Yemeni issue should continue. All parties in Yemen should strive to relaunch the United Nations-led comprehensive political settlement process at an early date. The conflict in Yemen has been continuing for five years, during which all parties have paid a heavy price.In the past two years, after difficult negotiations, the parties reached the Stockholm Agreement and the Riyadh agreement. Those outcomes should be commended and the political commitments made must be fulfilled by all parties in order to maintain the momentum for a political settlement. The situation in Al-Hudaydah remains tense. We support facilitating the work of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement in monitoring the ceasefire and fulfilling its mandate. We urge all parties to cooperate with the Mission. The implementation of the Riyadh agreement has entered its second phase, which has a direct impact on the formation of a coalition Government and the next stage of political negotiations. We hope that all signatories to the agreement will implement the consensus in military, security and other key areas. In that process, it is imperative to pay attention to the views of the countries of the region and leverage their roles. Parties to the conflict in Yemen should focus on the future of the country and the interests of the people, avoid an escalation of hostilities and jointly safeguard the country's sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity. The humanitarian situation in Yemen is grim and deserves serious attention. All parties in Yemen should fully cooperate with the humanitarian relief operations of the United Nations and relevant agencies, avoid inflicting civilian casualties during military operations and avert the more serious humanitarian crisis that could result from a lack of humanitarian access. The humanitarian situation has affected all aspects of people's lives - the country's currency and prices are unstable; food and supplies of drinking water are insufficient and diseases such as cholera are not effectively prevented or treated. Last year, the country also suffered from plagues of locusts, which seriously affected its agricultural production. China is deeply sympathetic to the suffering of the Yemeni people and has provided them with assistance through multilateral and bilateral channels. We advocate the promotion of peace and stability through development in countries affected by conflict. We hope that the international community, in addition to providing relief supplies to Yemen, will also support the country's development and reconstruction by helping to stabilize prices and providing support for education, employment and other economic and social needs. The unity of the Security Council is an essential prerequisite for a political resolution of the Yemeni issue. All parties should enhance communication, overcome their differences, work towards consensus and create favourable conditions for a political settlement. On the question of sanctions, China always takes the position that they are not an end in themselves. The Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014) should play a constructive role in promoting the political settlement of the Yemeni issue. China is not in favour of introducing complicated issues into the question of sanctions, since that would only undermine the unity of the Council.
