Mr. Yahya (Malaysia): At the outset, allow me to
express my delegation's appreciation to you, Sir, and to
the delegation of Bangladesh for convening this open
meeting of the Security Council to revisit this very
important subject of the prevention of armed conflict,
which the Council deliberated in the month of July last
year

I should also like to commend the Secretary-
General for his important report, which reviews the
progress that has been achieved in developing the
conflict-prevention capacity of the Organization. The
report also contains specific recommendations on how
the efforts of the United Nations system in this field
could be further enhanced, which my delegation
particularly welcomes. Much has been said, not only
today, on this particular subject. My delegation's
statement will be relatively brief, since we have
addressed the issue in a substantive manner on
previous occasions before the Council.
My delegation agrees on the need for the United
Nations to embark on preventive diplomacy and
preventive action as a far better and more cost-effective
approach, financially as well as in human terms, than
mounting any operation or activity after a conflict has
erupted. We also agree on the need for greater
coordination and cooperation on the part of the entire
United Nations system in the area of conflict
prevention, including ways of enhancing its interaction
and, particularly in respect of the mobilization of
resources, in developing long-term conflict-prevention
and peace-building strategies.

Malaysia supports the efforts that the United
Nations, regional, subregional and other international
organizations have undertaken to make conflict
prevention a priority. We are pleased to note that the
Secretary-General continues to pursue these noble
efforts alongside these organizations to further enhance
a comprehensive approach by drawing on regional
preventive strategies. Better coordination with these
groups will only strengthen the capabilities of the
United Nations, including the Security Council. More
frequent contacts between the Council and the leaders
of the regional and subregional organizations would
provide useful opportunities to exchange information
and examine situations in which preventive action
might be deemed necessary and the involvement of the
Security Council desirable.

In any meaningful discussion by this Council on
the prevention of conflict, one cannot but also address
the issue of the Middle East, especially the Palestinian
question and the occupied territories, including
Jerusalem. The plight of civilians caught in conflict in
the area, particularly the Palestinian civilians, is
pertinent to our discussion today. We are all aware that
the conflict is the most protracted one since the
establishment of this Organization, and the situation
there demands an international presence, namely, the
United Nations. It is a matter of deep regret to my
delegation that earlier initiatives by the non-aligned
members of the Council to prevent further conflict
through the establishment of a United Nations
monitoring force were not successful, resulting in an
increasing number of deaths and injuries, mostly on the
Palestinian side. We cannot turn a blind eye to
instances of foreign occupation and the effect that such
occupation has on regional and international peace and
security. We strongly believe that the presence of a
United Nations or international force to monitor the
situation on the ground would have been a tangible
manifestation of this Council's concern for conflict
prevention. Malaysia once again urges the Council to
give serious consideration to the establishment and
dispatch of such a force.

My delegation welcomes the Secretary-General's
intention to initiate a practice of providing periodic
regional or subregional reports to the Security Council
on threats to international peace and security. It is my
delegation's earnest hope that in coming up with such
periodic reports, the Secretary-General will continue to
further consult the relevant regional or subregional
groups that would be in the best position to provide the
necessary information. We also believe that the Council
will continue to benefit tremendously from timely and
in-depth briefings by the Secretariat on potential
conflict situations brought to the attention of the
Council by the Secretary-General. To a certain extent,
Member States with the capability to do so can assist
the Secretariat through regular sharing of vital
information pertaining to threats to peace and security;
but this is, at best supplementary in nature and cannot
replace the Secretariat's own independent means of
information-gathering and analysis.

The activities just mentioned can be further
expanded by the use of the Council's fact-finding
missions. These missions, which vary in their purpose
and objective, can indeed have important preventive
effects. My delegation welcomes the suggestion made
by the Secretary-General that these fact-finding
missions could be further enhanced through
multidisciplinary expert support so that all substantive
areas could be incorporated into a comprehensive
prevention strategy. We also support the Secretary-
General's recommendation to set up expert working
groups of the Council to monitor volatile situations and
consider options to prevent the outbreak of violence.
My delegation also agrees with the recommendation to
expand the use of the Arria formula or other similar
arrangements for informal discussions and exchanges
of views outside or inside this Chamber. These
arrangements have been used before.

My delegation concurs with the point made by the
Secretary-General on page 3 of his report that "[t]he
time has come to translate the rhetoric of conflict
prevention into concrete action It is axiomatic that
effective preventive action will require sustained
political will and a long-term commitment of resources
by Member States and the United Nations system as a
whole if a genuine culture of prevention is to take root
in the international community." What is pertinent now
is for the Council to act on these important ideas and
proposals, lest it be accused of continued inaction on
this important subject. Let us all hope that this latest
report of Secretary-General as contained in document
S/200l/574 will mark a beginning in that direction.

