Mr. Thorns (Germany): Germany fully aligns
itself with the statement by the Deputy Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations. In addition, allow me to add some remarks in
my national capacity.

We are grateful for this timely debate and the
valuable initiative of the Jordanian presidency.

The United Nations system as a whole has an
important role to play in countering Violent extremism
and addressing its root causes.

By fighting poverty and educating young people,
the United Nations development organizations address
the root causes of radicalization. The Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and the United Nations
Centre for Counter-Terrorism play an important role
in developing concrete counter-terrorism strategies.
UN-Women empowers young women and mothers
to stand up to extremism in their families and their
environment. We feel, however, that more work needs
to be done to broaden the range of actors and to further
mainstream the fight against Violent extremism into the
whole United Nations family.

Our response to violent extremism needs to be
multifaceted. Robust military engagement, sanctions
and criminal prosecution are only one part of the
solution. If we want to stop recruitment and lead young
people back into our societies, prevention measures and
de-radicalization are of even greater importance.

Both of those aspects are crucial pillars of
Germany's counter-terrorism response. At the national
level, our Government works hand in hand with civil
society, religious institutions and non-governmental
organizations. One example of that comprehensive
approach is the programme Live Democracy, which
sets up regional prevention networks, gives advice to
former members ofradical communities and funds civil
society institutions that are active in the fight against
extremism. Those institutions encourage young people
to stand up against extremist ideas and to assist affected
peers.

At the international level, cooperation remains
crucial. Together with its partners, Germany continues
to counter the enabling structural conditions worldwide.
Our various initiatives in Africa and the Middle East
aim to create favourable socioeconomic conditions and
to mitigate factors that could lead to radicalization.
Youth employment, the social integration of refugees
and migrants, as well as mass educational programmes
are only some ofthe focus areas. A few examples ofthese
initiatives include our support for partner organizations
in Egypt to assist young people in finding a job, our
organization of education and after-school activities
for refugee children and youth in northern Iraq and
our support for youth groups and facilities, as well as
schools and professional training institutions in Mali.

Debating the important connection between youth
and their role in violent extremism is a good first step
in analysing where we stand and what is already being
done by different actors. However, now it is time to
act to ensure that the youth of today will not become
the terrorists of tomorrow. We need to work together
to bring endangered youth back into their families and
communities. And we need to disarm, de-radicalize
and reintegrate those young men and women who have
been seduced by extremist groups and terrorists.

Integrating youth into our collective efforts to
counter Violent extremism will be the best way of
building our society and promoting peace as a whole.

