Mr. Ipo (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this biannual
debate on the progress made with regard to the work
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, and we thank Mr. Carmel Agius and
Mr. Serge Brammertz, in their respective capacities as
President and Prosecutor of the International Residual
Mechanism, for their briefings. We have had the honour
of working with them on the Security Council and wish
them every success in implementing their mandate. We
also thank the delegation of Peru for the remarkable
work accomplished as Chair of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals.

My delegation commends the progress made in the
work of the Mechanism with regard to its judicial and
administrative activities, namely, those pertaining to
the enforcement of sentences, the protection of victims
and witnesses, and archives management. We welcome
the commitment of the President of the Mechanism to
guaranteeing the greatest transparency in the review of
requests for early release of persons convicted by the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and encourage the diligent establishment of conditions
to perform this task in certain cases, in accordance
with the recommendation in paragraph 10 of resolution
2422 (2018) of the Security Council. My country notes
with satisfaction the Mechanism's implementation
of the recommendations made by the Office of
Internal Oversight Services, which were established
in the evaluation and audit reports, and we urge the
Mechanism to continue its efforts aimed at improving
working conditions in order to increase its efficiency.

Despite the progress made, Cote d'Ivoire remains
concerned with the relentless number of challenges to be
addressed, particularly with regard to the cooperation
between Member States and the Mechanism and
the judicial cooperation among the countries of the
former Yugoslavia. My delegation stresses the need
to fight impunity and to that end urges Member
States to cooperate fully with the Mechanism in the
implementation of its mandate, in order to facilitate the
search, arrest and transfer of the fugitives, as outlined
in paragraph 10 ofresolution 1966 (2010). In this regard,
we appreciate the efforts made by the Mechanism to
locate and apprehend the last eight fugitives indicted by
the ICTR and would like to echo the recurrent appeals
of the court to Member States to comply with their
international legal obligations by providing necessary
assistance to that end.
My country also believes that judicial cooperation
among the countries of the former Yugoslavia is
an indispensable tool for the search and arrest of
perpetrators of war crimes who have found refuge
in neighbouring States. We therefore urge national
authorities to pool their efforts in the fight against
impunity by taking measures to improve and strengthen
judicial cooperation in the region.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its full
support for the Mechanism in its search for methods
and means to effectively accomplish its mission.

