Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President, allow me to begin by
congratulating you on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for August 2007. I cannot but
wholeheartedly thank the Permanent Representative of
the People's Republic of China, Ambassador Wang
Guangya, and the members of his delegation for the
able manner in which they led the Council in its work
during July.

I would also like to address Mr. Michael
Williams, the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, who is participating today in his last
briefing to the Security Council. I truly wish that his
new post will allow him to continue to make sincere
efforts to activate and promote a just and
comprehensive peace process in the Middle East
region.

We meet here today to discuss once again the
situation in the Middle East, an item that the continued
Israeli occupation has caused us to remain seized of.
For decades now, the Security Council has failed to
find a solution to end that occupation for reasons that
are known to everyone. Due to this failure, the Israeli
occupation of Arab lands has been transformed over
time from an Israeli military occupation and
annexation by force of the territories of others to
colonial, provocative and aggressive settler activity
based on fait accompli and on continued acts of
aggression, 24 hours a day, seven days a week, against
the Palestinian people and against our citizens in the
occupied Syrian Golan.

The Charter of the United Nations and the tenets
of international law consider the annexation or
acquisition of territories of others by force a criminal
act endangering international peace and security. The
United Nations International Law Commission has
confirmed this definition. Article 2 of the Charter of
the United Nations, in total complementarity with the
tenets of international law, exhorted its Members to
"refrain in their international relations from the threat
or use of force against the territorial integrity or
political independence of any state, or in any other
manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the United
Nations".

The Security Council, the General Assembly and
all other organs of the United Nations have adopted
hundreds of resolutions calling on Israel to end its
occupation of Arab territories. Regrettably, more than
40 years after Israel's occupation of Arab territories,
including Jerusalem and the Syrian Golan, the clear
picture on the horizon still speaks of Israel's rejection
of peace and its persistence in escalating acts of
aggression, its continued war crimes, its settlement
activities, its killing, terror, destruction, siege,
detention, imprisonment and continued building of the
separation wall.

These activities have been carried out in full view
of those who sing the praises of democracy and who
claim to be champions of human rights in other parts of
the world where the amount of human rights violations

is almost negligible in comparison to those committed
by Israel in the occupied Arab territories. This Israeli
policy, which is readily condoned by some and
deliberately protected by powerful States in the
Security Council, basically aims at keeping the
achievement of a just and comprehensive peace ever at
a distance.

In their recent summit in Riyadh, Arab leaders
relaunched the Arab Peace Initiative that was adopted
by the 2002 Beirut Summit. The Initiative confirmed
the Arab commitment to a just and comprehensive
peace as a strategic choice. It also confirmed that this
process is indivisible. Arab commitment to the
realization of a just and comprehensive peace must be
matched by a concomitant and serious commitment by
the Israeli Government and those who support it to the
achievement of that peace, including by compliance
with the resolutions of international legitimacy and
withdrawal from occupied territories as mandated by
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973).

Peace is a major political responsibility, the
weight of which can be felt only by those who truly
believe in it. We cannot talk about peace - this noble
word - in the context of a manoeuvring Israeli logic
of division, with its intention of circumventing the
necessary measures leading to such peace and Israel's
attempts to dwarf the noble objectives of a just and
comprehensive peace process on which the
international community pins its hopes.

Syria followed the events in the Gaza Strip
between our Palestinian brothers with great sorrow.
Syria insists on the need for Palestinians to overcome
the adverse repercussions of these serious
developments by addressing their differences through
direct dialogue among parties concerned with a View to
restoring Palestinian national unity in order to best
serve the goals and noble cause of their people. Syria
would stress that it would make every effort possible to
push toward the realization of this objective.

The Israeli military manoeuvres that are
continuing in the occupied Syrian Golan for the second
time in a couple of months - described by the Israeli
officials themselves as the largest in scale in years -
starkly testify to the Israeli indifference to and
disregard for the possible consequences of preparing to
wage new wars and of provocations and continued
occupation. The disquieting irony is that these Israeli
measures coincide with Israel's attempt to market the
claims of its commitment to peace while its military
machine continues to mobilize in an unprecedented
manner that runs totally counter to the will not to
escalate tensions and the will to work for peace.

The command of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force in Golan (UNDOF)
confirmed on 11 July 2007 that the tension along the
Syrian-Israeli border has reached its highest level in
years. The UNDOF command also confirmed that
Israel bears the full responsibility for this tension.
These unquestionably suspicious Israeli military moves
in the occupied Syrian Golan are cause for serious
concern, particularly when they are accompanied by
public threats by Israel politicians and leaders in the
Israeli army regarding the possibility of an outbreak of
war with the Syrian Arab Republic. This is associated
with Israel's continued attempts to consolidate and
expedite the settler activities in the occupied Syrian
Golan, the last instance of which was an attempt by the
Israeli Ministry of Tourism to grant new Syrian land -
an area of 80 dunums in the region of el-Bouteiha,
which is the southernmost point of occupied Syrian
Golan, at the intersection of the Jordanian, Syrian and
Palestinian borders - to build a tourist village.

Confirming Israel's intention to act against peace
and against returning land to its rightful owners,
Mr. Netanyahu, the Chairman of the Likud Party, made
a statement on 2 August 2007 to settlers in the Katzrin
settlement, which was built on the ruins of Qasrin, a
Syrian village, stating "Golan Heights is part and
parcel of the State of Israel and it is the most beautiful
piece of land in northern Israel". In addition,
statements have been made by Mr. Olmert, the Israeli
Prime Minister, in which he claimed that the Golan is
part and parcel of Israel and that it would remain in the
hands of Israelis as long as he remained the Prime
Minister of Israel.

Israel has proved yet again through such
irresponsible declarations that it is not really interested
in the peace process and that it continues to pursue a
policy of fait accompli by force and in a manner that
runs counter to the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations. Israel is also, through
statements like these, riding roughshod over repeated
Arab and Syrian calls for the realization of peace. This
proves beyond any doubt that Israel does not really
have the real political will to achieve peace.

On a larger scale, this means that the
international community must adopt measures that
force Israel to comply with international resolutions
and to sit in good faith at the negotiations table.

The Syrian people will not surrender and will not
submit to occupation, and wants negotiations that will
restore all of its occupied territories to the boundaries
of 4 June 1967.

My country follows closely the developments
regarding the call for an international peace conference
next fall. It believes that any such initiative should be
clearly defined, with clear terms of reference and
objectives. Such a process must also provide the
necessary guarantees for the implementation of
internationally legitimate resolutions and should be a
comprehensive and a sincere peace initiative that will
bring about the recovery of all usurped Arab lands. The
policy of wasting time and ignoring the legitimate
rights of people is only a prescription for further
failures in addressing the questions of our region, and
it only attempts to protect Israeli settlement and
expansion projects.

The Syrian Arab Republic has chosen
comprehensive and just peace as a strategic option on
the basis of the well-known terms of reference of
peace, which definitely include the return of all
occupied Arab lands, including the Syrian Golan, to the
lines of 4 June 1967 and the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as its
capital. The continued occupation runs counter to
peace and means more conflict, more victims and more
destruction.

As the President of the Syrian Arab Republic,
President Assad, stated recently:

"Israelis must learn that genuine peace that
continues is more meaningful than any other
option because other options are not permanent.
The cost of peace is hundreds of times less than
the cost of occupation and aggression, which
cannot continue forever."
That is the end of my statement. Allow me to
comment briefly on the statement we have just heard
by the Israeli representative.

The policy of State-sponsored terror pursued by
Israel is internationally documented. It is documented
by hundreds of relevant international institutions and
includes the slaughters, crimes, detentions,
imprisonments, the building of settlements, the
building of the racist wall of separation in the occupied
territories and the changing of demographics and of the
landmarks of Syrian and Palestinian territories.

The Israeli representative cannot hide the truth,
which is known to everyone. He cannot hide or cover
these facts through his unfounded claims. The truth to
which we refer is represented in the facts already cited
by Mr. Williams in his opening statement. The facts are
also corroborated by the commanders of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and
UNDOF, in addition to the advisory opinion issued by
the International Court of Justice and scores of
resolutions adopted by various United Nations
organizations, agencies, bodies and entities such as the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.

The Israeli State acts of terror have already
harmed UNIFIL personnel and international
representatives. It has stood in the way of
implementing many of the resolutions of the Security
Council. It also stood against attempts by the
Secretary-General to send fact-finding missions to
verify and testify to the Israeli crimes committed in
Jenin, Nablus and Qana. The Israeli policy of State-
sponsored terrorism has a long history. Israel refused to
receive the international committee that was sent to
investigate Israeli practices against civilians in the
occupied Arab territories.

Peace is action, not words, and the actions of the
Israeli Government are very far removed from its
words and the repeated hackneyed words spoken by its
Permanent Representative to which we must listen in
this Council.

