Ms. Dlamini Zuma (South Africa): Mr.
President, allow me to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of August. Let me also express our
sincere gratitude for inviting us to address the Council
on an important development in our continent. I would
also like to pay tribute to the Secretary-General for his
tireless efforts and contribution to bring about peace
and stability throughout the African continent. The
recent launch of the African Union has highlighted our
commitment to peace and development in Africa. We
believe that the United Nations can be an important
partner as we rebuild our continent, especially using
the principles enshrined in the New Partnership for
Africa's Development (NEPAD).

Last week, the Presidents of the Democratic
Republic of Congo and the Rwandese Republic took an
important step by signing a peace agreement on the
withdrawal of the Rwandan troops from the territory of
the Democratic Republic of Congo and the dismantling
of the former Rwandan Army (ex-FAR) and
Interahamwe forces in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. This peace agreement assumes greater
significance in that it comes in the wake of the
tremendous progress that was made by the Congolese
people in the inter-Congolese dialogue, which was held
in our country earlier this year.

This agreement is very important, and it is at the
centre of the peace process. It therefore gives a strong
signal of political will on the sides of both Rwanda and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to expedite a
peace process between themselves. It is very important
that we all support and encourage the implementation
of this agreement. We cannot be seen to be less than
enthusiastic about it.

To understand the agreement before us, we must
go back to the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement of 1999. In
that agreement, there was a question on how to deal
with the foreign forces that had come into the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Everyone
acknowledged that the foreign troops would have to
withdraw in order to allow the people of the country to
decide on their future without any external
interference. The problem remained of the presence in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo of the armed
military groups such as Interahamwe and ex-FAR,
which were implicated in the Rwandese genocide.

In the years since the signing of the Lusaka
Agreement, it has become even more clear that the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo could
not be resolved until the matter of the armed groups
was addressed. We are all aware that these armed
groups operate freely within the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and not only
continue to pose a real threat to the people of Rwanda
but can destabilize the Democratic Republic of the
Congo itself. We welcome the declared wish of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
not to have those armed groups utilize its territory for
launching attacks against its neighbours. We also
welcome the commitment of the Government of
Rwanda to withdraw its forces from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as soon as those military groups
cease to be a threat to the people of Rwanda.

At the launch of the African Union, a crucial
meeting was held when President Joseph Kabila of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and President Paul
Kagame of Rwanda met for the first time. The meeting
was held in the presence of President Mbeki and
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, who was accompanied
by senior leadership of United Nations Secretariat and
of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). Follow-
up meetings were later held with ministers from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda,
together with MONUC. In this regard, we would like to
pay tribute to MONUC for its role in supporting peace
efforts in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Despite its limited strength and the difficult conditions
that prevail, MONUC has managed to carry out its
duties.

The Durban meeting laid the basis for the peace
agreement. It was where both President Kagame and
President Kabila asked President Mbeki and Secretary-
General Annan to act jointly as a third party
guaranteeing the agreement.

From the outset we wish to make clear that the
agreement signed between the two Governments is a
reflection of their wishes and interests. Furthermore, it
does not supplant the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement of
1999 and subsequent agreements but, rather,
complements all of them.

The need for this Agreement stems from the
recognition that progress in establishing lasting peace
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo cannot be
registered without resolving the conflict between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda.

There is no doubt that the developments of the
last month have created a political momentum that
must be seized and supported by all actors concerned,
including the international community. That
momentum, in turn, requires that every one of us do
everything necessary to achieve the targets set out in
the programme of implementation. This Agreement has
given the rare gift of hope to the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and to all the
countries of the Great Lakes region. We cannot,
therefore, be seen to have contributed to the slowing
down of the peace process in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Rwanda and, indeed, in the rest of the
Great Lakes region.

We therefore look forward to the discussions this
morning as a step forward towards taking the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Great Lakes region to higher levels.

