Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the presidency of Poland for
convening this meeting. We also thank Ms. Izumi
Nakamitsu for her briefing.

First, we regret the formal termination, at the
beginning of the month, of the Intermediate-Range
Nuclear Forces Treaty between Russia and the United
States due to alleged violations of the Treaty by one of
the parties. In that regard, we note with great concern
the escalation of tensions caused by this situation.

We understand that the disarmament and
non-proliferation architecture is facing a major threat,
with the actual possibility of a resumption of the arms
race that we thought had been relegated to the era of the
Cold War. The Dominican Republic reiterates its firm
commitment to the obligations outlined in the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
and its three fundamental pillars - disarmament,
non-proliferation and the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
In that regard, we believe that the Intermediate-Range
Nuclear Forces Treaty served as an excellent complement
to the NPT, which led to significant progress in the
elimination of conventional and nuclear missiles, as
well as in reducing the great danger of a then perceived
imminent nuclear confrontation.

We believe that humankind and the planet cannot
be allowed to be exposed once again to the catastrophic
humanitarian and environmental damage caused by
the use, development and testing of those weapons.
We therefore call on the parties to give careful thought
to their decisions and refrain from aggressive rhetoric
and destabilizing actions, as well as to consider
returning to the dialogue table, with a View to restoring
confidence-building measures via an agreement and its
effective implementation, whereby the commitments
agreed upon in such an agreement would be respected
in a sustained manner.

In conclusion, we endorse the Secretary-General's
call on the parties to extend New Strategic Arms
Reduction Treaty and enter negotiations on new arms
control measures.

