Mr. Mahmassani (League of Arab States) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me, Mr. President, to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and on your wise and competent
guidance of its deliberations, which has become your
hallmark. I also wish to pay a tribute to your
predecessor's conduct of the Council's affairs last
month.

Israel continues to violate international law and
international humanitarian law. This is evident in the
series of acts of aggression against and killing of the
Palestinian people, without accountability or
deterrence. This has been confirmed by the criminal act
committed by the Israeli occupation authorities in Gaza
on the morning of 22 March, which led to the killing of
Sheikh Ahmad Yassin and his comrades. We strongly
condemn that heinous crime.

The development of events since September 2000
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, shows us that every time we begin to
discern signs of understanding or that attempts are
made to reach an understanding to enforce and realize
peace in the Middle East, we find that Israel commits
an act of aggression that totally erodes any glimpse of
hope and undermines any attempt to achieve peace and
security in the region. The daily crimes committed by
the Israeli occupation forces against the Palestinian
people, the killing, the destruction and the oppression
perpetrated by the Israeli forces in violation of the
1949 Fourth Geneva Convention on the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War and the Council's
failure to put an end to such acts are totally
unjustifiable. How can the Security Council remain
silent about these crimes?

Israel's ongoing targeting of Palestinian leaders,
the illegal extrajudicial killings and the continued
establishment of the separation wall and settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, are aimed at aborting the entire peace
process. They are aimed at creating a fait accompli that
will bring the Arab-Israeli conflict to a grave turning
point, the consequences of which could affect the entire
Middle East region as well as international and
regional peace and security at large.

The Security Council, which is entrusted with the
maintenance of international peace and security, is
called upon to assume its responsibility today, in
accordance with the Charter, to protect the Palestinian
people, to put an end to the hostile Israeli policy in the
region and to establish the independent State of
Palestine.

The core of the Arab-Israeli conflict is the
continued occupation by Israel of Arab and Palestinian
territories. Attempts by Israel to divert attention by
framing this conflict in the context of fighting
terrorism is a failed, naive and ridiculous attempt that
will not be believed by anyone. The occupation is the
core of the problem and the logic of the military
option, pursued by the Government of Israel to impose
the logic of force on the Arab-Israeli conflict, has
already proven futile. It has only led to the
deterioration of the situation and to further killing and
destruction. Continuation of this policy would only
exacerbate the situation in the region and definitely
result in dire consequences for international peace and
security.

We call upon the Security Council to adopt a
decisive position in keeping with the Charter which
will compel Israel to agree to retreat from its policy of
occupation, the establishment of settlements and the
bringing in of more settlers, and to give up the military
option and extrajudicial killing. It should force Israel to
resume participation in the negotiation process, which
will lead to the realization of just peace and security in
the Middle East, in accordance with resolutions of
international legitimacy, the Arab Peace Initiative and
the principle of land for peace.

