Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank you, Sir, for having convened this
meeting and for your briefing, in your capacity as the
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
on the work of the Committee.

Under your leadership, the work of the CTC over
the past three months has made further progress. The
CTC has continued actively to review the progress
reports submitted by various countries on their
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and has
begun its review of stage B implementation in certain
countries. The CTC's counter-terrorism assistance has
been carried out at a deeper level and, on the basis of
the particular situations of various countries, the
Committee has made relevant proposals in its draft
letters. The CTC has continued to strengthen its
cooperation with international, regional and
subregional organizations. Its Chairman has sent letters
to 17 international and regional organizations, in which
he has indicated the inter-State areas for cooperation.

We highly appreciate the leadership of
Ambassador Arias and the worthy efforts of his
colleagues. At the same time, I wish to thank the Vice-
Chairmen and the secretariat of the CTC for their work.

China supports the eighth 90-day programme of
work of the CTC. I wish to make two comments on the
Committee's future work.

First, it is important to further strengthen the
work being done in counter-terrorism assistance.
Practical measures should be taken to ensure that the
assistance needs of the many developing countries are
met. To that end, the CTC should not only continue to
serve as a bridge between recipient and donor
countries, but also closely follow the provision of such
assistance so that the donors, as proposed by the CTC,
can effectively provide assistance to countries in need.
The eighth 90-day programme of work includes some
very good ideas on counter-terrorism assistance to be
provided by the CTC and I hope that action will be
taken to turn those ideas into reality.

Secondly, it is imperative that we maintain the
leadership of the CTC in the cause of international
counter-terrorism. The CTC was established by the
Security Council under Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter and its authority and legitimacy are
irreplaceable. While we strive further to strengthen
cooperation between the CTC and international,
regional subregional organizations, we must ensure the
Committee's core position and leadership.
International, regional and subregional organizations
should work in the spirit of Security Council
resolutions fully to support and cooperate with the
CTC.

China has always fully supported the global fight
against terrorism and the work of the CTC. We will
continue in the future to participate constructively and
actively in the work of the CTC. I wish to affirm that
the Chinese delegation intends to work closely with
Ambassador Arias to ensure that the CTC can better
serve the international cause of counter-terrorism and
the interests of the myriad States Members of the
United Nations.

