Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Keita for her briefing
today. I would also like to thank Foreign Minister
Camara for participating in today's meeting.

Sadly, this has been a very difficult reporting period
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). Over the
past three months, the Mission saw two peacekeepers
killed and 42 injured, and three contractors killed and
nine injured. That is a sobering reminder to those of
us in the Chamber that MINUSMA remains the most
dangerous peacekeeping mission in the world. The
United States recognizes the risks that the soldiers and
civilians of MINUSMA face, and we pay tribute to
those who have paid the ultimate price and to all the
soldiers, civilians and their families who sacrifice daily
to bring peace and stability to the people of Mali.

In addition to those attacks against the United
Nations mission, we continue to witness heinous acts of
violence against civilians and security forces, especially
in the centre of the country. The United States strongly
condemns the terrorist groups and the so-called self-
defence groups for that growing violence. While we
welcome the Government's efforts to address the
deteriorating security situation in the centre, we call on
the Government of Mali and MINUSMA to hasten their
efforts to protect civilians, work to end intercommunal
conflict and quickly hold accountable and bring to
justice those responsible for these violent acts.

Every civilian, peacekeeper and security force
member killed and injured underscores the need to fully
implement the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali and swiftly implement the provisions of
resolution 2423 (2018). The United States recognizes
that some progress has been made since the presidential
elections last summer. We commend the establishment
of 10 district-level interim administrations and greater
coordination between the Government and the signatory
parties. We also commend the accelerated disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and integration process
of the Operational Coordination Mechanism elements
in Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu. However, we understand
there have been some issues regarding living conditions
and next steps for those units. We look forward to
hearing more about the Government of Mali's plans for
utilizing the newly integrated armed group fighters to
secure northern Mali.

We are frustrated and disappointed that more is
not being done to quickly implement the provisions
specified in paragraph 4 of resolution 2423 (2018). In
October, we made it very clear (see S/PV.8376) that
resolution 2423 (2018) demands that signatory parties
must show significant progress, or face changes to
MINUSMA after the expiration of the mandate. We
repeat that today. There is more to be done.

