The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

China thanks Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
his briefing. Currently, international terrorist activities
are rampant. Terrorist organizations such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida are
now better organized, and terrorists move across
borders more frequently. They have a great variety
of financing channels and are increasingly using new
technologies such as the Internet and social media to
spread their extremist ideas and engage in terrorist
activities, thus posing a grave threat to international
peace and security.

Terrorism is the common enemy of humankind.
The international community should increase its
cooperation and take effective countermeasures while
formulating new and targeted initiatives in the light of
emerging trends and characteristics in the evolution
of terrorism. The international community should use
political, economic and cultural means in an integrated
manner to address both the symptoms and the root
causes of terrorism.
In this connection, China wishes to make the
following six points.

First, it is necessary to increase political input
in counterterrorism and forge a greater international
consensus. The effects of terrorism transcend national
boundaries. No country can deal with it on its own,
and no country is immune to it. The international
community should adhere to uniforms standard in
counterterrorism and combat it with zero tolerance
and no differentiation. All terrorist activities, under
whatever pretext, against which our country and by
whatever means, must be firmly suppressed.

Terrorism should not be linked to any particular
ethnic group or religion. In the fight against
terrorism, the leading role of the United Nations
and its Security Council in particular must be given
full play. The purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations must be complied with and
effective coordination enhanced so as to form a united
international front against terrorism, suppress terrorists
relentlessly and put them under great pressure.

Secondly, we must block the flow of terrorists
across borders and be vigilant in an effective fight
against those who return. The frequent movement of
foreign terrorist fighters across borders constitutes
a grave threat to the security of countries of origin,
transit and destination. The international community
must pay great attention to this problem, and the
countries concerned should cooperate closely so as to
strengthen border control and step up law-enforcement
cooperation. They should create databases for counter-
terrorism as soon as possible, share intelligence and
destroy networks that facilitate the flow of terrorists.

All of the parties concerned should enhance
communication, provide intelligence support for one
another and step up law-enforcement cooperation so
as to effectively respond to the threat of returning
terrorists and ensure that terrorists are severely
punished wherever they may try to seek safe haven.

Thirdly, update the means of response and
effectively suppress the use of the Internet and social
media for terrorism. The Internet and social media
have now become an important platform for terrorist
organizations. The international community should,
in the light of the characteristics of cyberspace, adopt
effective measures to resolutely combat the criminal
activities of terrorist groups, including posting
audio and video materials on the Web to disseminate
extremist ideology, raising funds, promoting materials,
recruiting for terrorist attacks and planning terrorist
activities. All parties must comprehensively implement
the relevant Security Council resolutions, strengthen
the regulation of the Internet and suppress the use of
the Internet for terrorist activities. The relevant organs
of the United Nations should identify the right breaking
points and points of action and come up with new ideas
and initiatives to promote international cooperation
and strengthen coordination in cyberregulation.

Fourthly, there is aneedto strengthen comprehensive
cooperation and eliminate sources of funds and
weapons for terrorists. Terrorist groups such as ISIL
depend heavily on the exploitation of natural resources
as a way to finance their operations. The international
community should effectively implement resolutions
2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015), among others; strengthen
cooperation in the regulation of the financial and other
sectors; and effectively prevent terrorist groups from
raising funds through trafficking in oil and cultural
relics.

Countries should be highly vigilant against the real
threat of nuclear, biological and chemical terrorism,
strengthen their coordination and cooperation, focus on
scaling up the security of the relevant materials, boosting
international information-sharing and improving the
relevant laws and regulations so as to close the Internet
channels by which terrorist organizations attempt to
acquire nuclear, biological and chemical materials.

Fifthly, intensify prevention and upstream
checkpoints in the fight against terrorism. All countries
must give serious attention to the dissemination of
violent extremism and incitement of national and
religious hatred by terrorist organizations, in an effort
to comprehensively implement Security Council
resolution 1624 (2005). Countries should adopt robust
legislation to effectively combat incitement to terrorism,
and suppress, according to the law, the dissemination of
violent extremist ideas.
Sixthly, countries should work together to build
a new type of international relations with win-win
cooperation at its core; establish a common, holistic
cooperative and sustainable security concept; resolutely
promote global security governance; promote universal
development and prosperity; and engage in cultural
exchange so as to achieve harmony while respecting
differences among different cultures. Countries should
treat each other as equals, drawing inspiration from
each other in order to create a social and cultural
atmosphere in which different nations, cultures and
religions coexist harmoniously. Attention should be
given to promoting the political settlement of regional
conflicts, maintaining an international environment
conducive to peace, stability and sustained development
and eliminating the breeding grounds for terrorism at
an early date.

China is an important member of the international
counter-terrorism camp. The East Turkestan terrorist
forces, represented by the East Turkestan Islamic
Movement, is a real threat facing China today. In recent
years, the East Turkestan terrorism movement has been
constantly inciting and organizing terrorist activities
that have seriously threatened not only China's national
security, but also regional security and stability.
The Chinese President, Mr. Xi Jinping, has stressed
that China will fight terrorists on both the domestic
and the international fronts simultaneously and will
further enhance its international counter-terrorism
cooperation. In that regard, China has established
counter-terrorism cooperation mechanisms with over
10 countries and engaged in substantive cooperation
with them. China is also deeply involved in multilateral
cooperation mechanisms, such as the United Nations,
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the Global
Counter-Terrorism Forum, thus making an important
contribution to the international fight against terrorism.
China will continue to take an active part in and push
forward bilateral and multilateral counter-terrorism
cooperation, scale up counter-terrorism intelligence
sharing and provide, to the best of its ability, materiel
and capacity-building assistance in the fight against
terrorism to other developing countries.

China is willing to continue to uphold the spirit of
mutual respect and cooperation on an equal footing,
work with all other countries, strengthen exchanges
and cooperation, and strive to advance cooperation
on international counter-terrorism in order to enable
us to build a tightly woven network against terrorist
organizations and forces, which will leave no blind spot
for terrorism, thus ensuring regional and global peace
and security.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their texts and to deliver a
condensed version when speaking in the Chamber. I
would also like to appeal to speakers to deliver their
statements at a reasonable speed so that interpretation
may be provided accurately.

I now give the floor to the representative of Mexico.

