I would like to thank Her Excellency Minister Naledi Pandor and the Government of South Africa for this timely initiative and for the continued support for advancing the United Nations security-sector reform (SSR) agenda. I would also like to thank the members of the Security Council for their continued interest in SSR issues, which led today to the submission of the second stand-alone Security Council draft resolution on SSR. I am grateful for the continual support provided by the Group of Friends of Security Sector Reform, co-chaired by South Africa and Slovakia, and all other partners that have engaged with and supported the United Nations on this important topic. Assisting national authorities in building an effective and accountable security sector is an important priority for the United Nations. In 2014, the Security Council adopted resolution 2151 (2014), which affirms that an effective, professional and accountable security sector is the cornerstone of peace and sustainable development. Over the years, and in support of the Secretary- General's Action for Peacekeeping, prevention and sustaining peace agenda, the United Nations has facilitated political commitment from its Member States to support the normative and operational aspects of SSR. The United Nations is currently assisting more than 15 countries in undertaking various SSR initiatives through the implementation of peacekeeping and special political missions' mandates as well as in response to requests from Member States and regional organizations for targeted SSR support. In addition to the various country examples mentioned by Assistant Secretary- General Keita earlier, the United Nations, at the request of the national authorities, stepped up its cross-pillar support for national SSR processes in Burkina Faso and the Gambia. In those countries, the Peacebuilding Fund financed catalytic SSR advisory programmes to support the design and implementation of comprehensive SSR processes, with a focus on the greater inclusion and participation of women in the security sector. A number of special political missions also support critical security-sector reform tasks. In Libya, the United Nations Support Mission in Libya supports mediation efforts among security actors, including following the signing of the ceasefire agreement in October by the 5+5 Joint Military Commission. In Yemen, the Office of the Special Envoy has supported efforts to broker a nationwide ceasefire agreement through SSR analysis and technical advice, fostering dialogue and implementing confidence-building initiatives between local communities and security forces. In Somalia, the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia is providing strategic policy advice to national stakeholders on the security architecture and security-sector governance structure. It also supports the Government in coordinating international assistance to the security sector. Strategic partnerships are key to promoting effective, predictable and sustainable international SSR assistance. The United Nations continues to strengthen its collaboration with regional organizations such as the African Union; the Economic Community of West African States; the European Union and its overseas operations in the Central African Republic, Mali and Somalia; the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe; and the World Bank. The coordination of international SSR assistance is enhanced through the United Nations Inter-Agency Security Sector Reform Task Force and the United Nations Global Focal Point for the Rule of Law. Those platforms have been essential in ensuring the coherence of system-wide SSR assistance, delivering joint and/or coordinated responses, and developing system-wide policy and guidance - most recently in partnership with the World Bank and through the generous support of the United Nations Humanitarian, Development, Peacebuilding and Partnership Facility. However, some challenges persist. First, United Nations regional offices and special envoys lack reliable SSR capacity, particularly in the context of implementing the Secretary-General's conflict-prevention agenda. As the demand for related expertise and assistance grows in non-United Nations mission settings, supporting those entities with the relevant knowledge and capacity would be vital to assessing and analysing the risks and conflict factors associated with the security sector in the geographical areas under their purview. Secondly, the mismatch between financial needs and the resources availed and committed to by donors is a major concern in many countries. That is particularly challenging in transition settings, where the Government and United Nations country teams often lack the resources needed to preserve the SSR gains made through peacekeeping. Finally, ensuring an effective division of labour and fostering the strategic coherence of international assistance, including in the context of implementing political agreements such as in the Central African Republic, Mali and South Sudan, continue to be a challenge. I would like to conclude by sharing three recommendations. First, for a greater effectiveness of prevention efforts, United Nations regional offices and special envoys should be equipped with enhanced capacity to analyse the risks, vulnerabilities and conflict drivers in the security sector to inform good offices and feed into national peacebuilding and development strategies. Secondly, to consolidate SSR gains in transition and sustaining-peace settings, the allocation of the necessary financial resources by Member States is critical; greater resources need to be made available to support SSR initiatives through the Peacebuilding Fund and other pooled-funding mechanisms. Thirdly, the Council's support for United Nations joint planning of SSR assistance with its strategic partners, in particular the AU and the EU, will be vital for strategic coherence. This can help reinforce the capacity of United Nations peace operations to comprehensively deliver on their mandates through greater SSR coordination. Regular reporting on these support activities could be provided to the Security Council.
