Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Mr. President, allow
me to express our delight at reporting to you under
your presidency for the second time. My delegation
also would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Commissioner Chergui and
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of
UN-Women, for their presentations and their recent and
timely visit to South Sudan.

My delegation would like also to thank the
Permanent Representative of Sweden for leading the
delegation of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict to South Sudan recently.

As the Security Council knows, in Addis Ababa
on 12 September, South Sudanese political leaders
signed the revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. The
long-awaited Agreement was the culmination of efforts
by the leaders of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), led by Prime Minister Abiy
Ahmed of Ethiopia, President Omer Al-Bashir of the
Sudan and President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda,
who were its brokers. The Government of the Republic
of South Sudan is grateful to them, the region, the
African Union (AU), the United Nations and the
international community.

While we appreciate the Security Council's
concerns, we would like to remind members that we are
at the pre-implementation stage of the Agreement. The
role and participation of women are enshrined in the
Agreement and will be enhanced when we implement it.

As the Council meets today to discuss issues
regarding South Sudan, I want to point out that a
time of peace in South Sudan has arrived. The people
of South Sudan are excited that the Government and
the opposition leaders have signed the revitalized
Agreement. I would like to reassure the Council by
recalling the statement that our President made on
15 September in which he pledged that the Government
would implement the Agreement in good faith and
appealed for forgiveness and reconciliation among the
people of South Sudan. We are indeed hopeful that the
peace Agreement will unite the people of South Sudan
as a result.

Since the peace celebration ceremony held on
31 October in Juba, which was attended by South
Sudanese opposition leaders, regional and African
leaders and representatives from the international
community, confidence-building elements have already
been visible to the people of South Sudan. Although
it was behind schedule, the Parliament has ratified
the revitalized peace Agreement, political detainees
have been pardoned and freed and the National
Pre-transitional Committee has been meeting in Juba
and Khartoum. Most reassuring of all, however, is that
several opposition delegations have visited Juba and
been met by President Salva Kiir Mayardit over the past
several days.

Those are all reassuring signs that most of the
stakeholders are determined to make the peace
Agreement work. Moreover, contrary to what most
observers believed at the beginning, the national
dialogue has been holding public discussions around
the country in an environment of transparency and
openness that many thought would not be possible a
few months ago. What is most encouraging is that some
opposition parties have been considering how best to
join the national dialogue process, especially when the
latter has been considering issues ofthe utmost concern
to the opposition.

In conclusion, we would like to thank those
who provided us with words of encouragement and
comments during the process of implementation. We
urge the Council to join the Secretary-General, the
AU and IGAD in the endeavour of making sustainable
peace a reality in South Sudan.

The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.
