Miss Durrant (Jamaica): I wish to join in the
welcome extended to the High Representative, Mr.
Wolfgang Petritsch, and in thanking him for his very
useful briefing. When he last briefed the Council, in
May, the High Representative had focused on three
areas, namely, economic reform, the acceleration of the
return of refugees and the consolidation of institutions.
Today's briefing builds on these developments and
paints a comprehensive picture of the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina against a background of
recent political developments in the region. While
progress has been slow, there have been some
encouraging developments reported by Mr. Petritsch,
particularly in regard to the common institutions,
refugee return, judicial reform and human rights
institutions.

The full implementation of the New York
Declaration, adopted on 15 November 1999, continues
to be critical to the process under way in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The strengthening of the State
institutions along multi-ethnic lines must remain a
priority. The Peace Implementation Council, at its
meeting in Brussels in May, set one of its main goals as
"Fostering functional and democratically
accountable common institutions supported by an
effective, merit-based civil service and a sound
financial basis, based on the Rule of Law."

We have noted the holding of regular meetings of
the Council of Ministers and the establishment of three
new Ministries - of the Treasury, for European
Integration and for Human Rights and Refugees. These
developments are encouraging, and we would wish in
due course to hear more about the progress on the
State-level civil service law and in clearing the backlog
of legislation which has to be adopted in accordance
with the Peace Implementation Council work
programme.

The agreements reached on a number ofissues by
the Joint Presidency are also encouraging. We are,
however, concerned that the Presidency secretariat,
which was called for in the New York Declaration, has
still not been fully established. We note the need for
more dialogue and constructive engagement in
decision-making among the three members of the
Presidency. It is clear from Mr. Petritsch's briefing that
the process can be accelerated only with the firm
commitment of the politicians to multi-ethnic
cooperation.

We welcome the fact that general elections will
be held in November, and we see the election law as an
indispensable dimension of a democratic Bosnia and
Herzegovina. While it is disappointing that, due to
differences relating to its adoption, the law has not
been passed, we commend the efforts of the House of
Representatives and the Council of Ministers to
establish a working group to overcome the differences
in this area. My delegation fully agrees with
Mr. Petritsch that any election law must establish
principles for all levels in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Nearly five years after the Dayton Accords some
one million refugees and displaced persons are waiting
to return to their pre-war homes. The reported rate of
minority return has been encouraging, as numbers up to
31 August were more than double their number for the
same period in 1999. As Mr. Petritsch pointed out, the
rate of returns is even greater than the registered
figures show. The fact that minorities feel comfortable
and safe enough to return home is a positive indication
that the situation there is coming under control and is
improving. The report that few if any areas can now be
deemed inaccessible because of security
considerations, due to the role of the local police, is
welcome.
Despite this we are cognizant of the need for
work on refugee-related matters such as
documentation, employment, education, pensions and
access to utilities. In some cases other lasting solutions,
such as local integration and settlement, may have to
be considered for those unable or unwilling to return.

The implementation of the Property Law
Implementation Plan is closely bound up with refugee
return. Those returning and those displaced must be
able to reclaim their properties. While the property
legislation has begun to make steady progress, much
remains to be done. We recognize in this regard the
work of the Office of the High Representative, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) and we
would wish to hear more about the remaining obstacles
to progress in this area.

My delegation sees judicial reform as the
cornerstone for the creation ofa democratic society and
the entrenchment of the rule of law. The recently
adopted Law on Courts and Court Service in the
Republika Srpska is welcome. The establishment of the
Coordinating Board for the education of judges and
prosecutors is another important addition, as this will
offer additional education to judges in both the
Republika Srpska and the Federation.

My delegation also welcomes the work currently
under way to establish an independent judicial
commission, as in our view this could provide a focal
point for international assistance to judicial reform
initiatives and for the identification and design of
specific programmes for judicial assistance.

In the area of human rights, we welcome the
appointment of three Ombudsmen in the Republika
Srpska, but we are disappointed that the decision of the
Human Rights Chamber regarding the reconstruction of
mosques in Banja Luka has not been implemented.

My delegation would be remiss if it were to
conclude its remarks without expressing support for the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We recognize the
challenge of creating a mufti-ethnic society with multi-
ethnic institutions, and we believe that success is
contingent on the cooperation of the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and their leaders.

My delegation wishes to stress the need for the
full involvement of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in charting their own course. International
commitment must be aimed at assisting the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to build local capacity, as it is
only through their involvement that a sustainable
Bosnia and Herzegovina can be achieved.

My delegation recognizes that many of the
economic, social and political problems facing Bosnia
and Herzegovina can be best addressed from a regional
perspective, and for this reason we attach importance
to the development of a programme for reconstruction
and renewal in South-eastern Europe within the
framework of the Stability Pact. We are encouraged by
the prospects for better cooperation among the leaders
of all the countries in the region.

Finally, I wish to thank the High Representative
and his staff for their unwavering commitment to the
creation of a just, lasting and sustainable peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

