Mr. Gambari: I thank you, Mr. President, and the
members of the Council for this opportunity to brief
you, on behalf of the Secretary-General, on the latest
developments in Iraq since his last report pursuant to
resolution 1770 (2007), issued in April.

May I also warmly welcome the presence of
Mr. Hoshyar Zebari in our midst today. The focus of
this briefing will be on activities of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in accordance
with its mandate.

Speaking at the first annual Review Conference
of the International Compact with Iraq, held on 29 May
in Stockholm, with some 103 delegations from around
the world in attendance, the Secretary-General said that
if he were to use one word in connection with the
situation in Iraq today he would use the word "hope".
There is indeed new hope that the people and the
Government of Iraq have started to overcome daunting
challenges and to work together at rebuilding their
country after decades of dictatorship, neglect and
conflict.

As noted in the Secretary-General's report in
April (S/2008/266), there were security improvements
in many parts of the country, and that encouraging
trend has continued since. Thanks to the concerted

efforts of the Government of Iraq and other
stakeholders, we have seen steady progress in
improving the capacity of Iraqi security forces, curbing
the activities of militias and other armed groups and
strengthening the rule of law in Basra, Baghdad, Mosul
and other places.

The situation, however, remains fragile, because
ordinary Iraqis continue to face the threat of violence
in the form of terrorist attacks, sectarianism or criminal
acts and Violations of human rights, which continue to
occur. The delivery of essential services must also be
urgently improved in order to help the average Iraqi
family cope with daily life.

In order to secure the gains that have been made
on the economic and security fronts, urgent steps are
needed to pursue political dialogue and reach lasting
solutions. There are indications that some progress is
being made in this regard as well. Important talks on
the return of the leading Sunni bloc, Tawafuq, to the
Government are apparently progressing well. In
another positive development, on 20 May, Turkoman
representatives ended their 18-month boycott of the
Kirkuk Provincial Council. We are therefore hopeful
that these and other efforts will create a positive
momentum towards national reconciliation.

For its part, the United Nations remains
committed to carrying out its mandate under resolution
1770 (2007). Under the leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq has stepped up its effort to assist Iraq in a number
of areas, including political facilitation, the resolution
of disputed internal boundaries, constitutional and
electoral assistance, human rights and humanitarian
assistance, and reconstruction and development
assistance. I would like to take this opportunity to
update the Council on UNAMI activities in each of
those key areas.

On 5 June 2008, UNAMI presented its first set of
analyses regarding Iraq's disputed internal boundaries,
focusing on four specific districts in northern Iraq.
During the press conference, Special Representative
De Mistura explained the underlying methodology and
stressed the need for Iraqi ownership of the process.
UNAMI is determined to help the parties concerned
find an acceptable process to resolve the country's
disputed areas, bearing in mind that the Government of
Iraq alone has the sovereign responsibility to make
decisions about this complex matter. UNAMI is also
looking at ways to promote confidence-building
measures in communities that remain divided and that
remain suspicious of one another's intentions.

Resolving the status of Kirkuk is central to any
effort to address disputed internal boundaries in Iraq.
UNAMI has recently established a presence in Kirkuk
and will continue to engage with all communities to
work towards possible solutions for resolving the
question of the administrative jurisdiction and status of
Kirkuk. This is no easy undertaking; it will require
time, patience and hard decisions and compromises on
the part of the Iraqi leadership, including the
development of political and constitutional processes
that are acceptable to all major stakeholders. The
United Nations stands ready to assist in that process,
but the process must be centred on dialogue among
Iraqis. Decisions on disputed boundaries will be made
by Iraqis, and Iraqis alone.

UNAMI has been working closely with the
Independent High Electoral Commission of Iraq on
planning for an upcoming voter registration update and
governorate council elections before the end of this
year. These events would mark yet another milestone in
achieving a representative and inclusive democracy in
Iraq. However, the Council of Representatives has yet
to approve a new election law that would serve as a
basis for future elections. A number of issues are still
under discussion, and the United Nations hopes that
special provisions can be made to allow for the
inclusion in the political process of internally displaced
persons, women and minority groups. The electoral law
must be passed by mid-July in order for the elections to
take place this year.

UNAMI also continues to support the
Commission in technical preparations for governorate
elections, including the printing of materials for voter
registration, the training of over 8,500 Commission
staff to implement the registration process, the
planning and logistics of governorate elections, and the
carrying out of public outreach. Consultations have
also taken place with security forces to ensure that
governorate elections are conducted safely.

The United Nations strongly believes that the
constitutional review process remains an important
mechanism through which Iraqi communities can
enshrine a national political agreement on the
fundamental elements of the Iraqi State. In this regard,

UNAMI has held talks with Iraqi interlocutors to
facilitate agreement on outstanding political issues that
remain in dispute, either within the Constitutional
Review Committee itself or at higher political levels.
These elements include the respective powers of the
presidency, the governorates and the regions; the
constitutional underpinnings of hydrocarbon revenue
and wealth-sharing; and the resolution of disputed
internal boundaries. These consultations come at an
important juncture, before the Constitutional Review
Committee submits its report to the Council of
Representatives, which is expected to occur before the
end of the legislative session at the end of June.

In the face of the many challenges facing the
Iraqi people, the support of the international
community, and of neighbouring countries in
particular, is essential for the stability of Iraq. On the
international front, on 29 May the first annual review
of the Compact was hosted by the Government of
Sweden in Stockholm. Co-chaired by the Prime
Minister of Iraq and the Secretary-General, the Review
Conference was the latest in a series of events marking
Iraq's re-engagement with the international community,
and it marked a new phase in the relations between Iraq
and its international partners. The Government of Iraq
took advantage of this opportunity to send a strong
message to the international community that Iraq is a
country with substantial resources and is looking for
mutually beneficial partnerships with other countries in
order to expand its human resource capacities and to
unlock the economic potential of its resources.
Regional and international cooperation in this area
could bring enormous rewards to everyone involved.
Indeed, we believe that the Compact can be raised to a
new level of engagement, sustained by a strong
partnership based on trade, economic exchange and
investments. The Stockholm Declaration, adopted at
the end of the Conference, highlighted the progress
attained by the Government of Iraq in the most difficult
circumstances and identified areas where progress
needed to be achieved in the next year.

There are hopeful signs that progress is being
made in the regional dialogue on Iraq as well. Since the
last expanded ministerial meeting of Iraq and its
neighbours, held in Kuwait on 22 April, there appear to
be increased efforts to strengthen cooperation between
Iraq and its neighbours on a number of issues. The
United Nations welcomes contacts between Turkey and
Iraq at various levels to discuss political, security and
economic cooperation. Following the Stockholm
Conference, some Member States in the region -
Bahrain, Jordan and the United Arab Emirates - have
indicated their intention to appoint ambassadors to Iraq
in the very near future. We very much welcome these
developments and hope that other regional States will
explore such opportunities for turning the regional
dialogue process into a real partnership based on
reciprocal obligations, mutual interests and concrete
cooperation in the diplomatic, political, economic and
cultural areas. In accordance with its mandate, UNAMI
is committed to supporting the process of regional
dialogue through the ad hoc support mechanism.
Through that mechanism, the United Nations is
providing targeted assistance to the Iraqi Ministry of
Foreign Affairs to strengthen its capacity to promote
regional dialogue, support the three regional working
groups - on border security, energy and refugees -
and to prepare for future ministerial meetings.

In the past weeks, the UNAMI Human Rights
Office has focused its monitoring and advocacy
activities on addressing the needs of Iraqi civilians who
reside in the areas where intense fighting has taken
place in recent months. UNAMI is hopeful that it will
gain access to places of detention in order to better
assess the plight of detainees, who could possibly
include minors. Although much has been accomplished
in Iraq, a great deal more remains to be done to
promote the protection of human rights and the rule of
law. In that regard, UNAMI is assisting the
Government of Iraq in drafting legislation and
establishing important institutions, including a national
human rights commission, while continuing to build
capacity and actively support the work of the Ministry
of Human Rights.

We must also redouble our efforts to alleviate the
suffering of Iraqi refugees and internally displaced
persons, not only on humanitarian grounds, but also
because this has regional repercussions. We believe
that, together with the Government of Iraq and the
wider international community, the United Nations can
help host countries, particularly Jordan and Syria, cope
until safe and voluntary return is possible. The United
Nations country team has been focusing on providing
host countries with humanitarian and technical
assistance, and the country representative of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees in Iraq has now been posted full-time in
Baghdad. The United Nations welcomes the recent

actions of the Government of Iraq in that regard,
particularly the confirmation of its contribution of
$40 million to the United Nations country team's
country consolidated appeal to support the World Food
Programme in providing food assistance to vulnerable
groups in Iraq and the $195 million that the
Government recently earmarked to support the return
of displaced Iraqis. For its part, the United Nations is
developing a programme for refugee return to ensure
that the Government of Iraq and aid agencies are ready
when the conditions are ripe for that to take place.

Iraq's reconstruction remains a top priority for
the United Nations. As the security situation improves,
there will be growing demands to meet the basic needs
of ordinary Iraqis, including jobs and services. UNAMI
and the United Nations country team have been
working together to consider ways to increase the level
of support and reach inside the country. One notable
effort has been to visit Ramadi to evaluate the local
conditions on the ground for establishing a United
Nations presence in the Al Anbar governorate and to
assess what contribution the United Nations could
make locally. Similar visits are expected to take place
across the country during the course of the year. The
United Nations hopes that it can not only increase the
delivery of assistance throughout country, but also
provide capacity-building and technical assistance to
local governments.

The Secretary-General is committed to seeing the
United Nations do more in Iraq under resolution 1770
(2007). Indeed, despite the security challenges, under
the leadership of Special Representative De Mistura,
UNAMI continues to expand its presence and activities
inside Iraq. The United Nations remains heavily reliant
on the support of Member States for protection and
support. For example, a distinct entity was established
in 2004 under the unified command of the
Multinational Force, with a dedicated mission to
provide security for the United Nations presence in
Iraq. A trust fund was established at that time to accept
and administer contributions from Member States in
support of that force. To date, there are only enough
funds to cover its operation costs until the end of
August 2008. The Secretary-General therefore appeals
to all Member States to continue contributing to the
trust fund to ensure that the distinct entity is well
funded at least until the end of the year and possibly
beyond. We also encourage Member States to provide
additional military advisers to the Mission in Iraq as a

critical component to expanding our presence inside
the country. We thank the Government of Iraq for its
offer of a suitable site for its new integrated compound
in Baghdad and look forward to finalizing those
arrangements.

In conclusion, despite continued progress in
many areas, it should not be forgotten that Iraq is still a
country in transition, recovering from three conflicts
over the past 30 years. The people of Iraq have
suffered immensely under the heavy burdens of
dictatorship, war and neglect. Daily life for ordinary
Iraqis remains a constant struggle, although their
personal security may have improved in many parts of
the country.

Now more than ever, urgent steps need to be
taken to broaden the national reconciliation process
and find solutions that will support a sustainable peace.
That will require courage, brave leadership and often
painful decisions and compromises, but the ultimate
reward would be a peaceful, stable and prosperous
Iraq. Addressing fundamental issues such as the
sharing of resources, the future federal nature of the
Iraqi State and the resolution of disputed internal
boundaries requires wisdom, patience and strong
political will. It is ultimately up to the Iraqis to make
the right choices and build a sustainable and lasting
peace. That is a challenge not just for the leadership of
Iraq, but for all its communities. The United Nations
will continue to stand by Iraq in this process.

