Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): Honduras condemns all acts, methods and
practices of terrorism, wherever they may occur, and
whoever commits them, and reiterates its support for all the
efforts being made under international law to end the threat
of international terrorism to international peace and
security.

The attempted assassination of the President of the
Arab Republic of Egypt in Addis Ababa on 26 June 1995
was a reprehensible act, and an example of a practice which
the international community cannot tolerate. It affected the
sovereignty and stability not only of Ethiopia, but of the
African region as a whole, and should not be treated with
impunity, as the Organization of African Unity (OAU) has
recognized.

My delegation therefore supported the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1044 (1996), and deplores the
fact that it has not yet been complied with. My delegation
regrets the fact that the Government of Sudan has not
complied with the requirements of paragraph 4 of resolution
1044 (1996) or with the demands in the statements of the
Central Organ of the OAU Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution of 11 September
1995 and 19 December 1995 for the extradition of those
suspected of the attempt on the life of President Mubarak.

My delegation believes that in the struggle against
the scourge of international terrorism, States should be
aware of their responsibility for adopting measures
intended to combat and eliminate terrorism, as well as
their obligation to refrain from instigating, inciting or
promoting terrorist acts and from allowing their
preparation in their territory. It is also the duty of States
to refuse to receive or protect those who commit such
acts.

My delegation voted in favour of the resolution the
Council has just adopted, in the hope that the measures it
contains will prompt the Government of Sudan to meet,
without further delay, the requirements contained in
resolution 1044 (1996) and to act in conformity with the
principles of the United Nations Charter. Furthermore, we
believe that this resolution has been carefully worded so
as not to include economic measures that could adversely
affect the civilian population of Sudan.

