Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): We would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing, which told us
that the annihilation of eastern Aleppo is not merely a
threat but a reality, carried out with complete disregard
for innocent life.

Only last week the Council was informed that
aerial attacks would be halted unilaterally and military
operations on the ground in eastern Aleppo would
pause to enable medical evacuations and the separation
of armed opposition fighters from terrorist groups. But
the brutal onslaught began again before any significant
relief could be delivered. We are compelled to ask what
the purpose or intention of the announced pause was.

We are deeply disturbed by United Nations
reports of extrajudicial killings of civilians, including
women and children, during the attacks on the ground,
which reached 82 yesterday alone. What crime
could those children possibly have committed to be
summarily executed by pro-Government militias in
their own homes? In addition to those who have been
mercilessly executed, more than 100 children who were
unaccompanied or separated from their families have
been reported by UNICEF to be trapped in buildings in
eastern Aleppo under heavy attack. The attacks must
stop. The children must be saved and protected.

With eastern Aleppo on the brink of total
destruction, those with leverage must use their influence
on the parties to the conflict to end the summary
execution of civilians there. More than 100,000 people
are still trapped there, and we strongly support the
United Nations request for the urgent imposition of a
ceasefire in order to enable them to evacuate. The fate
of the innocent civilians is the responsibility of the
advancing forces.

In view of the Syrian Government forces'
impending takeover of eastern Aleppo, we expect that
the Government will take immediate steps to implement
the following measures. First, it must demand that
its forces exercise maximum restraint, respect the
principles of distinction and proportionality and
refrain from any targeting or extrajudicial or summary
executions, particularly of civilians and especially
women and children. Secondly, it must facilitate
immediate and unfettered access for humanitarian aid
and personnel to all areas under its effective control,
and engage in an inclusive political dialogue, with a
focus on achieving national reconciliation. We believe
that those are the minimum steps needed to restore calm
and stability, which the Government itself has cited as
one of its primary aims.

As the Secretary-General said, the legitimate
aspirations and grievances of the parties opposed to
Damascus must be addressed in a peaceful manner
through constructive dialogue and engagement, and not
by launching another phase of military operations.

