The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of the Central African Republic and
Chad, in which they request to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the consideration
of the item, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gambi
(Central African Republic) and Mr. Allam-mi
(Chad) took seats at the Council table.

The President: On behalf of the Security
Council, I wish to extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Antoine Gambi, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Regional Integration and Francophonie of the
Central African Republic.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Youssef Mahmoud, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Mahmoud to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
2

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/529, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission
in the Central African Republic and Chad. I also wish
to draw members' attention to a letter dated
7 September 2010 from the Permanent Representative
of Chad to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council, contained in
document S/2010/470.

In addition, I wish to draw members' attention to
photocopies of a letter dated 12 October 2010 from the
Permanent Representative of the Central African
Republic and a letter dated 15 October from the
Permanent Representative of Chad, which will be
issued as documents S/2010/530 and S/2010/536,
respectively.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Youssef Mahmoud, to whom I now
give the floor.


