Mr. Straw (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency, and by wishing you well at a very
important moment. I also echo and underline the thanks
which you so generously gave to Vice-Chancellor
Joschka Fischer and Ambassador Gunter Pleuger for
the excellent way in which they chaired the Security
Council during the month of February. I would also
like to thank Mr. ElBaradei and Mr. Blix for their
reports and to place on record my Government's
appreciation for their work and the work in very
difficult circumstances of all the staff of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and of
the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC).

I have listened with very great care to what my
colleagues speaking before me have said. We are all
agreed that Iraq must be fully disarmed of weapons of
mass destruction and that Iraq's failure to cooperate
immediately, unconditionally and actively with the
inspectors has to be dealt with. As we negotiated
resolution 1441 (2002), the evidence was there for all
to see that Iraq had been and remained in material
breach. All 15 members voted to give the Iraqi regime
a final opportunity to comply with its obligations.

The first question before the Council, therefore, is
this: has Iraq taken this final opportunity to disarm? I
was very much struck, while listening with care to all
the statements - and of course people have different
points of View - by the fact that nobody - not one
minister in the Council - said, in my hearing, that Iraq
is now fully, actively and immediately in compliance
with resolution 1441 (2002). It has not so far taken this
final opportunity. If anybody in the Chamber or outside
has any doubt about that conclusion, then I commend
to them the so-called clusters report on the outstanding
issues concerning Iraq's proscribed weapons
programme, which, as a member of the commission
behind the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission, I have already had the
privilege of reading. As Mr. Blix knows, I have read all
167 pages of that report in every particular. It is a
painstaking piece of work and I thank Mr. Blix for
publishing it. But it is also a chilling read about the
failure of Iraq to comply with successive resolutions of
the Council each day of the past 12 years.

There has not been active cooperation in the areas
which matter. As a result, UNMOVIC has not been
able to resolve any substantive issues outstanding from
1998. As we all know - this is a point to which I shall
return shortly - Iraq refused to admit inspectors for
three years after resolution 1284 (1999) was adopted,
agreeing to them only under threat of enforcement
action and in an attempt to frustrate resolution 1441
(2002). Iraq has dragged its feet on as many elements
of procedural and substantive cooperation as possible.

I would like to draw attention to just one aspect,
which is often overlooked. Mr. Blix referred to the fact
that Iraq recently informed us that following the
adoption of a presidential decree prohibiting private
individuals and mixed companies from engaging in
work related to weapons of mass destruction, further
legislation on this subject is to be enacted. No one
should be taken in by that as a concession. Iraq was
ordered on 2 October 1991 - I have here the
instruction from the Council - to enact legislation, in
conformity with international law, to do precisely what
it is now saying it intends to do. What is more, what it
has so far done covers not the operations of the State
but only those of private individuals and mixed
companies. So 12 years on, 12 years after the world
saw that Iraq had developed, under the world's nose,
weapons of mass destruction and delivery systems -
nuclear systems, biological systems, chemical
systems - Iraq is still refusing to pass a law saying
that such activity by members of State Government
authorities is illegal.

This is not something for which they needed to
search. It is not something for which they need the
assistance of inspectors or ground-penetrating radar. It
is something they could and should have done back in
October 1991 and that, notwithstanding all the
pressure, they are still refusing to do.

Then we come to the issue of interviews. As Mr.
Blix and Mr. ElBaradei have reported, Iraq has done
everything possible to prevent unrestricted, unrecorded
interviews. There have now been 12 private interviews
between the United Nations Monitoring, Verification
and Inspection Commission and the International
Atomic Energy Agency against a United Nations
Special Commission list of 3,500 people previously
associated with weapons of mass destruction
programmes. We know for a fact that all of those 12 -
and all prospective interviewees - were threatened
and intimidated by the Iraqi regime beforehand and
told that their exchanges were being recorded. The
interviewees were not being recorded by bugs and tape
recorders that they were told to take into the meetings.
But they were told that they were going to be recorded
in any event by bugs placed in the walls of the
recording halls. I understand that scientists most likely
to have the most incriminating evidence have been
locked away by the Iraqi security services. There have
been no interviews in the safe havens outside Iraq -
not one. And the restrictions placed on the interviewees
is itself the most incriminating evidence that Saddam
has something to hide.

The Al Samoud 2 episode further confirms Iraq's
familiar tactics. Iraq under-declared the number of
missile engines it - illegally - imported. It declared
131 engines but imported 380. Iraq also falsely
declared that the missile had a maximum range of 150
kilometres when it was designed - it was not an
accident - to fly considerably in excess of that. We
know that Iraq's agreeing to the destruction process,
necessary as it is, is a calculation that it can satisfy the
Council with a partial response in only one of the 29
categories of unresolved disarmament questions.

I must say, with all due respect to good
colleagues, that it defies experience to believe that
continuing inspections with no firm end date, as I
believe has been suggested in the French, German and
Russian memorandum, will achieve complete
disarmament if - as the memorandum
acknowledges - Iraq's full and active cooperation is
not immediately forthcoming. The memorandum is not
even a formula for containment, given Iraq's proven
ability to exploit the existing sanctions regime to
continue to develop weapons of mass destruction. We
knew nothing about the missile engines. We knew
nothing about the rest of this - imported under our
noses in breach of the sanctions regime - until we
passed resolution 1441 (2002).

To find a peaceful solution to the current crisis,
the Council must not retreat from the demands it set
out clearly in resolution 1441 (2002). What we need is
an irreversible and strategic decision by Iraq to disarm;
a strategic decision by Iraq to yield to the inspectors all
of its weapons of mass destruction and all relevant
information, which it could and should have provided
at any time in the past 12 years; a strategic decision
like that taken by South Africa when it decided freely
to abandon its secret nuclear programme.

I greatly welcome the progress the inspectors
have reported. My earnest wish, and that of my
Government, has all along been to achieve the
disarmament of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction, if
humanly possible by peaceful means. But if we are to
achieve that, we have to recognize that the progress
which has been reported represents only the tip of a
very large iceberg of huge unfinished business required
of Iraq.

Just as I welcome the progress about which we
have heard, I say to the Council that there are very
serious lessons for us to draw from what has been
reported. Let us consider what has changed. Why has
there been this sudden bout of activity when there was
no progress at all for weeks before, and when for
months and years before that, Saddam Hussein was re-
arming under our noses?

It is not our policy which has changed. It is not
international law which has changed - there have
been from the beginning the clearest instructions to
Saddam to disarm. No, what has changed is one thing
and one thing only: the pressure on the regime. Mr.
Blix said in his opening remarks that the changes may
well be due to strong outside pressure. That is
absolutely right. In his remarks, Dominique de Villepin
described a lot of diplomatic pressure by the Non-
Aligned Movement, the European Union, the Arab
League and many others. I greatly welcome all of that
diplomatic pressure.

Dominique went on to say that the forces of the
United States and of the United Kingdom lend support
to that pressure. With due respect for my good friend, I
think it is the other way around. What has happened is
that all that pressure was there for every day of 12
years. In Mr. Blix's carefully chosen words, the strong
outside pressure is - and let us be blunt about this -
the presence of more than 200,000 young men and
women of the United States and of the United

Kingdom, willing to put their lives on the line for the
sake of this body, the United Nations.

Dominique also said that the choice before us was
one between disarmament by peace and disarmament
by war. That is a false choice. I wish it were that easy,
because then we would not be obliged to have this
discussion; we could all put up our hands for
disarmament by peace and go home. The paradox we
face is that the only way we are going to achieve
disarmament by peace of a rogue regime that, all of us
know, has been in defiance of the Council for the past
12 years - the only way that we can achieve its
disarmament of weapons mass destruction, which, the
Council has said, pose a threat to international peace
and security - is by backing our diplomacy with the
credible threat of force.

I wish that we lived in a different world where
this was not necessary, but, sadly, we live in this world,
and the choice is not ours as to how this disarmament
takes place - the choice is Saddam Hussain's. Would
that it were ours, because it would be so easy, but
sadly, it is not. And there is only one possible, sensible
conclusion that we can draw: we have to increase the
pressure on Saddam Hussain. We have to put this man
to the test. He has shown this week that he does not
need more time to comply, he can act with astonishing
speed when he chooses to. What is more, he knows
exactly what has to be done. He knows this because he
is the originator of the information. The Iraqis do not
need a Mr. Hans Blix and all his staff to produce 167
pages of forensic questions; they have the answer book
already. Look how fast they acted to produce 13,000
pages of a declaration, albeit much of it irrelevant. It
may take time to fabricate further falsehoods, but the
truth takes only seconds to tell.

And I should just like to make something clear on
the issue of automaticity, which, again, my good friend
Dominique raised. Nothing has ever been automatic
about the threat of force or the use of force; it has
always been conditional. It would be utterly
irresponsible and in defiance of our solemn duties to
the Council for us to walk into a situation where force
was used automatically. And, although the canard has
been around that some of us were in the business of
using force automatically, the truth is that it is not
being used automatically, it should not be used
automatically, it will not be used automatically, and
nothing to which my Government has ever put its name
has ever suggested that that would be the case.

What we seek is compliance by Saddam Hussain
with resolution 1441 (2002). And I make this point: we
are not suggesting that, in a matter of days, Mr. Blix
and Mr. ElBaradei would be able to complete all their
work - that they would be able to verify the
disarmament of Iraq. No one is suggesting that. But
what we are suggesting is that it is perfectly possible,
achievable and necessary for Saddam Hussain and the
Iraqi regime to bring themselves into compliance so
that, instead of us all admitting - either by our words
or by our silence, as we have today - that Saddam is
not in full compliance, that he has not taken a further
opportunity and the final opportunity, we can say the
reverse and can celebrate the achievement of the fine
ideals of the United Nations and the upholding of one
of the central points of the work programme of the
United Nations - that we back our diplomacy, if
necessary, with the credible threat of force.

As founding members of the United Nations and
permanent members of the Security Council, we
remain committed to exploring every reasonable option
for a peaceful outcome and every prospect of a Council
consensus. In the light of that and of what I have said, I
shall tell the Council that, on behalf of the sponsors of
our draft resolution - the Kingdom of Spain, the
Government of the United States and the Government
of the United Kingdom - I am asking the Secretariat
to circulate an amendment, which we are introducing,
that will specify a further period beyond the adoption
of a resolution for Iraq to take the final opportunity to
disarm and to bring itself into compliance. But the
Council must send Iraq the clear message that we will
resolve this crisis on United Nations terms: the terms
that the Council established four months ago when we
unanimously adopted resolution 1441 (2002).

