Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, allow me to thank you, Sir, for
convening this meeting in order to hear the briefing
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General.
We commend Mr. Mladenov for the excellent work that
he is doing in the Middle East in the search for peace
in that region. We welcome the President of the State
of Palestine, His Excellency Mr. Mahmoud Abbas,
and are grateful for his presence at this meeting. We
also appreciate the presence of Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres.

The Republic oquuatorial Guinea is optimistically
following developments in Iraq, although it is very
concerned about the current situation in Yemen and
Syria, and it expresses its deep concern about recent
developments in the Iraeli-Palestinian conflict.
Accordingly, we express the full support of Equatorial
Guinea for stabilizing and bringing peace to the
region in general, and the situation between Israel and
Palestine in particular.

Equatorial Guinea regrets the latest escalation of
violent incidents and tensions between Palestinians and
Israelis, as we just heard in Mr. Mladenov's briefing,
and calls on all parties to act rationally and refrain
from actions that could aggravate an already complex
situation. The Government of Equatorial Guinea, led
by His Excellency President Obiang Nguema Mbasogo,
always advocates for negotiated solutions to all conflicts
and problems no matter how complex or intractable they
might seem, and, with regard to the case at hand, our
Government's stance is no different. We therefore call
on all parties involved in the conflict to do their utmost
to normalize the situation and alleviate the suffering
of the people. The Government of Equatorial Guinea
advocates for the two-State solution directly negotiated
between Israelis and Palestinians, or within the
framework of a multilateral mechanism. It is possible
that such a solution might entail painful concessions for
both parties, as the very nature of dialogue implies the
ability and need to make concessions.

All negotiations must be conducted within
the framework of the relevant Security Council
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. The final
status of Jerusalem must be the consequence of such
negotiations. Equatorial Guinea considers as just the
historic claims of the Palestinian people, which have
been validated by the various declarations by the
African Union and the relevant General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions. But Israel's right to live
in peace and security must also be taken into account.
The parties should refrain from unilateral actions that
could stymie dialogue.

We are deeply concerned about the critical
humanitarian situation in Gaza, as highlighted by
Mr. Mladenov's briefing. Equatorial Guinea believes
that the solution to the grave humanitarian crisis should
be a priority for the international community, with
the objective of improving the plight of the civilian
population. We therefore commend Qatar and the
United Arab Emirates on providing financial assistance
to ease the humanitarian crisis. Nonetheless, it is not
enough to resolve issues with health care, drinking
water and electricity. Without those services, it is very
difficult to provide medical assistance and a semblance
of normalcy. We call for intra-Palestine dialogue to
overcome differences. We believe it will have a positive
impact on the quest for ajust solution to the crisis.

In conclusion, we pay well-deserved tribute to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East for its work, despite scarce
resources, and call for the continued provision of
international financial assistance to an agency whose
humanitarian efforts are very noble and laudable.

