Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Mr. President, let me
join others in thanking you for convening this public
meeting of the Security Council on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. This
has given members and non-members of the Council an
opportunity to review developments over the last six
months.

Today the plight of the Palestinians in the
occupied territories has reached desperate proportions,
further threatening the stability of the whole region and
thereby posing a threat to international peace and
security.

Yesterday the Council held two very important
meetings which provided a useful backdrop to today's
discussions. First, the Council met with the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of the
new Government of Israel, Shimon Peres, at his
request. The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs outlined his Government's perspective
on the problems bedeviling the people of Palestine and
of Israel. He outlined what he saw as the basis for
restarting the peace process between the Palestinians
and the Israelis, and outlined actions contemplated and
to be taken by Israel in this regard.

The Jamaican delegation welcomes the steps
announced by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs to open up avenues of commerce
and to begin to reverse a policy which has revisited
economic devastation on the Palestinians. We expect to
see early results on the ground, reflected in an
improvement in the living conditions of the
Palestinians.

Immediately after the meeting with the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, the
Security Council met with Ambassador Al-Kidwa, the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations.
He shared with us the Palestinians" perspective on the
prevailing conditions in the Palestinian territories. He
confirmed for us much of what has been reported over
the past few months and gave us reasons why the peace
process has been derailed. My delegation expressed the
hope that yesterday's meetings would usher in a new
era of relations between the United Nations, the
Palestinians and the Israelis in the search for peace.

While both sides clearly saw the causes and
effects differently, they both made it absolutely clear
that they both wanted peace and that they wanted to
end the cycle of violence and coexist as good
neighbours. However, for many complex and varied
reasons, they have been unable to achieve that peace of
which they spoke, and, despite several hopeful
attempts, the peace which they have sought for many
years has eluded them.

My delegation believes that the Security Council
must offer its help and its support for the peace
process. Jamaica has in the past urged both the
Palestinians and the Israelis to seek peace through an
active negotiating process, a process which requires
them to stay the course, no matter the obstacles that
may confront them. As we have stated on previous
occasions, recognition of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people to self-determination must be a
principal element of this process. The right to security
of all countries in the region, including that of Israel,
must also be assured. We reiterate this position today.
Jamaica offers its continued support in efforts to
achieve a just and lasting peace within the framework
of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973).

Last October the Security Council adopted
resolution 1322 (2000), which called for the immediate
cessation of violence and for all necessary steps to be
taken to ensure that the cycle of violence is brought to
an end. We urged the parties to refrain from new and
provocative actions and to work towards a situation of
normalcy in a way that promoted the prospects of
peace. We gave full support to the important role of the
Secretary-General in the peace process. We condemned
the acts of violence, especially the excessive use of
force against Palestinians. We called upon Israel to
abide scrupulously by its legal obligations and its
responsibilities under the Fourth Geneva Convention of
1949. We stressed the importance of establishing a
mechanism for a speedy and objective inquiry into the
violent events. The Mitchell commission was
subsequently established, but so far no results have
been seen of its inquiry. Yesterday, however, Mr. Peres
advised us that the commission had been invited to
visit Israel next week. We look forward to positive
results from that visit.

Last October, the then Prime Minister of Israel
and the President of the Palestinian Authority made
commitments to Secretary-General Kofl Annan to
resolve their differences by peaceful means. We saw
this as a very important development. Those of us who
desire to see peace between the Palestinians and the
Israelis welcomed the brave actions contemplated by
the parties and dared to hope that, at long last, there
was the requisite political will to end the conflict. In
the wake of the Sharm el-Sheikh summit and the
agreement reached, we had hoped that further loss of
life would be avoided. The peoples of Palestine and of
Israel no doubt saw a glimmer of hope in the decisions
taken at that time by their leaders.

Needless to say, my delegation has been very
disappointed by what has taken place since then. The
Sharm el-Sheikh agreement has not been implemented;
we have seen a drift further away from peace; many
lives, particularly Palestinian lives, have been lost; and
economic devastation has descended upon the
Palestinian people. We are deeply concerned about the
dire humanitarian situation in the Palestinian territories
and the reported lack of access by humanitarian
workers to those in need. We believe that all barriers to
humanitarian relief reaching the Palestinian people
must be removed without delay.

In light of this, and in spite of the intractable
nature of the problems facing both sides, we maintain
that, if the political will exists to make bold decisions
for peace and to carry out those decisions, with the
help of the Security Council and the United Nations as
a whole, perhaps we can then move forward to bring
peace to the peoples of the region.

In December, Jamaica supported the sending of
United Nations observers to Palestine, a position which
did not at that time receive the support of the majority
of the members of the Security Council. We believed
then, as we do now, that the deployment of United
Nations observers could act as a deterrent to further
violence and as a confidence-building measure between
the Palestinians and the Israelis.

While we delay, the violence rages on, and many
lives continue to be lost. As the Permanent
Representative of Singapore reminded us, the Council
has repeatedly expressed its concern about the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

Other members of the Council have spoken today
of some of the things that the Security Council should
and must do. We are almost in unanimity that action by
the Security Council is urgently needed. While we have
not yet achieved unanimity on what needs to be done
and how, we are working to achieve this. We join
others who support revisiting the issue of the
deployment of United Nations observers in Palestine.
We join other members of the Council in calling for
Israel to act immediately to remove all economic
blockades and closures, and to take decisive action to
restore the economic viability of the Palestinian
territories. We reiterate our call to both sides to bring
an end to the violence and to sit down together, face to
face, and to resume negotiations.

Over the course of the next few days, the Security
Council will be working on a draft resolution to reflect
the concerns expressed in this meeting and to give
meaning to the aspirations for peace in the Middle
East. We urge all parties to show the maximum
flexibility and to assist us in this endeavour.

