Mr. Idrissov (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Russian):
Thank you very much, Mr. President, for giving me
the floor, and please pass on my country's gratitude to
Mr. Lavrov for his initiative in convening this meeting
for an open debate on some of today's most urgent and
pressing issues.

(spoke in English)

As we continue to witness unprecedented crises of
grave magnitude in the Middle East and North Africa,
we believe that now is the time to jointly address those
issues. For decades the situation in the region has been
a major factor in the destabilization of global security.

We are absolutely sure that the current situation
in the Middle East will start to seriously improve
only if the Palestinian issue is resolved. Kazakhstan
recognizes the Palestinian people's legitimate right to
self-determination and strongly supports the creation
of an independent State of Palestine, coexisting
peacefully with Israel within its 1967 borders. We also
support Palestine's full-fledged membership in the
United Nations, and we welcome today's ceremony
in which the Palestinian flag was raised at United
Nations Headquarters. We see a two-State solution as
the only viable option for lasting peace, and we call on
Israeli and Palestinian leaders to demonstrate political
responsibility and goodwill in order to reach a historic
peace agreement that meets the legitimate aspirations
of their peoples.

As we celebrate the seventieth anniversary of the
United Nations, let us remind ourselves of the events
that humankind had to endure in the last century,
including two world wars and many revolutions. The
tragedy that we all had to go through is the permanent
impulse pushing us to work constantly to achieve peace
and security. The Arab Spring once again proved that
revolutions only hinder human development, propel
societies backwards and damage inter-State relations.

We must all reject the unconstitutional and illegal
use ofmilitary force, including external foreign military
interventions, which lead only to the destruction of
statehood.

The humanitarian disaster in Syria is no longer just
a regional issue. The crisis has spread far beyond the
Middle East. A good illustration of that is that more
than 200 Kazakh citizens are fighting in the area of
Syria and Iraq. We support the efforts by the United
Nations, the League of Arab States, the United States
of America, Russia and other stakeholders. Kazakhstan
firmly believes that the crisis should be resolved only
through genuine political dialogue among all Syrian
parties, with the unbiased support of external actors.

In May Kazakhstan hosted a meeting of Syrian
opposition leaders, at their request. The negotiations
were based on the following key principles: respect for
the Geneva process, the condemnation of all forms of
terrorism and a collective call to end foreign paramilitary
involvement. In two days' time, the same groups will
meet again in Kazakhstan for a second round. We do
not interfere; we simply provide a platform in the hope
that Syrians themselves will find a road to peace and
reconciliation.

In 1992, in an effort to ensure peace and security
in the entire Asian region, Kazakhstan initiated the
Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building
Measures in Asia (CICA), a unique pan-continental
security forum for implementing confidence-building
measures and forging and enhancing political dialogue
and interaction aimed at achieving peace and stability
in Asia. Today, CICA stretches from Cairo to Seoul
and unites 26 countries from every subregion of the
continent.

We are confident that spiritual and religious
leaders play a significant role in fostering inter-ethnic
and interreligious harmony and mutual respect, which
is why Kazakhstan convenes and hosts the triennial
Congress of Leaders of World and Traditional Religions,
which provides a platform for dialogue among religious
and political leaders for the sake of peace. In July,
Kazakhstan hosted a regional conference on countering
violent extremism to which we invited representatives
from the countries of Central Asia, China, Iran,
Pakistan, India and the republics of the Caucasus.
We believe that all these things are a symbol of our
sincere contribution to a united fight against the evils
of terrorism.

While recognizing terrorism as a global threat,
we need to establish a counter-terrorism coalition
led by the United Nations and to develop a common
mechanism to defeat this evil and bring its perpetrators
and their supporters to justice. The current United
Nations mechanisms aimed at countering terrorism,
including the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
should be made legally binding through the adoption
of relevant Security Council resolutions. Two days
ago, in his remarks at the general debate of the General
Assembly (see A/70/PV.13), my President called for
the establishment of a global anti-terrorist network
under the auspices of the United Nations. We will
lobby strongly for and support that initiative and will
ask every Member State to support it. It is necessary
to create an agreed-on list of terrorist organizations, at
which point the Security Council alone should have a
mandate to outlaw them.

In conclusion, we reiterate our commitment to the
collective efforts to fight international terrorism and to
ensure peace in the Middle East, based on freedom and
justice for all.

