Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I, too, would like to thank Ms. Khawla Matar for her briefing. I would like to address three points. First of all, I would like to return to the issue of the tragedy taking place in Idlib, which we addressed earlier today (see S/PV.8707). It is a humanitarian disaster affecting 3 million civilians in north-western Syria, who are exposed to daily attacks by the regime and its allies. They endure hunger and cold. Nearly 400,000 of them have fled since early December in an attempt to find refuge near the Turkish border. The relentless and brutal war is at odds with the goal of the ceasefire and the quest for a political solution. As I said earlier today, France strongly condemns the intense and indiscriminate bombing by the regime and its allies, which target, inter alia, populated areas, medical facilities and camps for displaced persons, in deliberate violation of international humanitarian law. France reiterates its call for a cessation of hostilities. As the majority of Council members reiterated earlier today, ending the deadly offensive must now be the main priority. As we have said time and again since the start of the conflict, the fight against terrorism cannot be used as a pretext for an outbreak of violence. Ongoing hostilities on the ground serve only to strengthen terrorist organizations and threaten the gains made by the international community against such organizations, at the cost of heavy sacrifice over the past five years. In that regard, the efforts of the Global Coalition against Da'esh must continue in order to end the threat once and for all. My second point pertains to the political process, which remains indispensable to efforts to stabilize Syria over the long term. It is essential that the Constitutional Committee finally begins its work, as the Secretary- General recalled last week. However, after nine years of conflict, Bashar Al-Assad is maintaining his systematic obstruction. That is unacceptable and serves only to exacerbate the situation. We expect those who support the regime to encourage the Syrian leaders to see reason. We expect the United Nations to give an accurate account of the obstacles in the process and clearly identify those responsible for them. It is obvious, but must be recalled, that the political process goes above and beyond the Constitutional Committee. France calls on the Special Envoy to move the process forward in parallel with the implementation of all elements of resolution 2254 (2015). The Special Envoy has our full support with regard to developing confidence-building measures that would create the safe and neutral environment called for in the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). That includes two elements in particular: first, achieving results on the issues of detainees who must be released and missing persons; and secondly, making progress on the reformof property rights, which is one obstacle to the return of displaced persons and refugees to their homes. A safe environment, in which Syrians must no longer live in fear of bombs and arbitrary arrests, is essential to the holding of credible elections. To be fully legitimate, elections must be held under United Nations supervision and allow for the participation of all Syrians, including refugees and internally displaced persons. Thirdly and lastly, I would like to conclude by reiterating the consistent position held by France and its close partners with regard to the issues of refugees and reconstruction. The return of refugees must be conducted in strict compliance with international law - in a safe, dignified and, above all, voluntary manner. Only a credible political solution, in line with resolution 2254 (2015), will allow, when the time comes, for a mass voluntary return of displaced persons and refugees. In conclusion, France and its European partners will not fund reconstruction until a political settlement is firmly in place. The same applies to the lifting of sanctions. In that regard, we call on Russia, which has the means to exert effective influence, to work with the Council and all international partners to achieve a credible political solution in Syria. Damascus's ongoing quest for confrontation is a dead end whose costs will not be assumed by us. France, for its part, will pursue its efforts to find a way out of the violence and onto the path to peace. If such peace is to be genuine, it must be just and inclusive.
