Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Indonesia thanks the
Egyptian presidency for convening this open debate
on a highly important topic, and thanks the Deputy
Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, and
Mr. Youssef Mahmoud for their respective briefings.

We associate ourselves with the statement made by
the representative of Venezuela on behalf of Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.

The seminal joint resolutions by the Security
Council and General Assembly on the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture, adopted last year, outlined
sustaining peace as among the activities that, among
others, prevent the outbreak, escalation and recurrence
of conflict, end hostilities and help move towards
recovery, reconstruction and development. Achieving
sustainable peace critically requires the support and
participation from all the relevant stakeholders.

It is therefore vital that there first be no ambiguity:
United Nations peacekeeping is part and parcel of
the essential tools and activities aimed at achieving
sustainable peace. From deterrence against hostilities
and ensuring that peace processes are supported
and civilians safeguarded to enabling elections,
Statebuilding and reform, the role of Blue Helmets
is indispensable. All United Nations entities should
ensure that nothing - even inadvertently - detracts
from support for peacekeeping.

Secondly, following the 2015 reviews, as the United
Nations increases the focus on prevention, political
diplomacy and mediation, there is a profound need to
better integrate those functions with United Nations
peacekeeping. The 2015 reviews pointed to some gaps in
that regard. As such, we hope that the recommendations
in the reports ofthe Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations will be addressed effectively.

Thirdly, cooperation and partnerships between the
United Nations and Member States, as well as regional
and subregional organizations, is also crucial. Indonesia
encourages regional solutions to conflicts and supports
the strengthening of partnerships both at the strategic
and operational levels.

Fourthly, even with the best of intentions to integrate,
success will be elusive if peacekeeping mandates are
not clear, realistic and supported adequately. As one
of the largest troop- and police-contributing countries,
Indonesia is strongly convinced that the Council has
a very important responsibility to work collaboratively
with the troop- and police-contributing countries, host
countries and the Secretariat so that such mandates are
actualized with the required synergy and ownership.
That entails that, throughout the various mission stages,
the Council should consult meaningfully and regularly
with all the relevant peacekeeping stakeholders.

Fifthly, all that I have mentioned cannot happen
if the Secretariat shies away from changing the status
quo. Indonesia supports the recommendation of the
report (see S/2015/446) by the High-Level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations requiring that the Secretary-
General develop options for restructuring the Secretariat
peace and security architecture so as to strengthen
leadership and management. We also strongly support
doing away with the silo mindset, which can impede the
United Nations.

At the same time, we underline synergy-building
among the Security Council, the General Assembly,
the main Committees, the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) and the Economic and Social Council, as well as
the relevant United Nations agencies and departments.
A system-wide, coordinated approach that eschews
unnecessary duplication and wasteful competition must
be promoted. Peace is best ensured on the ground when
various activities take place in a seamless manner. That
should be reflected by the United Nations entities.

Sixthly, on a related point, the PBC, with more
than a decade of rich experience, is well suited to
provide advice to the Security Council as well as the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, especially as
new peace challenges emerge and during the review
and development of exit strategies. In that regard, the
PBC's advice is very useful, particularly with regard to
the integrated strategies for post-conflict peacebuilding
and recovery.

Last but not least, to enable sustaining peace and
sustainable development, it is very important that the
peacebuilding component in peacekeeping missions,
as well as the special political missions, are well
supported financially and politically. We also need
to provide options for the adequate resourcing of
peacebuilding activities by the United Nations country
teams. Moreover, enhanced financial and material
support with regard to training must be afforded to
conflict-affected countries to help them undertake their
national peacebuilding and development programmes
in a sustained manner.

In the context of peacekeeping, Indonesia's
position remains unwavering. The basic principles
of United Nations peacekeeping remain relevant,
vital and applicable. Despite the changing context of
peacekeeping, those principles are indispensable for the
success and credibility of all peacekeeping operations.
Peacekeeping mandates should adapt to current realities
and be well-calibrated without impinging on the basic
principles, as I said previously.

Indonesia ranks today as one of the
largest contributors among the 127 troop- and
police-contributing countries, with a robust number of
2,715 peacekeepers deployed in nine United Nations
peacekeeping missions. In line with its road map vision
of providing 4,000 peacekeepers between 2015-2019,
Indonesia will continue its steadfast commitment
to strengthen its contribution to United Nations
peacekeeping. As of yesterday, I received an update
that an additional battalion of peacekeepers is being
prepared to support United Nations peacekeeping
efforts and will be deployed appropriately.

Lastly, we will continue to lend a hand to making
the world a much safer place in our own humble way.
