Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): We wish to welcome the statement just made
by the Liberian Foreign Minister.

There has been fighting in Liberia on and off for six
years already, since the outbreak of its civil war in 1989.
This war in Western Africa has caused severe damage to
the economy of Liberia, killed over 100,000 people and
reduced another 700,000 to the condition of refugees. It
is also posing a threat to peace and stability in
neighbouring countries and the region as a whole.

In recent years, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) has made tremendous efforts
to end the fighting in Liberia. Those States have sent
peace-keeping forces to Liberia, in accordance with
Chapter VIII, despite their own economic difficulties.
Heads of State or Government of the countries concerned
in the region have also met on many occasions to offer
good offices and mediation, with a view to seeking a
proper solution to the Liberian question. The United
Nations has also made unremitting efforts to this end.

The dawn of peace once came to Liberia. Recently,
however, the situation in Liberia has deteriorated again,
as shown by the casualties suffered by the ECOWAS
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), the grimmer humanitarian
situation and continued difficulties in the comprehensive
implementation of the Abuja Agreement. We are deeply
concerned and disturbed by these developments.

The Liberian crisis is now at a critical moment. The
international community and the countries concerned are
doing their best for a renewed cease-fire among various
parties in Liberia. Facts have proved that only when the
parties concerned truly give up war and persist in
peaceful negotiations can there be a momentum of peace
for turning swords into ploughshares. Therefore, we

 

strongly urge the Liberian parties to cooperate with the
United Nations and ECOWAS, strictly implement the
Agreement already reached and the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council and take effective measures to
complete at an early date the disarmament and
demobilization of combatants so as to create conditions for
the final realization of national reconciliation. The
international community should also take concrete actions
to support the efforts of ECOWAS and give full play to its
role in this process.

Africa, with its rich resources and industrious people,
is an important force in the international arena. African
peoples, who have suffered greatly from conflicts and war,
are now working hard to create a peaceful environment,
rebuild their homelands and develop their national
economies. The Chinese Government has all along held that
world peace and development cannot be achieved without
Africa's participation. A stable and developing Africa is
conducive to world peace and prosperity. Therefore, we
sincerely hope that African peoples will strengthen unity
and cooperation, overcome difficulties and, with the help of
the international community and through their own efforts,
resolve various disputes at an early date, thus embarking on
the road to national unity and economic development. We
believe that with the joint efforts of the international
community and African countries, a solution will ultimately
be found to the Liberian conflict. China will work together
with the international community to achieve this objective.

