Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Today the delegation of the United States
is once again trying to mislead the international
community and is taking yet another step towards
confrontation by putting to a vote a draft resolution
(S/2018/321) that does not enjoy the unanimous support
of the members of the Security Council.

It is not true that it meets almost all our
requirements. The text is nothing more than an attempt
to resurrect, unchanged, the former Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM), established to
investigate cases of the use of chemical weapons in
Syria. Russia has always emphasized that it will not
support that approach. The JIM. became a puppet in the
hands ofanti-Damascus forces, and it covered itselfwith
shame when it issued a guilty verdict for a sovereign
State without credible evidence. The American draft
resolution represents an identical reproduction of all of
the former Mechanism's flawed working methods. The
new mechanism would conduct investigations as it sees
fit, with no reference to the standards of the Chemical
Weapons Convention. That has nothing to do with
independence, which the draft resolution's sponsors
and its closest allies only pretend to care about. We
know the worth of such independence. It is true anarchy
and manipulation.

At every stage of our work on the American
initiative we have insisted that the Secretary-General
should select the staff for the investigative mechanism
on the basis of the broadest possible geographic
representation, with subsequent approval by the
Security Council. Visits to the sites of the incidents
and strict adherence to the principle of sequential
actions while ensuring the preservation of the material
evidence should be not optional but mandatory working
principles. In a collective decision, the Security Council
would determine who was responsible in any given
case of the use of chemical weapons, based on reliable
evidence that would leave no room for doubt about the
correctness of the conclusions. There is nothing about
this in the American draft resolution. The authors know
that it goes against the Russian position and will not be
adopted. But they are obstinately sticking to their line.

It is clear that today's provocative step has nothing
to do with a desire to investigate what happened in
Douma, Syria, on 7 April. An attributive mechanism
is not necessary in order to initially establish the facts.
Even if we could conceive of the improbable scenario
in which the draft resolution creating the mechanism
was adopted today, it would take several months to put
the mechanism together and fine-tune its operations.
Establishing who is to blame is the final link in a
very long chain of actions. Here, in front of everyone,
I would once again like to ask the sponsors why they
need the mechanism when they have already identified
the guilty parties before the investigation. They do not
need it. They do not want to hear anything. They do not
want to hear that no traces of a chemical attack were
found in Douma. They have simply been looking for
an excuse the whole time, and the provocateurs among
the White Helmets have very kindly provided it. This is
all reminiscent ofa kind of spring fever. Exactly a year
ago, in April 2017, a similar scenario unrolled with the
chemical provocation in Khan Shaykhun, followed by a
missile strike.

The fact is that the authors of the draft resolution
are motivated by completely different priorities. They
have pinned their hopes on the assumption that the draft
resolution will not be adopted. That is what they want,
and it is something that they can bank along with the
rest of their reasons justifying the use of force against
Syria. For several days now, the Administration in
Washington, DC, has been keeping the international
community in suspense while discussing the so-called
important decisions being prepared. Only yesterday we
heard how anxiously Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura
spoke about the current escalation extending beyond
Syria's borders (see S/PV.8225), and we know that the
Secretary-General is also very concerned about that.

It is clear that Russia will once again be the target of
the propaganda cannons. My American colleague will
painstakingly enumerate the Russian vetoes on Syria.
It is not impossible that she has taken upon herself a
capitalist commitment to using the reckless policies
of the United States to achieve some sort of personal
record in that regard. We are using the veto to protect
international law, peace and security and to ensure that
the United States does not to drag the Security Council
into its misadventures. The United States representative
says that we are covering up for someone. Russia is in
Syria at the invitation of its lawful Government in order
to combat international terrorism, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, while the United
States is covering up for militias and terrorists.

If the United States has decided to carry out an
illegal military venture - and we still hope that it will
think better ofit - it must answer for that itself. It wants
to dump this draft resolution, which has been sitting on
the shelf for a long time, onto the Security Council in
order to find a pretext. The United States representative

herself has said repeatedly that if the Council does not
make a decision, the United States will make a decision
on its own. Why is the suta purposely undermining
the Council's authority by promoting a draft resolution
that we know will not go through? And a lot of people
said that yesterday during consultations. We urge the
Americans to give sober consideration to the potential
this presents for confrontation, to think better of it and
to withdraw its draft resolution from a vote. Russia
cannot support it.

