Mr. Taula (New Zealand): I thank Ukraine for
convening today's open debate.

With great sadness I, too, wish to acknowledge the
passing of Ambassador Vitaly Churkin. New Zealand
had the honour of working side-by-side with that
outstanding diplomat over the last two years. I would
like to convey the deep condolences of the New Zealand
Permanent Mission to the Russian Federation, and
particularly to the members of the Russian delegation
here in New York. Ambassador Churkin served his
country with distinction and was deeply respected by
all who worked with him. He will be greatly missed.

In Europe we have seen the significant role that
regional organizations can play in reducing tensions
and promoting peace and security. Monitors from the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) are working in eastern Ukraine to assist efforts
to consolidate a ceasefire. The European Union (EU) is
facilitating dialogue in Kosovo between Belgrade and
Pristina, and is leading a multinational stabilisation
force in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

EU support for the settlement negotiations in
Cyprus under the auspices of the United Nations is
also very welcome. We hope to see the role of regional
organizations in Europe continue to be strengthened
in support of peace, and we welcome their enhanced
engagement with the Council. While there is much to
feel encouraged about, we are concerned at the fact that
some old animosities have been reasserting themselves
in parts of Europe. Those ongoing tensions are a further
demonstration of the need for the United Nations
system and the Council to increase their conflict-
prevention capability.

As a Security Council member, New Zealand was
committed to working with others to take practical
steps to improve the ability of the Council to prevent
conflict. We hope that all Council members will
continue to make good use of the tools at their disposal,
such as the regular situational awareness briefings by
the Secretariat and timely visiting missions to try to
prevent conflicts before they break out. Unclogging
the heavy agenda of the Council would be one way to
help it focus on problem-solving and prevention, rather
than on just managing conflict. We also encourage
the Secretary-General to proactively use his good
offices and other preventative-diplomacy tools to avert
conflict, including briefing the Council at his own
initiative in the spirit of Article 99 of the Charter of the
United Nations.

Conflict prevention is not easy. New Zealand is all
too aware of how sensitive it can be in a practical sense
within the Council, particularly when specific country
situations are being discussed. But the Council should

continue to assess how it can take practical steps to
do better. Doing so will save lives and ensure a more
cost-effective use of resources. There are a number of
current threats to peace and security in Europe that New
Zealand continues to be concerned about, as detailed by
other speakers today.

In Ukraine, we urge all sides to ensure that the
OSCE is able to effectively carry out the responsibilities
entrusted to it by the parties with a view to establishing
a lasting ceasefire. All parties must deliver on their
obligations under the Minsk agreements. We reiterate
our support for Ukraine's territorial integrity, and also
the territorial integrity of Georgia. In Georgia, we call
for internally displaced people to receive unimpeded
humanitarian access and to be able to return to their
homes. We also hope to see commitment from all
parties to resolve tensions in Nagorno-Karabakh.

It is in the interests of all of us, and small States in
particular, to ensure that the principles of the Charter
and the international rules-based system are adhered
to. New Zealand will continue to speak up in support
of those principles, just as we did during our term on
the Council.

