Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): Portugal associates itself
with the statement made this morning by the representative
of the presidency of the Council of the European Union.

Portugal shares the positive assessment of the peace
process in Angola contained in the Secretary-General's
report. Indeed, the formation of a Government of Unity
and National Reconciliation, the return of UNITA
parliamentarians to the National Assembly, the start of
normalization of State administration and the special
status of the President of UNIT A all are milestones in the
Angolan peace process.

These important achievements were obtained with
the firm engagement and support of the international
community, and particularly of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III), and the tireless
efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Maitre Beye.

My delegation would like to pay a heartfelt tribute
to the exemplary efforts of Maitre Beye and the staff of
UNAVEM. III, whose diligence and patience have
overcome countless obstacles, including that most difficult
one to conquer - despair that there will ever be peace.
The United Nations should be justly proud of the work
that UNAVEM. III has done in Angola in support of
peace and national reconciliation.

Certain things, however, remain to be done, and
problems do persist. As the Secretary-General points out
in his report, the road towards lasting peace in Angola
remains a difficult one. Portugal believes that the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA) is the
right response to the current situation in Angola. It will
permit the United Nations to remain engaged in the
process, which is still fragile. On the other hand, the
Angolans must get the message that they must seize this
opportunity to consolidate peace. A return to war will not
be tolerated by the international community.

We hope that the long-awaited meeting inside
Angola between President Jose Eduardo Dos Santos and
Mr. Jonas Savimbi will take place as soon as possible.
My delegation believes that this meeting will contribute
decisively to the completion of the remaining political and
military aspects of the peace process.

Despite the ongoing tensions in north-east Angola,
the manner in which both the Government and UNITA
leadership have been dealing with each other shows that
they may have learned something from bitter experience
about the virtues of restraint and dialogue. The same
could certainly be said about their constructive
cooperation within the Government of Unity and National

 

Reconciliation. We urge them to continue to follow this
pattern.

The different components of MONUA will play a
crucial role in this important stage of the peace process. In
particular, the monitoring of human rights and humanitarian
aspects will have a long-term effect on the type of post-war
society that will emerge in Angola. In this context, we fully
support the strengthening of the police component of
MONUA as well as its political assistance for promotion of
tolerance and national reconciliation.

Portugal will be participating fully in MONUA, as it
will be providing the Mission's medical unit as well as
military and civilian police observers. We have also
pledged funds to the International Organization for
Migration for demobilization and social reintegration
programmes and urge other countries to contribute as well.

MONUA can play a vital role in enhancing confidence
and creating an atmosphere of trust, which is needed to
pave the way for democratic consolidation, including the
rule of law, and the economic rehabilitation of the country.
My country will continue to intensify its bilateral
programmes of cooperation with the Government of
Angola.

With regard to the military aspects of this follow-on
operation, we share the Secretary-General's View that the
pace of withdrawal of United Nations military forces on the
ground must be dictated by the situation in Angola and the
progress in consolidating peace rather than by external
budgetary constraints. After investing so heavily in peace
for Angola - MONUA will be the fourth United Nations
operation there - the United Nations should stay the
course, which is hopefully nearing its destination.

Recent developments in the area have underlined the
importance of peace and national reconciliation in Angola
for stability and security in the wider region. The
international community, in the interest of security in the
region, must therefore support the conclusion of the peace
process in Angola. The establishment of MONUA is an
important step in that direction.

