Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): My delegation would
like to express its satisfaction that the Security Council has
convened this open debate on the situation in Somalia to
explore the full realm of options that may be taken by the
United Nations to encourage the process of national
reconciliation and to address that country's tragic
situation. We deem this meeting to be of significant
importance given the lack of progress in the political
situation and declining security and humanitarian
conditions. It is our sincere hope, therefore, that our
deliberations today will produce effective measures to
encourage and facilitate the creation of an environment
conducive to a peaceful resolution of this crisis.

The Indonesian delegation remains concerned by the
debilitating stalemate in Somalia and the continuing
conflict between the various factions. While it is true that
an all-out civil war has been averted, the reality of the
situation is one dominated by political instability, inter-
clan conflict, banditry and general lawlessness. Moreover,
we believe that maintenance of the status quo can lead
only to widespread hostilities with severe ramifications.

The inability of all the faction leaders to forge
comprehensive political initiatives for achieving national
reconciliation continues to inflict harsh consequences on
the people of Somalia. Furthermore, this continuing
unstable climate has had severe repercussions on the
efforts of the international community to render critical
humanitarian assistance.

We firmly believe that the people of Somalia bear
the ultimate responsibility for achieving national
reconciliation and restoring peace. We therefore consider
it a matter of urgency and importance that all Somali
factions - particularly their leaders - should use all
available means to enter into broad-based consultations,
with the widest possible scope of participation, in order
to avert a further deterioration in the situation.

We call on all parties to work in earnest towards this
end by achieving a genuine compromise that reflects the
needs and aspirations of the people of Somalia as a whole
rather than their own narrow self-interest. My delegation
notes that several recent proposals have been put forward
by the Somali Salvation Alliance and the Somali National
Alliance to begin the process of reconciliation and
dialogue. We wish to stress, however, that their
contribution to a comprehensive peace will prove
inadequate so long as they choose to pursue independent
paths towards peace.

None the less, my delegation also believes that
international community's response will have a profound
impact on the peace process. In this regard, my delegation
maintains that the international community should resist

 

- as was reflected in Security Council
resolution 954 (1994) and clearly stated in the Council's
presidential statement of 24 January 1996
(S/PRST/1996/4) - the temptation to abandon the crisis in
Somalia. We therefore encourage the Organization of
African Unity, the League of Arab States and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference to continue their
efforts, in cooperation with the United Nations, in the
search for a lasting peace in Somalia.

We believe further that it is necessary for all Member
States, in particular the neighbouring countries, to continue
to provide support for all Somali efforts towards genuine
national reconciliation and to refrain from any action
capable of exacerbating the conflict.
My delegation is deeply concerned by the harsh
humanitarian conditions that are inflicting so much
suffering on the people of Somalia. It is particularly
distressing to note the recrudescence of malnutrition and
disease in areas that had shown significant progress in the
past. In order to ameliorate this situation, it both urgent and
important that all parties should extend their fullest
cooperation to humanitarian organizations and personnel.

In this regard, we call on the Somali people to
endeavour to do their utmost to prevent the deplorable
harassment, beatings, abductions and killings of
humanitarian personnel. We also call on United Nations
agencies to redouble their efforts in achieving
administrative efficiency and devising procedures for
circumventing bureaucratic log-jams so that humanitarian
assistance can be more expeditiously provided.

Moreover, the humanitarian situation will, in our view,
continue to deteriorate so long as Mogadishu's main seaport
remains closed and adequate security to protect the
transport of humanitarian supplies is not provided.

My delegation believes that there is an urgent need for
the international community to pursue new initiatives to
break the impasse. To this end, the Indonesian delegation
considers that now is an appropriate time to explore a wide
range of options that would allow for both immediate and
long-term responses.

One of the options available would consist in
upgrading the United Nations Political Office for Somalia
and by relocating it in Somalia as soon as circumstances
permit. The Office should be headed by a resident, high-
ranking officer who would not only provide the Council
with timely and accurate assessments of unfolding
developments but would also act as facilitator in assisting
the Somali parties towards national reconciliation and
towards a peaceful settlement to the conflict.

Furthermore, the Council may consider, as security
conditions permit, sending a mission to Somalia, similar
to the one sent in 1994, so that the Council is in a better
position to respond more effectively.

It is the Indonesian delegation's hope that the actions
taken by the Council will lead to a genuinely all-inclusive
approach to reconciliation which would result in a lasting
political settlement and the re-emergence of a civil society
in Somalia. Only once these conditions are met can the
process of rehabilitation and reconstruction of the country
be undertaken, with the assistance of the international
community.
I shall conclude by stressing that the people of
Somalia have already suffered for far too long. Indeed, it
is our hope that as a consequence of our deliberations
today, a clear signal will be sent to all parties to the
conflict that we are calling on them to cease all hostilities
immediately and to refrain from any activities that might
prevent the peace process from moving forward.

