Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): We would like to
thank Mr. Guehenno for his very informative and
comprehensive briefing.

We welcome the fact that yesterday the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE)
officially established a Temporary Security Zone along
the countries' common border. This represents a
milestone in the resolution of the conflict. It is an
important step towards eliminating the legal and
security vacuum in the relevant areas. It allows for the
immediate restoration of civil administration and the
return of internally displaced persons, which is
particularly urgent given the impending rainy season
and the need to reconnect existing villages and
communities to their administrative support systems.

We are also pleased to note that, on Sunday,
UNMEE signed a protocol agreement with Eritrea
outlining rules of interaction between United Nations
peacekeepers and Eritrean security personnel in the
Temporary Security Zone. We call on both parties to
continue to support the efforts of the Special
Representative, Ambassador Legwaila, keeping in
mind that the zone is a temporary arrangement and in
no way prejudges the final status of contested areas.
We also wish in particular to emphasize the importance
of the work of the Boundary Commission, entrusted
with the delimitation and demarcation of the border
between the two countries.

Finally, I have a few questions to put to
Mr. Guehenno. The Council was informed some time
ago that the Government of Ethiopia had objected to
one of the commissioners nominated by Eritrea. Has
this issue been resolved? The success of the Boundary
Commission will depend upon adequate financial
support for its activities. We are aware of the limited
resources of the Trust Fund, but is there any indication
from the parties of the financial arrangements that they
have made, or intend to make, to meet the obligations
undertaken in the agreement of 12 December?

Finally, Mr. Guehenno informed us that there are
still some problems with the establishment of direct
flights between the capitals. This question was
discussed during our most recent meeting and we were
also informed by the representatives of the two
countries that they are ready to do their utmost to deal
with this precarious situation. What, therefore, is
behind the delay this time?

