I thank Mr. Rajasingham for his briefing. As he pointed out, the coronavirus disease pandemic continues to spread, including in the north-west and north-east. We know that the reality of the pandemic is probably even more alarming than the figures he quoted, as the testing capacity is very low. In that context, an immediate cessation of hostilities and a humanitarian pause, in accordance with the terms of resolution 2532 (2020) and the appeals of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy, are more essential than ever. They are all the more necessary as the truce in the north-west remains fragile. We cannot say it often enough: respect for international humanitarian law is an obligation incumbent on all parties. I am thinking in particular of the protection of civilians, including humanitarian and medical personnel, as well as civilian infrastructure. France will continue to strongly support all efforts to prevent and punish violations of human rights and international humanitarian law. Our collective priority today is to respond to the emergency and meet the ever- growing humanitarian needs not only in Syria, but also in Lebanon, where the needs of Syrian refugees and host communities are exacerbated by recent developments. The instrumentalization of humanitarian assistance must stop. All parties, in particular the Syrian regime, must ensure safe and unhindered humanitarian access to all those in need of assistance. France regrets the closure of the Bab Al-Salam border crossing and the lack of consensus within the Council to reopen the Al-Yarubiyah border crossing, at a time when the spread of the pandemic and worsening food insecurity make the delivery of aid to the north-east and north-west even more essential. However, we cannot ignore the consequences of the adoption of resolution 2533 (2020): humanitarian operations in the north-west are now more costly, higher risk and less timely. In conclusion, only a political solution in line with resolution 2254 (2015) will put an end to the humanitarian tragedy and bring lasting stability to the country. As long as a credible political process is not firmly under way, France and the European Union will not finance reconstruction. Finally, the Council is aware of our positions on the lifting of sanctions and normalization. They remain unchanged.
