Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman
for his detailed briefing. Japan takes note and pays
particular attention to the three points included in
the briefing: first, that the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) faces financial difficulty; secondly,
that the flow of foreign terrorist fighters to Iraq and
Syria has slowed; and, thirdly, that the number of ISIL
fighters has significantly decreased.

These are positive developments, however, since
the last report in February (S/2017/97), we have
witnessed a number of terrorist attacks throughout the
world, including in the United Kingdom, Afghanistan,
Australia, Egypt, Indonesia, the Philippines, France,
Sweden, Russia, Syria, Iraq and now in Iran. On this
occasion, I would like to express again my deepest
sympathy and condolences to the families of those
victims and all the affected Governments. Now, as the
Under-Secretary-General said, the threat posed by ISIL
is evolving globally. While ISIL is experiencing military
setbacks, foreign terrorist fighters are returning to their
countries of origin or relocating to other regions.

As the report (S/2017/467) notes, the threat level
has intensified in South-East Asia. Returnees to that
region continue to pose a significant concern, as they
could increase the military capabilities of local terrorist
networks. Relocators from Iraq and Syria, who are
not nationals of South-East Asian States, are another
source of concern, as they are most likely unknown to
the local authorities. We are alarmed by ISIL's evolving
tactics, which include diversifying financial sources,
disseminating propaganda through social media,
exploiting encrypted applications and using broken
travel. We have heard reports of the use of bitcoin and
drones. ISIL employs those evolving tactics and we
must be responsive to the counterterrorism resolutions
and enhance our capabilities.

The Council has recently adopted resolutions
on aviation security with resolution 2309 (2016);
international judicial cooperation with resolution 2322
(2016); the protection of critical infrastructure with
resolution 2341 (2017); and counter-narratives with
resolution 2354 (2017). The adoption ofthose resolutions
is noteworthy, but their implementation is equally vital.
Japan has implemented them and has also developed
new measures. For example, we recently enacted laws
to prevent terrorists from using bitcoin and virtual
currencies, and to prohibit drones from flying over
critical facilities, embassies, and nuclear plants.

The terrorist threat is global, and we must extend
assistance to those in need as part of our collective
response. Japan, for example, provided $35 million
in March, mainly to South-East Asia, in the light of
the increasing threat in that region. Those funds will
be used to facilitate the implementation of relevant
resolutions through concrete projects, including
on advance passenger information, international
judicial cooperation, INTERPOL databases and
counter-propaganda.

Last week, a briefing was held by the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force on the Capacity
Building Implementation Plan for Countering the Flow
of Foreign Terrorist Fighters, which was established
by PRST/2015/11. While the plan was proposed
two years ago, only eight Member States and two
organizations have contributed thus far and only 41 per
cent of budgetary demands have been met. Japan has
contributed $12.5 million - that is, 12 per cent of the
total budget. Japan invites all Member States to consider
contributing to that plan as well, given the importance
of implementation and impact.

The new office of counter-terrorism is expected to
better coordinate our contributions and, consequently,
to enhance counter-terrorism measures in all Member
States. We must not lose that momentum. We must
unite to fight against ISIL and other terrorist groups by
implementing Council resolutions and developing our
counter-terrorism measures.

