Mr. Brammertz: I am honoured to appear before
the Security Council again, for the first time in my
capacity as Prosecutor of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia. I will brief the Council on the
progress made in the implementation of the Tribunal's
completion strategy since my predecessor's last report.

At the outset, I would like to say that it is a great
privilege for me to have been entrusted with the
mandate of Prosecutor of the International Tribunal, an
institution which, despite great odds, has succeeded in
bringing to justice many of those who bear the greatest
responsibility for atrocities committed in the former
Yugoslavia. That success is the result of the combined
efforts of my predecessors, the Tribunal's judges, its
dedicated staff and the courage of witnesses who have
come forward to testify. Still, none of that would have
been possible without the assistance of States,
international organizations and the endless support of
those active in civil society.

I will now address developments in the following
areas: the ongoing and pending judicial proceedings,
interaction with prosecutors in the region, and the
cooperation of States.

The Office of the Prosecutor is fully committed to
completing all trials and appeals in accordance with its
mandate. Of the 28 individuals on trial, only eight are
in the prosecution phase of the case. There have been
no arrests during the reporting period and four accused
are still at large.

Over the past six months, the Office of the
Prosecutor has taken a number of steps to reduce the
time necessary to present the prosecution case in
ongoing and upcoming trials. We are firmly engaged in
finding ways to expedite proceedings without
diminishing the prosecution's case. My Office is
actively and constructively working with the judges in
exploring ways to speed up proceedings. We have
substantially reduced the length of time in our cases by
using more written evidence instead of live witness
testimony. We also continue to look to improve the
transition from pre-trial to trial and to have all issues
decided pre-trial except those involving live witness
testimony. The objective of those measures is to
achieve greater efficiency in the presentation of

necessary evidence while proving the essential nature
and scope of each accused's responsibility.

I am, however, greatly concerned with regard to
the problems of witness protection, which directly
affect our ability to present a case in an effective and
timely manner. Interference with witnesses,
particularly in the form of witness intimidation, has
become increasingly frequent and problematic.
Witnesses have been intimidated and threatened and, as
a result, refused to testify or reversed their testimony.
Where appropriate, we have addressed those concerns
together with the Registry and Chambers. We have also
conducted formal investigations, some of which have
resulted in indictments charging individuals with
contempt of the Tribunal. Unfortunately, despite those
efforts, the problems are not abating.

That is why I ask States in which witnesses reside
to assist the International Tribunal by ensuring that
necessary measures are taken to avoid any witness
interference. International trials will succeed only if
witnesses are protected from intimidation and threats.

As the International Tribunal nears the
completion of its mandate, cooperation between my
Office and national judicial and prosecution authorities
has become even more important and is now a focal
point of our activities. Their roles are crucial to the
strengthening of justice in the former Yugoslavia.

With the assistance of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), we
continue to monitor all cases transferred pursuant to
our Rules of Procedure and Evidence. At the same
time, we remain actively involved in transferring
investigation files and other material, including
evidence that is requested by national prosecutors. We
work closely with national judicial and prosecution
authorities from the former Yugoslavia and assist them
so that they can continue to effectively prosecute war
crimes cases.

Since I took office, I have had several fruitful
meetings with State and war crimes prosecutors from
the region. Last month I attended a successful
conference in Croatia with prosecutors from the region,
which resulted in a renewed commitment from all
participants to intensify national war crimes
prosecutions and to strengthen cooperation among
themselves.

I am determined to reinforce professional ties
with national prosecutors and develop true
partnerships. I will also continue to explore further
methods of cooperation, such as engaging prosecutors
and experts from the region and our office to facilitate
the sharing of expertise and to provide practical hands
on training. I kindly ask the international community to
support such initiatives.

International support to national courts in the
former Yugoslavia will remain crucial in the coming
months and years. In this respect, I am very concerned
that, as the President of the Tribunal has already
mentioned, future funding for the War Crimes
Department in the Office of the Prosecutor of Bosnia
and Herzegovina may be reduced and that international
prosecutors may leave, thereby jeopardizing the work
of the State court. I hope funds will be made available,
as I believe that the role of the War Crimes Prosecutor
and Chamber is crucial in strengthening Bosnia and
Herzegovina's still-fragile justice system.

In order to succeed in fulfilling our mandate, we
still rely heavily on cooperation from the States of the
former Yugoslavia and the support of the international
community. Since I took office, I have repeatedly
called upon those States to fully cooperate with my
Office. I have specifically requested access to archives
and documents and the arrest and transfer of the
remaining fugitives.

Although Croatia has, in the past six months,
made available certain archival materials, a number of
important requests for key documents required for
ongoing trials are still pending. As these trials are in
progress, it is crucial that the requested documents be
made available immediately.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has generally responded
in a satisfactory way to requests for assistance. We
would, however, like to encourage the authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to adopt a more proactive
approach against those helping the fugitives evade
justice.

Serbia has provided adequate responses to
number of requests for assistance. However, significant
obstacles remain in relation to access to some key
archives and documents for ongoing trials and those
that are about to begin in the very near future. In the
coming weeks, teams from my Office will meet again
with senior officials in Belgrade to continue our efforts
to obtain these documents.

The arrest of fugitives remains a key challenge.
We strongly believe that the remaining fugitives -
Ratko Mladic, Radovan Karadzic, Stoj an Zupljanin and
Goran Hadzic - are within reach of the authorities in
Serbia and that the Serbian authorities can do more to
locate and arrest them. With the exception of a genuine
but, alas, failed attempt to arrest Mr. Zupljanin, there
has been no notable progress in this critical area of
cooperation during the past six months. One of the
reasons given by the authorities for this lack of
cooperation is the political uncertainty in which Serbia
has found itself since the beginning of the year. It is
my hope that the new Government will empower the
security services and the Office of the War Crimes
Prosecutor to search for, arrest and transfer the
remaining fugitives.

I ask the Council to endorse my call for
international support and full cooperation from the
international community and from the States of the
former Yugoslavia. This message is important,
especially as we near the completion of ongoing trials.

Six months ago, I joined an institution that is well
on its way to fulfilling its mandate. As an outside
observer, 1 was impressed by the International
Tribunal's achievements. Now that I am in-post, I
witness every day the commitment and dedication of
our staff members. I therefore ask the Council to
support initiatives and measures to retain the expert
staff the Tribunal needs in order to conclude its work.

We are committed to fulfil our mandate. At the
same time, I cannot think of a situation in which the
Tribunal, having been established to try those most
responsible for atrocious crimes, will close its doors
without bringing to justice all remaining fugitives.
During my trip to Bosnia and Herzegovina last March,
I met with a number of victims' associations. After
all these years, their demands for justice are
unwavering - and unanswered in respect of the
fugitives. I was impressed by the courage of the
survivors and the clarity of their message that the
accused must be tried by the International Tribunal.
They have never given up, and neither can we. We owe
them the justice that was promised 15 years ago, when
the Tribunal was set up.
I thank the Council for its support to the Office of
the Prosecutor. We continue to rely on it.

