Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): Today's meeting,
convened on the initiative of Sweden, should not focus on
or end up with a mere renewal of the general commitment
to protecting children and armed conflicts. There is no
doubt that, at least in principle, this endeavour is shared
by all ofus. Therefore, our meeting and resolution 2427
(2018), which we adopted this morning, should focus
on the most practical and appropriate measures to make
sure that this commitment is fulfilled and that the place
of children is in school and not in armed conflicts.

Let me say at this juncture that, regardless of the
situation, any child who is in an armed conflict is by
definition a victim.

Let me address the Council, the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative as Chair of the Security
Council Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict:
Be bold in proposing and advancing measures, bearing
in mind all the mechanisms, procedures and authority
that you hold and make clear the interaction that exists
between all areas of intervention that were defined
perfectly the concept note before us(S/2018/625, annex).

We recognize the extreme importance of and
strongly support the mandate of the Office of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. We always wait for her report to be
published, which marks a crucial moment at the United
Nations. We would like something to be added to that
report. We also believe that the United Nations list of
terrorist groups in the annexes of the report should be
differentiated from other non-State actors or parties to
peace processes or peace agreements.

It is rather shocking that, 13 years after the adoption
ofresolution 1612 (2005), which established the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, there is still a
constant increase in violations against children, as is
underlined by the most recent report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/465). The case of the Central African
Republic is one terrible example, as the use of children
in armed conflict has quadrupled in that country. That
is appalling. In all cases, 21,000 violations of children's
rights, as documented by the report of the Secretary-
General, represent 21,000 challenges to all of us and to
the Security Council. This cannot continue.

We would like to see the consolidation of the results
of the global Children, Not Soldiers campaign through
renewed efforts by Governments and agencies, but we
must recognize that those efforts have not reversed
the negative trend. Barbaric attacks are still being
committed by terrorist groups, such as Boko Haram,
Da'esh and the Movement for Unity and Jihad in Western
Africa, in particular the kidnapping and selling of girls
to terrorist fighters. That is another challenge to us all
that calls for greater coordinated efforts, and we should
continue to give specific attention to the protection of
girls, as they are at greater risk of sexual violence and
sexual exploitation and abuse.

Long-standing peace will never be achieved unless
we give children the means, skills and education to
rebuild a society and institutions torn apart by armed
conflict. Peacekeeping missions have an important
role to play in the protection of children in situations
of armed conflict. It is therefore essential that
peacekeeping missions receive the necessary training
and resources to effectively perform that critical task.

In the context of peacekeeping processes, we
strongly believe that specific provisions on the
protection of children and armed conflict should be
included in all peace negotiations and agreements and
in peacebuilding. Indeed, for example, the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, signed in Algiers
in 2015, contains specific provisions related to the
protection of children from armed conflict and the
engagement of communities to support the return
and maintenance of children, especially girls, in
school. Such provisions should inspire all ongoing
peace pI'OCGSSCS.

Let me conclude by saying that the increased
number and scope of conflict hasten the importance
of cooperation and coordination between the United
Nations and regional organizations, especially the
African Union, in all areas and precisely on prevention.

