Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
commends Ukraine for taking the initiative to convene
today's ministerial-level open debate on resolving
conflicts in Europe. We also welcome Foreign Minister
Klimkin, who is presiding over today's meeting. I
would like to thank Secretary-General Guterres for his
briefing.

China listened attentively to the statements made
by Mr. Zannier, Secretary General of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE),
and Ms. Schmid, Secretary General of the European
External Action Service. In recent years, the situation
in Europe has generally been calm and positive progress
has been made on hotspot issues. However, complex and
uncertain factors remain pronounced, as manifested by
terrorist attacks in some countries, the ongoing refugee
crisis and the rise in traditional and non-traditional
security challenges. Therefore, the concerted efforts of
all countries are required to respond to such challenges.
I would like to emphasize the following points.

First, we must foster the concept of community with
a shared destiny. After the people of Europe suffered
the devastation of the two world wars, cherishing peace
is the common aspiration of all countries. European
integration is a regional cooperation process that
was the first of its kind to be launched, the fastest to
develop and the most remarkable in progress after
the Second World War. As most European countries
have national interests that are deeply intertwined
and have close relations with countries outside of the
region, they can better the importance of building
a community with a shared destiny. We hope the
countries of Europe will discard the zero-sum-game
notion; build a new kind of international relations
characterized by win-win cooperation at its core;
nurture a common, comprehensive, cooperative and
sustainable paradigm of security; actively bring into
play their strengths in economic development and
interconnectivity; constantly create new growth drivers
based on converging interests; enhance cooperation
with other regions of the world; and make unremitting
efforts towards achieving lasting peace and common
development.

Secondly, all countries should adhere to resolving
disputes peacefully. They should continue to observe
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and stay committed to settling their differences
through dialogue and consultation. Parties to volatile
issues in Europe should display good will; respect
each other; enhance mutual trust; build up consensus;
and endeavour to find comprehensive, just and lasting
solutions to the issues. The international community
and regional countries should play an active role in
facilitating peace talks and encouraging the parties
concerned to scale up their dialogue, meet each other
halfway and seize positive momentum, with a view to
enhancing mediation efforts and contributing positively
to peaceful settlement.

Thirdly, diversity in civilizations should be
respected. The diversity of and differences among the
nations, religions and cultures in European countries
represent an important source for progress in the
region. All countries should continue to engage in
all-embracing and harmonious exchanges among
civilizations, while acknowledging the differences;
advocate ethnic integration; promote dialogue among
religions; defuse and reconcile differences through
mutual learning and complementarity; foster a stable
and harmonious social environment; and create an
enabling climate for properly handling regional
conflicts, terrorism and refugee issues.

Fourthly, cooperation between the Security
Council and regional organizations in Europe, such
as the European Union (EU) and the OSCE should
be strengthened. The Security Council is the core
mechanism responsible for maintaining international
peace and security, while the EU and the OSCE have
accumulated rich experience in conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. They should make
full use oftheir respective strengths and form synergies
to resolve conflicts in Europe and safeguard peace
and stability in the region. Relevant efforts should be
guided by the principles of objectivity, impartiality and
respect for the sovereignty of the countries concerned.
Furthermore, efforts should be made to heed the views
of the parties concerned, while refraining from double
standards and the imposition of one's will upon others.

China has always attached great importance
to the strategic position and role of Europe, and
Sino-European relations have consistently been a
priority in Chinese diplomacy. We welcome a united,
stable and prosperous Europe. China stands ready,
through the One Belt, One Road initiative and other
platforms - including the Sino-European Cooperation
Mechanism - to deepen the comprehensive
Sino-European strategic partnership, which is based on
mutual benefits and win-win cooperation. We also stand
ready to work with the EU to achieve fresh progress in
four partnership areas through the promotion of peace,
growth, reform and civilization, and to make a greater
contribution to achieving lasting peace in Europe and
common prosperity.

