Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Toure and
Ambassador Vieira for their informative briefings.

The situation in Guinea-Bissau is concerning.
It is not the first country in the world to experience
a political impasse, but it is a country that continues
to emerge from the serious instability and violence
of its recent past. The political impasse has prevented
progress on reforms that are critical to addressing key
conflict risks in Guinea-Bissau. The situation is only
likely to become more volatile as we move towards
elections. We have already seen violent confrontations
between demonstrators and police, and witnessed
worrying efforts to curb political freedoms. Economic
growth is at risk, and a serious deterioration in stability
would be deeply damaging for development and human
rights. The illicit economy and transnational organized
crime risk becoming further entrenched, with global
implications. More broadly, instability in Guinea-
Bissau would affect the wider region, which over the
past year has been, for the most part, the site of positive
political progress.

The United Kingdom welcomes the leadership
shown by the West African region, particularly through
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). It has shown persistence and patience. This
is a crisis that began in 2015. It brokered the Conakry
Agreement 15 months ago. It has agreed to countless
communique's and published innumerable statements.
It has sent numerous high-level delegations to Guinea-
Bissau, including three over the past six months alone.
But those most responsible for Guinea-Bissau's crisis
have responded with stubborn refusal to give ground
and find compromise. Therefore, it is understandable
that the region's patience has worn thin. ECOWAS has
now been driven to impose sanctions against individuals
deemed responsible for impeding the implementation
of the Conakry Agreement. The African Union Peace
and Security Council has endorsed that move. The
United Kingdom supports the ECOWAS decision,
and we urge the Security Council and the entire
international community to remain united in support of
ECOWAS efforts.

We also believe that it is important to recognize
the bold efforts of civil society in Guinea-Bissau to
resolve the crisis. In particular, the mediation efforts
launched by the Women's Facilitation Group were an
encouraging initiative, and we welcome the support
given to them by the United Nations.

As set out in resolution 2343 (2017), political
support for efforts towards the implementation of the
Conakry Agreement should be a priority for the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-
Bissau. The key next step remains the appointment of
a consensus Prime Minister so that preparations can
proceed for legislative elections in 2018, as per the
country's Constitution. As we open discussions on its
renewal, the United Kingdom will focus on ensuring
that the Mission's mandate responds to today's political
reality on the ground, that it is realistic and that it is
focused on the highest priority needs.
Guinea-Bissau's people watched the country
emerge from a period of instability but then found their
hopes for democracy obstructed by a political knot that
their own leaders tied. Support from the region and the
international community to prevent the country from
backsliding further will not succeed until those who
tied the knot untangle it. We hope that good sense,
compromise and the commitment to Guinea-Bissau's
future will prevail.

