Mr. Vieira (Brazil): At the outset, allow me to
thank you, Madam, for organizing this timely open
debate on preventing and combating the financing of
terrorism. 1 would also like to extend my appreciation
to the Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism, the President of the
Financial Action. Task Force and to the expert in
anti-money-laundering and countering the financing of
terrorism for their informative briefings.

Every terrorist attack, no matter where it happens
and whom it targets, affects each one of us. Terrorism
challenges our sense of humanity and attempts to create
an environment of fear and despair. Only through our
collective effort can we counter this scourge and prevent
further attacks. Combating the financing of terrorism is
a good example of an area where cooperation is key and
where results may have direct impacts on the ability of
terrorist groups to continue to operate.

Brazil is committed to the elimination ofterrorism,
including its financing. Our Constitution establishes
the repudiation of terrorism as one of the guiding
principles of our foreign policy. We updated our
legislation to typify the crimes of preparatory acts
of terrorism and of recruitment of foreign terrorist
combatants. Particularly with respect to financing, we
have been working to simplify the procedures to block
assets of terrorists listed by the Council. Two weeks
ago, Brazil adopted a law to facilitate the immediate
implementation of Security Council resolutions
concerning sanctions against individuals and entities
affiliated with terrorist organizations. Coupled with
previous legislative changes, this legislative piece brings
the Brazilian regulatory framework completely within
the standards of the Financial Action Task Force. It is
imperative that we intensify our work on cutting off the
sources of terrorism financing. As a related measure,
we should also sharpen our focus on combating money
laundering. Although there is no evidence of automatic
operational links between terrorism and crime, money
launderers may work for both indistinctively. There are
two issues that I would like to address in today's debate.

First, we should always keep in mind that any
counter-terrorism action, including on financing, must
abide by international law, in particular human rights
law, humanitarian law and refugee law. That might
seem to be common sense, as the Council consistently
stresses that point throughout its resolutions. However,
practice has shown that sometimes well-intended
legislation ends up causing international law violations
when applied.

Broad interpretations of counter-terrorism
legislation by national courts have hindered
humanitarian action in the past. As recognized in the
sixth review of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, it is imperative that Member
States ensure that their counter-terrorism measures
do not impede humanitarian and medical activities
or engagement with all relevant actors. That is key
to ensuring that our actions effectively contribute to
eradicating terrorism. If counter-terrorism efforts
disregard basic notions of humanity and the shared
values that inspire humanitarian law, they risk
reinforcing rather than countering the narratives of
terrorist groups.

The second point I would like to make relates to
prevention. As the concept note (S/2019/239, annex)
accurately points out, a number of terrorist attacks have
been perpetrated by individuals with limited financial
resources. That raises a question about the limits of
strategies focused on cutting off the financial sources
of terrorism. As history has taught us, terrorism is
hardly about money. Financial sources are certainly an
enabler of those terrible acts, and as such they need to
be addressed accordingly. Nevertheless, when a group
or an individual seeks to find the means to perpetrate
a terrorist act, the damage is already done because the
decision to resort to violence and terror has already
been made. That is why we must cut off the deeper
sources of terrorism by addressing its root causes.

Terrorist groups have been attracting recruits by
offering them an illusory sense of purpose, belonging
and identity. Social exclusion and youth unemployment
have been increasing the vulnerability of people to
the recruitment tactics of terrorist groups. Moreover,
expressions of xenophobia, discrimination and
prejudice not only contribute to social exclusion but
also fuel extremist narratives that are conducive to
terrorism. We must react against speech and any action
that is inconsistent with the respect for diversity, such
as those associating terrorism with specific cultures,
religions or ethnic groups.

There is no justification for terrorism. Brazil
condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
and is engaged in counter-terrorism efforts at the
United Nations, as the main Organization that
can bring universal consensus to the efforts of the
international community against that scourge. In
particular, the Council has a special role in condemning
terrorism and preventing its spread in a coherent and
universal manner, while always ensuring full respect
for international law. It is our hope that the discussions
that we have in this Chamber today will contribute to
bringing the scourge of terrorism to a definitive end.

