Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. David
Shearer for his briefing and for his outstanding work
under difficult conditions. I also thank Mr. Andrew
Gilmour and Ms. Lydia Minagano for their briefings.

On 9 July it will have been eight years since South
Sudan became independent. Five of those years have
been marked by the effects of civil war. The conflict
has claimed the lives of nearly 400,000 people. One
in three people have been forced to leave their homes.
One in two face acute food insecurity, or worse. It is
expected that about 860,000 children under the age of
5 will suffer from severe malnutrition in 2019. Women
and girls are the most affected by violence, including
degrading and barbaric sexual violence. No one is
spared, neither women in their 80s nor 2-year-old girls.
We can only imagine the intolerable suffering of the
people of South Sudan, and it must spur real action
from the leaders of South Sudan.
Just before 12 May, what was to be the end of
the eight-month pre-transition period, the South
Sudanese parties unanimously agreed to a six-month
extension to allow for the implementation of the
essential pre-transition conditions. The region and
the international community supported that decision,
but time is passing, no progress has been made and
there is a real risk of compromising the gains that
have been made. Unless there is significant political
investment from the parties and the region, including
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, to
accelerate preparations for the transition period, the
new deadline could be missed.

That is worrisome - the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan presents the window of opportunity to
instil lasting peace in the country. We encourage all
actors to spare no effort to achieve real progress on
key issues in the implementation of the agreement.
The parties must put in place security arrangements,
finalize the determination of internal boundaries,
create an implementation road map, organize face-to-
face meetings of key political leaders and release the
implementation funds announced by the Government.
Non-signatory parties must sign the agreement. We
support the Secretary-General's call for the parties to
refrain from mutual recrimination and inflammatory
rhetoric. The firm commitment of the States of the
region is essential to ensuring the implementation of
the agreement.

The protection of civilians remains critical.
Although political violence has decreased, there has
been an increase in intercommunal violence in recent
months. Human rights abuses continue. There can be no
lasting solution to the conflict in South Sudan without
addressing those abuses urgently and effectively. We
call for an end to the culture of impunity. We call on
the Government to assume its responsibility to protect
civilians, thoroughly investigate all cases of sexual
violence and other abuses and bring those responsible
for those crimes to justice. We call for the establishment
of transitional justice mechanisms, including the hybrid
court, to combat impunity.

Restrictions on the freedom of expression are
unacceptable. A country can flourish only with a
diverse and active civil society and free media. Political
prisoners and prisoners of war must be released without
delay. It is also unacceptable that the whereabouts of
two staff members of the United Nations Mission in
the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) has remained
unknown since their arrest in 2014: the South Sudanese
authorities should immediately inform UNMISS about
their condition and location.

Conflict is the main factor driving the humanitarian
crisis and violence in South Sudan, a crisis that is
completely man-made. Any delay in the implementation
of the agreement will prolong the suffering of the
people of South Sudan. The steps that are needed have
been identified; it is now up to the parties to take them.

