Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
would first like to thank Mr. Haile Menkerios, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing, and you, Mr. President, for organizing today's
meeting at a very timely moment, just as the Security
Council has returned from its annual meeting in Addis
Ababa with the African Union Peace and Security
Council and when one of the main parts of the General
Assembly's high-level week will be devoted to a Council
meeting on 20 September on maintaining peace. In that
regard, Mr. President, I commend your team's work on
a draft resolution on peacekeeping operations, which
France supports. Today I would like to enlarge on three
main points arising from our discussions in Addis
Ababa last week.

My first point is about emphasizing once again the
strategic nature of the partnership between the United
Nations, the African Union (AU) and the regional
economic communities. France is firmly committed
to strengthening that partnership. The time has come
to make a qualitative leap, as part of the evolution of
peacekeeping and the division of roles between the
United Nations and regional organizations, and to fully
implement Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations. That change is both inevitable - owing to the
evolving nature of the multiplying threats to peace - and
highly desirable, owing to the two organizations' clear
respective comparative advantages. It should enable us
to share tasks in a rational way, which will both improve
operations' efficiency and performance and ensure a
better allocation of financial and human resources.

The many crises affecting Africa and their terrible
consequences for its peoples, particularly on the
humanitarian front and with regard to violations of
human rights, compel us to deepen our thinking on how
to provide an adequate response. We must also work
together if we are to be more effective in preventing
such crises. That has been the aim of all the efforts
made since the Secretary-General took office, working
in close collaboration with the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission. It has also been the aim of
the actions taken in the wake of the Council's adoption,
in November 2016, of resolution 2320 (2016) and the
signing, on 19 April, of the Joint United Nations-
African Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security, as well as the Council's Visit to
Addis Ababa for its annual meeting with the African
Union Peace and Security Council.

Of course - and this is the second point I would
like to address 4 the question of the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union for
peace and security in Africa means dealing with the
goal of improving the conduct and organization as well
as the financing ofAfrican peace operations authorized
or mandated by the Security Council. African peace
operations can have comparative advantages over
their United Nations counterparts. They can be
deployed more quickly and benefit from more robust
mandates, and their troop contingents generally have
a good knowledge of the terrain. Besides that, they
also correspond to the universally supported goal of
African States' ownership of their own security. In
that regard, I commend the work undertaken so far
by the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission. Several options have been
proposed for financing African operations and should
be followed up and defined more precisely, including
the AU Peace Fund, designed to enable African States
to finance 25 per cent of the cost of operations by 2020
in line with the decision taken at the Kigali Summit in
July 2016 and confirmed at the Addis Ababa Summit in
January. And I would also point to the financial impact
that such proposals could have on the budget of the
United Nations.

With regard to political and operational cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union, the
Security Council, the AU Peace and Security Council, the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission have come up with constructive
proposals for a joint mechanism for analysing threats,
defining mandates and assessing operations. Those
concepts should be pursued with a View to producing
more detailed proposals on strengthening the capacities
of the African Union and African's regional economic
communities for planning and conducting peace
operations, in collaboration with the United Nations.
That also involves creating mechanisms essential to
ensuring transparency, accountability and respect for
codes of conduct and respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law. The Security Council
must be kept duly informed and able to guide the
missions it authorizes and mandates.

The third point I want to make is that while
African peacekeeping operations are key to the return
of stability in the African continent, they are not the
only decisive factor. That is why strengthening the
partnership between the United Nations and the AU
and regional economic communities must also be based
on a collaborative approach aimed either at better
preventing crisis situations - for example, through
greater sharing of early warning information, and I
welcome the progress made in cooperation between the
United Nations and the AU to that end - or at better
anticipating solutions for ending crises by sharing a
common political vision.

In particular, as the Secretary-General highlights
in his report (S/2017/744), it would seem indispensable
for the African Union and the regional economic
communities to contribute, where relevant, to creating
conditions conducive to a political resolution of crises
on which stabilization and reconstruction efforts can
be based. As our discussion in Addis Ababa strongly
highlighted, we must therefore ensure that the
partnership is not limited to issues of security but that
it be expanded and deepened in the area of sustaining
peace and sustainable development, in line with the the
African Union Agenda 2063 and the United Nations
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

To conclude, I wish to underscore that many crises
on the Council's agenda - be it the threat posed by
Boko Haram in the Lake Chad basin countries, the
situation in Somalia, or insecurity in Mali and the region
of the Group of Five for the Sahel - are emblematic
of the regional and cross-cutting nature of issues
facing States and peoples today. The interlinkage of
security, political, environmental, social and economic
challenges requires an integrated response addressing
both urgent security issues and the underlying causes
of Violence.

The time has come to make a decisive qualitative
leap in the United Nations-AU partnership by
articulating their respective actions in a structured and
pragmatic way. France is determined to contribute to
that end and to support the efforts of the Secretary-
General and the Deputy Secretary-General in this area.

