Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank President Theodor Meron,
President Vagn Joensen, Prosecutor Brammertz and
Prosecutor Jallow for their briefings on the reports
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) (S/2013/308) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) (S/20l3/310).

Next year, we will be celebrating the twentieth
anniversary of the ICTR. This year we have
commemorated that of the ICTY. The press statement
made on behalf of Security Council members on
22 May, under the Togolese presidency, to mark those
events reflected the commitment of the international
community to combat impunity. It is therefore
important to take stock, in a critical and constructive
manner, of the activities of the two Tribunals in order
to draw the best lessons from both their failures and
their successes, with a view to urging the international
community to work with greater determination to
promote international criminal justice. To that end,
Togo believes that the Council has been wise to expand
today's debate to include more participants than usual.

The reports presented reflect the progress that
has been made towards completion of the mandates,
sometimes through the modification of procedures,
all the while respecting the principle of due process.
The ICTR has concluded all trial court cases in a
timely manner. We urge the ICTR to keep its pledge in
terms of appeals to make two further arrests before the
end of 2013 and to hold substantive hearings without
significant delays in the six pending cases.

The ICTY, for its part, is still doing its best to stay
on schedule, despite being short of staff and appeals
judges and the workload resulting from new arrests.
In that context, the redeployment of Judge William
Sekule from the ICTR to the Appeals Chamber, at a
time when one of the ICTR judges of that Chamber has
resigned, will not be enough to respond to the persistent
difficulties at the ICTY in appointing judges to the
Appeals Chamber.

Togo takes note of the decision of the Council
whereby one of the two neijudges will be chosen
by appointment and the other by election to bring the
number of judges to the level commensurate to the
proportions of the task and challenges to be met.

Togo wishes to stress the negative impact of
the constraints resulting from the reduction in and
departure of qualified staff on the completion strategies
of the two Tribunals as well as on the transition
towards the Residual Mechanism. We think that the
entities concerned within the United Nations should
take appropriate steps to minimize the consequences
of the problem. We are also pleased that the end of
the ICTR and the ICTY will not spell impunity for
persons still on the run, since certain cases, including
those of ICTR fugitives, have been referred to national
jurisdictions. Monitoring mechanisms still need to
be established to guarantee due process before those
national jurisdictions.

Regarding the problem of the resettlement of
persons acquitted or who have served their sentences
but who continue to be denied their liberty due to the
lack of a host country, the Council should explore
appropriate ways and means to assist the Tribunals
in that respect. In that regard, Togo welcomes the
coordination initiative with the International Criminal
Court with a view to devising possible solutions.

It is clear that this unjust constraint imposed
on persons supposedly at liberty is at odds with the
agreements with the host countries, whereby those
persons, following their trials or serving their sentences,
should no longer reside in the host territory. But that
constraint also affects the credibility of the commitment
of the United Nations to ensuring international criminal
justice in accordance with the principles of the rule of
law or the primacy of law. The Council should call
on the Secretary-General to submit to it a report on
the role that has been, or could be, played by United
Nations entities and make recommendations to guide
the Council.

The interactive informal dialogue held on 14 March
with Mr. Bongani Majola, the ICTR Registrar, and
Mr. John Hocking, the ICTY Registrar, and with the
Residual Mechanism allowed us not only to take stock
of progress made towards completion of the mandate,
but also to grasp the scope of the challenges to come
for each of the branches of the Residual Mechanism.
We welcome the transfer of activities and the assistance
from the two Tribunals to the Arusha branch of the
Residual Mechanism. That experience will help better
organize The Hague branch, which will begin its work
on 1 July.

Outreach is one of the fundamental pillars for
the Tribunals in implementing the mandates through
raising the awareness not only of the broader public
but also of States and international institutions. Thus
Togo encourages initiatives from the Tribunals, not
just to bolster the capacities of States and international
organizations, but also to sensitize individuals in
order to prevent similar crimes. However, as we stated
regarding the Special Court for Sierra Leone last
October, Togo would like to draw attention to the fact
that the impact of images can still surprise and often
backfire. Therefore it calls on the two Tribunals to
follow the appropriate educational approach to counter
the negative effect of images that could rather inspire or
encourage certain persons to replicate atrocities.

