Ms. Rooijmans: This meeting today is an extremely
important one, as it serves as a way for the Security
Council - and the global community - to take stock
of their performance on the protection of civilians.
Sadly, the report card is bleak.

I speak today on behalf of Oxfam, a humanitarian
and development organization. Two out of every three
women, men, and children we work with are affected
by violence and conflict, and the protection of civilians
is at the heart of our mission. In our experience, what
people we work with call for is not just relief; it is
protection. Yet every day - from Yemen to South
Sudan - we witness the failure to protect civilians and
its human impact.

Yemen, for example, has seen more than 8,000
civilian casualties since the start of the conflict. Some
14.4 million people are food insecure, and this is not
because of natural circumstances but because of the
fighting and insecurity. Rabab, a 33-year-old woman
who now lives in Amran with her eight children, told
Oxfam recently:

"Our kids are scared, we are tired and homeless
and we keep moving without knowing where we
will end up. We need the foreign Governments that
are supporting this war to work together to end it.
Enough blood! Innocent people are dying daily,
and for what? In the name of what, exactly?"

In Syria, every month, every day, there are reports
of more barrel bombs and mortar and missile attacks,
and of starving civilians in besieged towns. Close to
300,000 people have been killed since 2011, and more
than half of the population have fled their homes.

In South Sudan, deadly fighting has left tens of
thousands dead, more than 2 million people displaced
and even more going severely hungry. At the same time,
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan is facing
difficulties in implementing its mandate of protecting
civilians across the country.

These are just three of the many places around
the world where civilians are under threat, trapped in
conflict every day. Let us keep those civilians at heart
and in the forefront of our minds today as we discuss
protection and as we find ways together to bridge the
gap between rhetoric and reality, and between what
the international community has already committed to
doing and what is actually happening.

Let me share a few examples. World leaders must
recommit to upholding international humanitarian law.
We urge parties to conflicts to refrain from bombing or
shelling populated areas. Member States should support
the process under way to negotiate an international
instrument to clarify international humanitarian law
with regard to the use of explosive weapons in populated
areas.

We cannot reiterate often enough the importance
of prevention. When civilians face violence, such as in
Burundi currently, it is critical that the Security Council
act upon the early warnings in a timely manner.

The Security Council must implement the
resolutions that already exist. On Syria, for example,
it has condemned indiscriminate attacks, besiegement
and deliberate blocks to life-saving assistance; it must
now ensure that these demands are heeded.

World leaders must also implement the Arms Trade
Treaty. Adhering to this Treaty means that Member
States make all arms transfers subject to observance
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.

Failure to protect civilians has forced nearly
60 million people to flee their homes, more than at any
other time since the Second World War, often taking
risky and at times fatal routes as they search for safety.
All countries have commitments under international
law to provide assistance and protection to those
seeking asylum, no matter where they are coming from.

Where there are peacekeeping missions to protect
civilians, troop- and police-contributing countries must
fully subscribe to and implement their mandate, and be
willing and allowed to act, and use force if need be, in
the face of threats to civilians.

Peace operations must also take a more
people-centred approach, as recommended by both the
report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (S/2015/446) and the Secretary-General's
action plan. For this people-centredness to become
a reality, a fundamental transformation in terms of
approach, action and culture needs to happen. A critical
element thereof is engagement with communities, in
particular with the women, in a safe and respectful
manner. A people-centred approach in peace operations
also means employing more women, in particular
among uniformed staff - that rate currently stands at a
poor 4 per cent - and in leadership positions.

In fact, many of the elements that are needed to
protect civilians have already been agreed, whether it is
international humanitarian law, the Arms Trade Treaty,
Security Council resolutions condemning violations in
Syria, the women and peace and security agenda, or
peacekeeping mission mandates.

A critical missing piece is implementation, the
action that world leaders need to take to turn the
rhetoric into reality. Without the follow-through by the
Security Council and by Member States, resolutions
and agreements ring hollow and civilians such as Rabab
feel abandoned 4 and rightly so.

We must also continue to find opportunities
for civilian voices to be heard by those in power: at
Arria Formula meetings, when the Security Council
visits conflict-affected countries, and here in this very
Council Chamber.

Just yesterday, a Syrian woman sent me this
message: "There is nothing dignified in what is
happening to my family and my friends right now,
except that we are still here and have not given up". Her
resilience is enormous. However, she and all those in
conflict-affected countries, need concrete measures. It
is action that we need now more than ever.

