Mr. Jagne (Gambia): At the outset, let me
congratulate you on your becoming President of the
Security Council. We are delighted to see you in the
chair. With your legendary dynamism and vast
experience, we are confident that your presidency will
be eventful and successful. We wish you the very best.
Similarly, my delegation would like to pay tribute to
your predecessor, Ambassador Lavrov, for a job well
done.
Having said that, we also thank you for
organizing this open meeting devoted to the report of
the Panel of Experts on Sierra Leone, diamonds and
arms. We welcome the idea of bringing this thorny
issue out in the open. It affords us the opportunity of
not only clearing our name but also stopping the bad
blood in our West African subregion that the Sierra
Leonean blood diamonds have recently created, further
exacerbated by the broad and thorough report of the
Panel of Experts.

We in the Gambia were flabbergasted by its
baseless and malicious allegations. As a peace-loving
nation that has always enjoyed excellent relations with
Sierra Leone, a sister country, it has made our blood
boil and has left us wondering whether, for some
obscure reason or reasons unknown to us, the Panel is
out for our country's blood. Despite all the odds, our
blood is not up. All we want to do is to set the record
straight.

First and foremost, we would have thought that
the Panel of Experts, out of courtesy, should have
visited the Gambia and discussed any issue of concern
with the competent Gambian authorities, as the Experts
have done with other countries mentioned in their
report. Why have they not done so? Is there a hidden
agenda to mount a smear campaign against the
Gambia? What is the motive behind these baseless
allegations? The representative of Ukraine is perfectly
right in stating that all relevant evidence should be
brought to the attention of the Governments concerned.
That was not the case with my Government. Yet we all
want a healthy and fruitful working relationship with
the Panel.

Let me hasten to point out that we have never
denied that some individuals have been involved in this
trade since time immemorial - long before the
Gambia gained independence from Britain in 1965.
This is common knowledge. My Sierra Leonean
colleague and friends and I have laughed over it many
times. He is here to bear me witness. But there should
be a distinction between the actions of individuals and
those of a Government. Individuals should be
accountable for their actions. A Government should not
be taken to task for, or have to account for, the actions
of an individual or group of individuals, especially in a
case like this.

This is why we are insisting on our invitation to
the Panel of Experts to visit the Gambia and present to
the authorities in Banjul the evidence they have - if
any - linking the Government to this illegal trade.
That is all that we require from this body: treat the
Gambia fairly. We are therefore requesting the Security
Council, in all fairness, guided by the principle of
equal treatment of all States, to send the Panel of
Experts to the Gambia and show us any proof that our
Government exports diamonds.

It is sad to say, but this is ridiculous, to say the
least, for a country that has no mineral resources. It is
simply ludicrous! The Government of the Gambia will
defend its integrity at all costs, but we want to give the
Council the chance to send the Panel of Experts to
Banjul first, before we take any appropriate action to
restore our country's good name.

Thank God, in the case ofthe Gambia, there is no
evidence whatsoever establishing any links between the
sale of diamonds and gun-running activities in Sierra
Leone. Besides, the Gambia has no borders with Sierra
Leone.

Through the unscrupulous behaviour of some
individuals, it is possible that diamonds might be
passing through the Gambia to other destinations, but it
is preposterous to even insinuate that the Government
either condones or participates in such transactions, or
derives any revenue from this illegal trade, either
through taxes or otherwise.

Considering the Gambia's stance regarding
maintaining peace and stability within our subregion in
particular and in Africa generally, the country cannot
be involved in any activity that could have negative
effects in Sierra Leone or contribute to the procurement
of arms and the encouragement of war. The Gambia,
despite its meagre resources, will continue to do all it
can to contribute to the search for an honourable
solution to the Sierra Leonean crisis. The bonds uniting
Sierra Leone and the Gambia - and they are many and
date back many centuries * are too strong for such
baseless allegations to undo. The number of Sierra
Leonean refugees in the Gambia is a testimony to our
long-standing ties of friendship and cooperation with
that country.

In conclusion, the Government of the Gambia is
again calling on the Panel to withdraw its statement on
the Gambia and indicate as soon as possible the dates
on which a delegation of the Panel of Experts could
visit Banjul, so that we could together inform the
whole world that the Government of the Gambia is too
much aware of its international obligations to be
involved in such a shameful trade. These allegations
are unfounded, and therefore we want our country's
name removed from the list of countries dealing in
blood diamonds.

There is still time to set the record straight. This
is why we support the extension of the mandate of the
Panel, as proposed by the United Kingdom. In this way,
the Panel will be able to carry on with its unfinished
business, including an early visit to the Gambia -
preferably before the scheduled meeting early next
month between the Security Council and a ministerial
delegation from the Economic Community of West
African States - so as to clear the air as far as my
Government is concerned.

To echo the words of the President, we should act
swiftly on the Panel's report, but justly. All that we ask
is that the Gambia be treated fairly, by separating the
chaff from the grain. That is all we want, nothing more,
nothing less.

