Mr. Koenders (spoke in French): It is a great
pleasure and an honour for me to address the Security
Council today. The second report of the Secretary-
General on the situation in Mali, which is before the
Council (8/2013/582), follows up on resolution 2100
(2013). I wish to offer an overview of the political and
security situation in Mali, the progress made since my
briefing at the end of June (see S/PV.6985) and the
challenges that lie ahead.

At the outset, it is important to underscore two
important achievements. In July and August, the
Malian people massively and calmly participated in
the presidential elections. The transitional authorities,
political actors and all the national stakeholders rallied
to ensure the success of the elections throughout the
national territory. Through that exemplary event,
Malian men and women demonstrated their desire to
turn the page after the disturbing events of the recent
past - the occupation of the north by extremist groups,
the coup d'etat and the collapse of national institutions.
A decisive step was taken to restore constitutional order
and the country's stability.

The second major achievement concerns the
successful, although incomplete, establishment of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). On 1 July,
we welcomed the troops of the African-led International
Support Mission in Mali. Although MINUSMA had
just been established, it still actively contributed to
ensuring the safety of the presidential elections and
creating favourable political conditions for holding the
elections.

The elections were held across the national
territory thanks to the preliminary agreement, adopted
on 18 June in Ouagadougou by the Government and
the armed groups in the northern regions of Mali.
The agreement paved the way for elections in the
north, and will be followed by inclusive talks on a
comprehensive peace settlement, which will start 60
days after the establishment of a new Government.
The United Nations has played an important role in the
negotiations, in close collaboration with the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
African Union. I welcome the critical contributions of
those organizations in those endeavours.

The implementation of the agreement has moved
forward, in particular with regard to beginning of
the process of the cantonment and the adoption
of confidence-building measures, particularly in
terms of measures to facilitate the start of a gradual
return of the State administration and the army in
the north. MINUSMA accompanied those processes
by strengthening its presence on the ground. We
opened offices in Kidal, Timbuktu, Gao and Mopti.
That is where we want to fully play our role with the
communities and the people of Mali.

Those developments are positive signs for
the restoration of peace and security in Mali. The
inauguration ceremony of the new President in the
presence of several Heads of State demonstrates that
Mali is back in the concert of nations. President Keita,
by forming his Cabinet, has already sent a strong signal
by creating a ministry in charge of reconciliation and
the development of the northern regions, and we have
the honour to have the Minister in the Council today.
He also said that reconciliation and security would be
the immediate priorities of the Government.

Despite those advances, it is clear that the real
work is just beginning. National reconciliation, the
implementation of the preliminary agreement, the
holding of legislative elections, the launching of
inclusive peace talks to address the root causes of the
Malian crisis, the restoration of the authority of the
State, the consolidation of security throughout the
territory, progress in the fight against corruption and
bad governance are priorities .

The authorities announced the holding of the
first round of legislative elections on 24 November,
with a second round scheduled for 15 December. That
would allow the establishment of a new Parliament
and, ultimately, the conclusion of the electoral cycle.
However, it is important that all political parties and
stakeholders be involved in discussions on the holding
of those elections in order to achieve an inclusive
national consensus.

In addition, in order to maintain a peaceful
and secure environment, the full implementation
and adherence of the signatories to the preliminary
agreement is crucial. On the ground, the Mouvement
national pour la liberation de l'Azawad (MNLA) and
the Haut Conseil de l'Azawad continue to occupy the
governorship and the public radio station, the Office
of Radio and Television of Mali, in Kidal, despite the
calls by authorities for their return. The return of basic
services in Kidal is becoming urgent. The issue of
cantonment sites and the coordinated deployment of
Malian forces also remain on the agenda.

I organized two meetings of the Monitoring
and Evaluation Committee since the adoption of the
agreement. However, during the second meeting, held
on 18 September, representatives of the MNLA and the
Haut Conseil de l'Azawad announced the suspension
of their participation, citing the non-implementation of
confidence-building measures, in particular the release
of prisoners. The Mouvement arabe de l'Azawad also
endorsed that decision.

Since then, we have increased our contact and the
number of meetings, making use of my good offices
with the representatives of the armed movements
in Kidal and Ouagadougou. All those efforts have
helped to ease the situation and led to the return of
the signatory movements within the Monitoring and
Evaluation Committee. For its part, the Government
called for the efforts under way in order to reach a
lasting settlement to the crisis in the north, including
the upcoming organization of the States-General of the
decentralization and the establishment of the north. It is
important to note that the Government has implemented
confidence-building measures. It released 23 prisoners
and announced the lifting of several arrest warrants.
That clears the way for coordinated dialogue so that
the parties to the conflict and the Malian nation may
overcome the causes that led their country to division,
so that the past will not happen again.
(spoke in English)

The recent and worrying security incidents in
Mali are, in my view, also an important wake up call.
After a period of calm, which facilitated the holding
of the presidential elections and the cantonment of
armed groups in Kidal, increasing tensions and acts of
provocation resulted in clashes throughout the month of
September in various localities in the north. There is a
need for a wake-up call.

The pursuit of tactical operations by the parallel
French forces, along with the gradual increase of
the Malian forces and the strategic deployment of
MINUSMA in some localities, positively impacted the
overall security situation in northern Mali. However,
the effective stabilization of the northern regions
remains challenging partly due to the complex nature
of the conflict, including the threat of asymmetric
attacks by extremist elements, which should not be
underestimated.

On 28 September, a vehicle laden with explosives
attempted to enter a Malian Defence and Security
Forces camp in Timbuktu. The attackers detonated
the vehicle at the entrance of the camp, killing four
individuals, including the driver and passenger, and
injuring many more. On 30 September, Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb claimed responsibility for the attack.
On 7 October, shells were fired at the city of Gao. The
Movement for Unity and Jihad in West Africa claimed
responsibility.

In addition to the security threat from armed groups
and terrorists, which mainly affected the northern
regions, the authorities had to contend with tensions
within the armed forces. On 1 October, sustained gunfire
was heard in the garrison town of Kati, the stronghold
of General Sanogo, approximately 30 kilometres from
Bamako. The mutineers were peacefully neutralized
following a strong stance by the Minister of Defence
and an address to the nation by President Keita. Yet that
incident is a sobering reminder of the urgent need to
quickly and effectively re-establish discipline and the
chain of command in the armed forces and to undertake
security sector reform in earnest.

The human rights situation, including violations of
sexual rights, remain of concern in spite of a decrease
in violations particularly in the north. Our human-
rights teams continue to register cases of abuses and
violations committed by all parties. They include
illegal arrests and detentions by the Malian defence and
security forces, extrajudicial executions and pervasive
impunity for various actors. On 24 September, the
MNLA released 30 individuals it had illegally detained
in Kidal. I will ensure that our work in the human
rights area receives all necessary attention, and we will
continue to underline the need for an end to impunity so
that justice may prevail.

Despite such security challenges, which are an
important wake-up call for the Security Council, I
can assure the Council that the overall improvement
of the situation in Mali has also opened up new
prospects for the country's recovery and longer-term
perspectives. But Mali's development and humanitarian
needs remain daunting. I am shocked by the country's
malnutrition levels. Scores of displaced people and
refugees are returning home, and an action plan for
the northern regions for the next few months has been
developed by the United Nations development and
humanitarian country teams to guide the international
response to the most urgent humanitarian and early
recovery needs. However, international support for
the humanitarian emergency in Mali has been timid,
with the humanitarian appeal funded at 37 per cent, or
$177 million out of $477 million required, leaving a gap
of $300 million. With this month marking the start of
a new school year, needs in the education sector are
particularly pressing.

The near-collapse of the Malian State last year was
not a mere coincidence. The country has been facing
recurrent crises for the past few decades. Nor should we
lose sight ofthe regional dimension ofthe Malian crisis;
we must make progress in implementing an integrated
Sahel strategy. As we move forward, it is important to
avoid repeating the errors of the past and to address the
root causes of the challenges facing Mali, which also
include the manner in which international partners have
traditionally provided political and financial support.
The time may be right for a critical reassessment
of our engagement. We may consider forging a new
compact or new deal between the Government and the
donor community, on the basis of an agreed set of key
priorities and a clear accountability framework, that
will lead the country and international actors towards
a more transparent and focused partnership, combating
bad governance and corruption and with Mali in the
driver's seat.

While the United Nations is striving to support
the Malian Government and people, we are faced with
a number of severe challenges. I have mentioned the
wake-up call of the security risks. The Mission lacks
critical enablers, such as helicopters, for facilitating
rapid deployment and access to remote areas to ensure
the protection of civilians. Troop generation must
accelerate. I call on Council members and troop - and
police-contributing countries to do their utmost to
promote the rapid deployment of additional enablers and
battalions to Mali in order for MINUSMA to discharge
its mandate speedily and effectively. Enablers are also
particularly important within the context of our security
and logistical support for the forthcoming legislative
elections, and in the light of the risks of asymmetric
threats.

The new authorities are dealing with numerous
challenges that must be addressed urgently in order
to enable Malian men, women and children to live in
security and to benefit from peace dividends. I remain
concerned about the fragile security situation, notably
in the North. Progress on the political front is key in
that respect, and I urge all actors and parties to refrain
from acts of provocation and violence that could easily
jeopardize the gains achieved so far. I encourage them
to formulate a transparent and agreed-on road map for
inclusive talks without hesitation and as a matter of
priority.

In conclusion, I would like to congratulate the people
of Mali on the journey they have begun so splendidly.
They can count on the support of the international
community in their search for sustainable solutions to
the challenges facing their country. Those solutions can
come only from them. I also thank the African Union,
ECOWAS and other international partners for their
commitment to addressing the Malian situation and for
their respect and support for MINUSMA.

