Mr. Bosah (Nigeria): I wish to express my
appreciation to the delegation of Sweden for convening
this open debate on conflict prevention and sustaining
peace as a centrepiece of the United Nations. Nigeria
considers it a subject of critical importance to all
humankind. Our appreciation goes to the Secretary-
General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, for his remarks and
for outlining his vision to prioritize prevention in
collaboration with the Security Council.

At the outset, we wish to congratulate the
delegations of Bolivia, Ethiopia, Italy, Kazakhstan
and Sweden on assuming membership of the Security
Council for the period 2017-2018.

In July 2010, when Nigeria convened an open
debate (see S/PV.6360) of the Council on preventive
diplomacy, we were motivated by a profound concern
that the nature of conflict was outpacing our collective
ability to respond effectively to it. We noted that, for too
long, the international community had accorded little
attention to mediation and the prevention of conflicts.
We have placed far too much emphasis on, and devoted
enormous resources to, the military dimensions of
peace and security, without addressing the root causes
of conflicts.

Although the United Nations works to maintain
international peace and security, contemporary world
security threats have become more complex. We live
in a world in which violent conflict is all too common
a feature of the daily lives of many across the globe.
Fragile constitutional frameworks, limited natural
resources and economic disparities can together render
a State vulnerable to conflict. The costs of such an
outcome are high in terms of both human suffering and
economic loss. Moreover, the socioeconomic advances
achieved through development efforts are also often
lost. Add to that the price of warfare and peacekeeping
operations, and the resulting figures are staggering.
It is against that backdrop that we must centre our
discussion today.

The immediate challenge before us must be how to
address those key questions. Africa has, over the years,
placed a great deal of political weight on the application
of preventive diplomacy strategies by putting in
place early-warning and mediation mechanisms. The
African Union took bold steps to develop a framework
for preventive diplomacy through the efforts of the
African Union Peace and Security Council. At the
subregional level, the Economic Community of West
African States has also made great strides in this area,
primarily through the steady implementation of its
conflict prevention framework, which encompasses
diplomacy, fact-finding and early-warning systems. It is
imperative, therefore, that those efforts at the regional
and subregional levels be supported both financially
and technically by the international community and the
United Nations system.

Today a number of effective contact points have
been developed within the United Nations system for
these collaborative arrangements, especially through
the Special Envoys of the Secretary-General, the
Department of Political Affairs, the United Nations
regional offices and the Peacebuilding Commission.
It is imperative for the United Nations to continue
to work with relevant partners in creating enabling
environments to ease tensions, build capacities for
skilled interventions and foster dialogue. Nigeria
has invested resources to support the campaign for
preventing conflicts, especially within our subregion.
We have adopted the use of preventive diplomacy
in addressing complex questions arising from
armed conflicts.

We cormnend the establishment of a steering
committee to consider measures for enhancing
cooperation across the network of preventive
diplomacy actors. In real terms, preventive diplomacy
is often most effective when conducted behind the
scenes, certainly well before tensions rise to boiling
point level. We believe we can foster the growth of
conflict prevention at both normative and practical
levels. We can standardize our approach to political
and peacekeeping missions to reflect the strategic
importance of preventive diplomacy.

If indeed our primary responsibility in the Security

Council is to maintain international peace and security,
the work of the Council in managing international
peace and security should be viewed through the
lens of preventive diplomacy. If we are able to assist
nations and communities in restoring their social and
institutional fabric, and if we can also apply ourselves
to the ongoing task of providing opportunities for
people and their livelihoods, we can go a long way in
reducing opportunities for conflict. We can directly
and indirectly prevent conflicts.

