Mr. Sychov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): Mr.
President, I would like to thank you for convening this
meeting, to which my Government attaches great
importance. I also thank you for giving me the opportunity
to speak here.

The Republic of Belarus strongly condemns the illegal,
aggressive military actions by the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. Belarus, which lost every fourth inhabitant in
the years of the Second World War, is deeply disturbed to
see that the flames of war are heating up again in the centre
of Europe. Further escalation of military action, barbaric
bombings of industrial, social, cultural and civilian targets
and the peaceful population are all assuming horrible
proportions.

Yesterday we saw that a diplomatic embassy was hit.
The bombing of the Embassy of the People's Republic of
China in Belgrade took human life and brought suffering to
completely innocent people. I would like to take this
opportunity to convey condolences to the Government of
the People's Republic of China, to the families of those
who died and to the Chinese diplomats who suffered.

The military actions of NATO are contrary to many
international instruments and to the generally recognized
norms of international law. In this connection, we call for
a halt to this senseless aggression and for an end to this
violation of international law by NATO. As we enter the
third millennium, the international community has a
special responsibility for the future of our planet. The
President of the Republic of Belarus and the Government
of my country have frequently declared their commitment
to a peaceful settlement of this conflict. We believe that
today it is still possible to find a diplomatic solution to
the situation with regard to Yugoslavia. In this respect,
the Security Council has a key role to play in accordance
with its powers under the Charter of the United Nations.
The United Nations must show the entire world that the
ideals of its Charter are paramount.

