Mr. Yardley (Australia): Children continue to be
disproportionately affected by armed conflict, which is
never of their own making. As the Secretary-General's
report (S/2017/82l) so clearly outlines, unacceptable
numbers of Children continue to be killed, maimed,
recruited, abducted, sexually abused and denied
humanitarian assistance, health care and education.
And we know that verified violations are only the tip of
the iceberg. That inhumanity must stop.

Australia welcomes the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and child protection advisers
to protect children affected by armed conflict. We
commend the progress made, including the delisting
of the armed forces of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo for child recruitment, as well as the large
numbers of children separated from armed groups
in the Central African Republic and from the Moro
Islamic Liberation Front in the Philippines. We also
welcome the signing of new action plans with Mali, the
Sudan and the Civilian Joint Task Force in Nigeria.

However, more must be done to shield the world's
children from the impact of armed conflict. Let me
highlight four key issues.
First, Australia believes that the accurate and
credible listing of perpetrators in the annual report
is crucial. We commend the Secretary-General for
ensuring that all parties responsible for the commission
of grave violations are listed. We also welcome the
introduction of the new reporting format, which
acknowledges where a party is taking steps to end
such violations. We hope that it will serve as an added
incentive for parties to put an end to violations.

Secondly, action plans to prevent child recruitment
and use have had a significant impact. As the majority
of groups known to recruit children are non-State
armed actors, we need to continue efforts to ensure
that those groups conclude action plans. We commend
Special Representative Gamba on her efforts to engage
proactively with those parties.

Thirdly, child protection advisers in peacekeeping
missions play an important role in verifying, preventing
and ending grave violations. Australia therefore
supports the maintenance of dedicated child protection
advisers on the ground.

Fourthly, it is impossible to overstate the importance
of the reintegration of former child soldiers so as to
ensure that sustainable peace is established. Working
with communities, health workers, policymakers,
schools and tertiary institutions to support the
reintegration of children formerly associated with
armed groups is crucial to helping those children return
successfully to Civilian life, thereby enabling them to
reach their full human potential.

Australia is proud to have endorsed the Paris
Principles and Commitments. Those standards
have informed national and international efforts to
strengthen the protection of children in armed conflict.
And yet, around the world, we continue to bear witness
to the devastating impact of armed conflict on children.
On the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the Paris
Commitments and Paris Principles, the urgent need for
renewed effort is clear.

