Mr. Archondo (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for allowing us to take the floor today.
Bolivia associates itself with the statements made by
the representative of Argentina on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China and by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Climate change is a genuine threat to the
existence of humanity, human beings and Mother
Earth. Given its systemic nature, it can be analysed
from many angles, including its social, economic,
cultural and environmental aspects. It is also known
that climate change has a security dimension because
many States may disappear and new conflicts will
emerge due to the effects of extreme temperature
change. It is a global threat caused by just a few but
affecting millions. Based on that understanding,

 

Bolivia expresses its solidarity with the small island
developing States, represented here in the Council by
the President of Nauru this morning.

However, while we recognize the security
dimension of this issue, we do not believe that the
issue should be addressed by the Security Council
because the representatives of the largest emitters of
greenhouse gases are precisely those States with
permanent seats in the Council and the right to veto.
Given those conditions, is it possible for the Security
Council to adopt resolutions on sanctions or
reparations that effectively hold those countries
responsible for the damage they are causing?

The security aspect of climate change should be
dealt with in a forum where the guilty States do not
possess permanent seats or the right to veto. It should
be discussed in a forum where the main victims are
adequately represented: the island States threatened
with disappearance, countries with glaciers, the
countries of Africa, and all of the developing countries
that have to pay for damage that they did not cause.
Today, the only forum with this level of participation is
the General Assembly. For that reason, all aspects of
climate change should be addressed comprehensively
by that body.

My delegation also stresses that the fundamental
task of climate change negotiations under the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) is to guarantee the effective and genuine
reduction of greenhouse gas emissions by
implementing the second stage of commitments of the
Kyoto Protocol. That is the only way to bridge the
existing gap and stabilize the global temperature
increase at 1°C. The developed countries should
increase their commitments to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions. We now face a temperature increase of 5°C
that will lead to a catastrophic situation, as the
Executive Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme clearly noted this morning.

According to the Global Humanitarian Forum,
every year 350,000 people die because of natural
disasters resulting from climate change. That figure
will grow and exceed the death rates of the many
conflicts and armed conflicts worldwide. That is why a
body must be created that will judge and sanction
countries that fail to reduce their emissions of
greenhouse gases, because they are provoking genocide
and ecocide against Mother Earth. For this reason, the

 

Plurinational State of Bolivia advocates the creation of
an international tribunal for climate and environmental
justice that will implement effective measures to
guarantee the human and natural rights of all, and
especially those affected by the irresponsibility of
those who place profit and earnings above the survival
of the human species and Mother Earth.

Every year, global military expenditures total
more than $1.5 trillion. Most of those expenditures are
incurred by the developed countries, and particularly
the five permanent members of the Security Council.
However, in order to address the problems of climate
change, developed countries have committed only
$30 billion over three years 4 $10 billion per year 4
an amount equal to less than 1 per cent of their
expenditures on defence and security.

A first positive step would be to significantly
reduce military expenses and to allocate those
resources to a fund to tackle the impacts of climate
change in developing countries, particularly island
States, African countries, mountain countries and all
poor regions of the world that are being affected by
this problem.

Allow me to end my statement with a question.
Would it be possible for the Security Council to adopt a
resolution establishing a reduction of some 10 or
20 per cent in defence and security expenditures, and
directing that money to efforts to address the effects of
climate change?

