The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United States of
America.

We welcome the adoption of resolution 1757
(2007) on the establishment of the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon. By adopting this resolution, the Security
Council has demonstrated its commitment to the
principle that there shall be no impunity for political
assassinations in Lebanon or elsewhere. Those who
killed Rafik Hariri and so many others will be brought
to justice and held responsible for their crimes. The
Tribunal will also serve to deter future political
assassinations. Those who might be tempted to commit
similar crimes will know that there will be
consequences for perpetuating political violence and
intimidation in Lebanon.

We know that it was necessary and right for the
Council to act now. The Council approved the Tribunal
Agreement and Statute on 21 November 2006. Since
that time, the legitimate and democratically elected
Government of Lebanon and the parliamentary
majority have tried, using every possible means, to
convince the Speaker of parliament to fulfil his
constitutional responsibility to convene parliament so
that final action on the Tribunal could be taken, but to
no avail.

Several influential parties visited Lebanon in an
effort to find a framework within which parliament
could be convened. These included the Arab League,
United Nations Legal Counsel Nicolas Michel and the
Secretary-General himself. After five months of tireless
efforts to find a solution to the impasse facing his
country, Prime Minister Siniora sent the Secretary-
General a letter on 14 May (S/2007/281, annex) asking
that the matter be put before the Security Council so
that it could take a binding decision to establish the
Special Tribunal. The Secretary-General endorsed the
Prime Minister's request one day later, after
concluding that all diplomatic efforts had been
exhausted.

We would have preferred that the Lebanese ratify
the Tribunal Agreement and Statute, but we know that
that was not possible. No one can say that the Lebanese
Government, the Secretary-General or the Security
Council failed to pursue every possible option, short of
Council action on the Tribunal. But those opposed to

the Tribunal made sure that there were no such options
available.

We have heard many voices warn of the risks to
peace and stability in Lebanon. We urge all parties to
act responsibly in the days ahead and to abide by their
obligations to support Lebanon's sovereignty and
political independence.

For our part, we concluded that failure to act in
support of Lebanon was unacceptable. There can be no
peace or stability without justice.

In conclusion, the United States reaffirms its
support for Lebanon. With the adoption of this
resolution, we are confident that the Security Council
will live up to its commitment to support Lebanon in
its pursuit of justice.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I shall now invite His Excellency Mr. Tarek Mitri,
Minister of Culture and Minister for Foreign Affairs ad
interim of Lebanon, to make a statement.

