Mr. Mackay (New Zealand): Three weeks ago,
the New Zealand Government's statement to the
Council urged that the diplomatic process be allowed to
run its course with respect to the crisis over Iraq. It
also urged that Iraq move rapidly to provide the
information and cooperation required of it to avert the
catastrophe which war would bring to its people.

The New Zealand Government has placed
considerable weight on the weapons inspection process
as providing a route to the disarmament of Iraq. As
long as the weapons inspectors report that they are
making genuine progress, the New Zealand
Government believes that their work should continue.

Since the open debate in the Council on 18
February, the inspectors have reported again. Their
reports make it clear that while many questions remain
to be answered, real progress is also being made. As
Mr. Blix has said, the destruction of the Al Samoud 2
missiles is not a matter of breaking toothpicks.

On this basis, the New Zealand Government
position remains as it was stated on 18 February. We do
not support military action against Iraq without a
mandate from the Security Council, and we do not
believe that the Council would be justified in giving
that mandate at this time. As Mr. Blix has stated, the
inspection process needs months rather than days.

We share the frustration of other members of the
Council and the international community at the slow
pace of Iraqi disarmament over a long period of time.
But now, when the inspection and disarmament process
is finally gaining traction, is not, in our view, the time
to abandon it in favour of the use of force.

The use of force can be authorized by the
Security Council as a last resort to uphold its
resolutions. But in view of the recent reports that this
Council has received from both the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), this is not a time of last resort.

All members of the Council share the same
objective: the disarmament of Iraq. Debate has raged
not over the objective, but over the timetable for and
the means of achieving it. It is distressing to my
Government that the debate has strained longstanding
friendships between nations. That strain will be
magnified if the next steps taken to resolve the crisis
do not have broad international support. The New
Zealand Government therefore urges the Security
Council to continue to support the inspection and
disarmament process it has in place while it is getting
results.

Iraq should not mistake the strong preference of
countries like New Zealand for a diplomatic solution
for tolerance of its failure to comply in full. This is not
a time for Iraq to be practising the diplomacy of
brinkmanship. Iraq should act immediately to comply
in full with all requirements laid down by the Security
Council and the weapons inspectors. Only by so doing
can it be certain that the catastrophe of war will not be
visited on its people.

