Mr. Jallow: Since our last report to the Security
Council, in December 2008, intense activity has
continued at the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) towards the implementation of the
Tribunal's completion strategy, and we remain firmly
committed to the expeditious and proper completion of
our mandate to bring justice to Rwanda in the light of
the genocide of 1994.

Within the past six months, the prosecution has
commenced the trial of four new cases, one of which
has just been completed, and gradual progress has been
made in respect of the other cases. The prosecution has
already closed its case in two of those cases after very,
very brief trials. In addition, the ongoing trials in the
multiple-accused case of Karemera et al. and the
single-accused case of Setako are moving towards
finalization. Of the six detainees currently in detention
awaiting the scheduling of their cases for trial, the
prosecution has prepared those cases and is ready to
proceed once they are scheduled.

During the same period, seven new cases and
appeals have also been filed with the Appeals
Chamber, and now there is a total of 11 such cases
pending appeal which are being dealt with by the
Office of the Prosecutor for hearing.

However, despite the intense activity of the ICTR
tracking team, no further arrests of any of the 13
outstanding fugitives have been secured in the past six
months. Our focus in the next six months will thus be:
the conclusion of the ongoing trials; the
commencement of the trials of the remaining detainees,
as and when they are scheduled and in respect of
which, as I have said, we are trial-ready; the
intensification of our tracking efforts, to secure the
arrest and transfer of the fugitives to the ICTR for trial
or for transfer elsewhere; renewed efforts for the
referral of some cases by the ICTR to Rwanda and to
other competent national jurisdictions; and the
exploration of new measures to preserve the evidence
for the trials of at least the four high-level fugitives
who have been earmarked for trial in Arusha, when
they are eventually arrested.

The arrest of Fe'licien Kabuga continues to be a
top priority for the ICTR. Council members have been
briefed regularly on the efforts to effect his arrest and
his transfer to the Tribunal. Incontrovertible evidence
collected by the Joint Task Force comprising Kenya
police and ICTR investigators indicates that Felicien
Kabuga entered Kenya in 1994 and was granted a
residence permit as well as a permit to carry out
business in that country. He, as a result, purchased
property; he registered businesses in his own name as
well as in the names of others; and he opened various
bank accounts in his name with various banks in
Kenya. The reports of the Joint Task Force also
document several reported sightings of Kabuga in
Kenya over a long period.

For several years now, the ICTR has been
engaged in securing the cooperation of Kenya in
arresting Kabuga and transferring him to the ICTR for
trial, and also in the freezing of his assets and
properties located in that country. This has involved
several missions to Kenya by ICTR officials, including
myself. My latest mission to Nairobi in this regard was
in March 2009. So far, one property - the family
residence of Kabuga in Nairobi, known as the Spanish
Villa - has been the subject of seizure by the Kenyan
authorities.

On 8 January 2008, the Director of Immigration
of Kenya wrote to the Joint Task Force to inform it that
Felicien Kabuga had left Kenya. All efforts, including
my recent mission of March 2009, to obtain from the
Kenyan authorities the particulars and circumstances of
his alleged departure from that territory, as well as
access to certain governmental records relating to his
assets and activities, have been fruitless, as the Kenyan
authorities have so far failed to comply with the
requests of the Tribunal.

Consultations are also ongoing with the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in order to find ways of effecting the arrest and transfer
of the large number of ICTR fugitives in that country.
We continue to appeal to the Security Council to call
on Kenya, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
all other States to cooperate with the ICTR in the arrest
and transfer of these indictees. The Tribunal's legacy,
and by extension respect for the impact of international
humanitarian law, depends on the ability of the
international community to arrest and give a fair trial
to all those who have been indicted for these grave
atrocities against their fellow human beings.

The cooperation of Member States where
fugitives from justice have been located is critical.
Closure of the Tribunal without the arrest or without
the transfer of these fugitives offers the real danger of
maintaining an impunity gap that will be difficult to
fill. It is all the more urgent therefore that Member
States fully cooperate and that the international
community provide additional support - especially in
the case of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
pressure in the case of Kenya - to these Member
States to ensure the immediate capture of the fugitives
and their transfer to Arusha for trial.
Following the Appeals Chamber decisions
rejecting referral of cases to Rwanda for trial under
rule 11 bis of the ICTR Rules, the Government of
Rwanda is in the process of enacting - indeed, I am
advised that it has enacted - additional legislation to
meet the remaining concerns of the Appeals Chamber
in relation to the protection of witnesses and the
recording of testimony of witnesses who may be
reluctant to travel to Rwanda to testify. Once the law
comes into force and the capacity is established for
witness protection and video link facilities, my Office
will again consider making further applications before
the Trial Chambers in the course of this year for the
referral of cases of ICTR indictees to Rwanda for trial.

As the concerns of the Trial and Appeals
Chambers relate to legal as well as capacity issues, I
would urge the Council to call upon Member States to
redouble their efforts in support of capacity-building
for the Rwandan legal system. Rwanda has had the
onerous burden of dealing with the cases transferred
not only from the Tribunal but also possibly from other
national jurisdictions, as well as many other domestic
cases of genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity.

Rwanda, I must acknowledge, has also
accomplished much in this area: the abolition of the
death penalty; the incorporation of additional fair-trial
guarantees in law; the upgrading of facilities; and the
training of personnel, with the assistance of the
Tribunal. Those positive efforts for capacity-building
in the legal sector should be encouraged.

The continued and prolonged evasion of justice
by the fugitives also poses a challenge to the proper
administration of justice, even when those fugitives are
finally arrested and brought to trial. As shown by our
own experience with the current trials that are ongoing,
the longer the interval between the commission of
these serious crimes, in 1994, and the time of trial, the
greater the possibility that much of the evidence may
be lost due to the unavailability of witnesses for
various reasons - such as death, relocation or just
reluctance on the part of the witnesses to be involved
after such a long interval.

Yet, understandably, there are no time limits for
the prosecution of these offences. The indictees will be
prosecuted whenever they are arrested, for so long as
there is evidence available. Some of the indictees are
of such a high level that it has been considered
appropriate for their trials to be conducted by an
international mechanism. The public interest in the
proper administration of justice requires that a fair and
proper trial not be subverted by the success of the
fugitives in evading justice long enough for the
evidence against them to possibly disappear, especially
where the bulk of the evidence is based on the oral
testimony of witnesses, who may no longer be
available.

Accordingly, my Office has proposed
amendments to the ICTR Rules which would enable
the Tribunal to preserve the testimony of witnesses in
the cases of the fugitives, and which would enable such
evidence to be available in any subsequent trial if the
witnesses are not available at that time. The rule
change, when adopted, will result in proceedings to
take special depositions next year from such witnesses
in at least four cases of fugitives. These proceedings
are expected to be very limited in duration, and they
should not have an adverse impact on the completion
strategy.

Building upon the conference of international and
national prosecutors held in November 2008, my
Office will be hosting the annual prosecutors'
colloquium later in the year to discuss the legacy of the
International Criminal Tribunals in relation to
measures against impunity for mass atrocities. The
colloquium will focus on drawing lessons from the past
in the administration of international criminal justice
and on reflecting on the future of that process at a time
when the ad hoc Tribunals are winding down. The
Tribunal is currently also focusing more attention on
residual matters relating to archives and public access
to documents, continuing support for national
prosecutions and appropriate administrative closure
and reporting.

We remain firmly committed to concluding the
trials of current detainees in a timely manner and to
making the referral of cases of some detainees and
fugitives a success. We do not underestimate the
challenges of doing so, in particular in the light of the
possible loss of experienced staff as the completion
strategy progresses. We nonetheless remain committed
to those goals.
I would very much like to thank the Security
Council and all the organs of the United Nations for
their continued support for the work of the ICTR.

