Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to join colleagues in
welcoming Mr. Jeremic', the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and Mr. Hyseni. I wish to thank them
both for being here with us today. May I also thank Mr.
Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing on recent
developments in Kosovo.

It is our understanding that the situation on the
ground in Kosovo has changed significantly, so we find
ourselves faced with a new situation, to which the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) has to adapt. Thus there are several
challenges for UNMIK to take up. It is an interim
administration in the context of resolution 1244 (1999),
following the declaration of independence on
27 February 2008 and the Kosovo Serbs' rejection of
that.

We understand the Secretary-General's decision
about operational factors affecting the civilian
international presence in Kosovo, and we appreciate
the effort to reconfigure UNMIK and to cooperate with
the European Union in the rule of law. That is, of
course, in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).
We are in favour of the international presence in
terms of reconfiguration and general structure. My
country reconfirms once again that resolution 1244
(1999) is the legal framework for the United Nations
effort in Kosovo, and it must continue to discharge that
mandate until the Security Council decides otherwise.
Therefore, any entity in the region must be part of that
framework.

We have taken due note of the talks that were
organized between the representatives of the Secretary-
General and the European Union and the Rule of Law
Unit at the technical level. We support the six common
points set out by the Secretary-General in his letter of
last 12 June (S/2008/354, annex I), stressing police,
courts, customs, transportation and infrastructure,
boundaries, and Serbian patrimony. We confirm the
importance of the Mission's having dialogue with all
parties on all operational matters.

We have some concerns about the gaps and
differences between Albanian Kosovars and Serbian
Kosovars that could affect stability in Kosovo in the
long run. That could create problems, so we call on all
parties to make every effort to preserve the proper
channels for constructive communication and dialogue.
We also call for the return of refugees, protection of
minorities and protection of the cultural and religious
heritage so that one can find a common area in which
to preserve peace and stability throughout the Balkans.

We have noted the points made by the Secretary-
General, and we support his recommendations for
reconfiguration of UNMIK, which is very important.
Steps should be taken swiftly to deal with the
prevailing situation on the ground. That must be done
in complete transparency, taking account of the United
Nations position and making sure that there is a neutral
status approach.

