Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): I thank Under- Secretary-General DiCarlo and Assistant Secretary- General Mueller for their briefings. I align myself with the statement to be delivered by the observer of the European Union. The only way to achieve lasting peace and to fulfil the legitimate aspirations of the Israelis and the Palestinians is through a negotiated two-State solution that respects the internationally agreed parameters and international law. Unfortunately, the developments on the ground are deteriorating and are preventing the resumption of meaningful negotiations in order to resolve this long-standing conflict. I would reiterate the importance of implementing resolution 2334 (2016), including its call for affirmative steps to reverse the negative trends on the ground that are imperilling the two-State solution. We are concerned about the continuation of Israel's settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territory, in violation of international law. We also call on Israelto end the demolitions of Palestinian-owned buildings in the West Bank and East Jerusalem, which have also included projects funded by the European Union and its member States. Concerning recent calls for the annexation of areas in the West Bank, I would like to stress that annexation would constitute a serious violation of international law and would harm prospects for moving forward with the peace process. Reaching a sustainable political solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict also requires progress on intra-Palestinian reconciliation. We encourage all Palestinian factions to commit to inclusive, comprehensive and fair elections. Holding elections throughout the Palestinian territory, including in the West Bank, East Jerusalem and Gaza, would be important for renewing the democratic legitimacy of the Palestinian Authority and ensuring its strong institutions. Unfortunately, the situation in the Gaza Strip remains fragile. We condemn the firing of rockets from Gaza into Israel. Such indiscriminate violence and targeting of the civilian population are completely unacceptable. We call on all parties to exercise restraint and to refrain from targeting civilians, in line with obligations under international humanitarian law. The cycle of violence in Gaza will only bring about more civilian casualties. It undermines the humanitarian situation in Gaza, resulting in further suffering and growing extremism. I would also stress the importance of continued support to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which remains crucial to providing essential services for Palestinian refugees, especially health care and children's education. Estonia has contributed with additional funding in recent years so as to support UNRWA's activities in the Middle East. With regard to Syria, we want to reiterate our support for resolution 2254 (2015). As pointed out in that resolution, the success of the political process is closely interlinked with a nationwide ceasefire. Unfortunately, that is not the case for Idlib province, where the situation remains highly volatile despite the repeated ceasefire agreements by various parties to the conflict. The continued military operations in the area may have severe humanitarian consequences and lead to another influx of refugees as increased violence threatens millions of civilians. The humanitarian situation in the area remains dreadful despite the renewal of the cross- border aid mechanism on 10 January. Millions of people remain in need of life-saving assistance and protection. The instability in Idlib and further military gains by the regime and its allies may harm the prospects for a meaningful political transition.
