Mr. Egeland: This is a very important
opportunity for us to brief the Council on several major
challenges that the humanitarian community faces in
Africa at the moment, all of which have regional
implications. I will start with what continues to be the
largest humanitarian operation in the world - the
crisis in Darfur - as well as with its impact on
neighbouring Chad.

The humanitarian operation launched in late 2003
has been remarkably effective this year, against
overwhelming odds. Some 13,000 international and
national relief workers have been providing relief to
more than 3 million people in Darfur and Chad. The
success of their work can be measured in the thousands
of lives saved, as mortality rates among displaced
persons have dropped by two thirds over the past year.

I want to pay tribute to the heroic work of those
men and women. But we must realize that their work
and their lives are under increasing threat and that our
operations can now be disrupted completely by
renewed conflict any day, and anywhere, in Darfur. We
must be acutely aware that all that has been built up by
the thousands of relief workers and by hundreds of
millions of dollars in donor contributions could be
destroyed. We could be on the brink of losing this huge
humanitarian operation. In addition, no amount of
humanitarian relief can provide what those threatened
by the conflict have wanted most from day one:
effective protection against violence of the most
vicious kind, and the ability to return to their homes.
Only an effective ceasefire, a political solution and a
strong international security presence can accomplish
those objectives.

We have to face up to the terrible reality that our
colleagues on the ground are witnessing and reporting
every day. The killings have not stopped. The rapes are
continuing, as are the burning, looting and forced
displacement that I first reported to the Council more
than 20 months ago. For three consecutive months
now, the situation has been deteriorating. We have had
less humanitarian access during this period than at any
other time since that first briefing, in early April 2004.
More than 20,000 more people were displaced in the
last few weeks alone. In a deeply worrying new
development, camps for internally displaced persons
(IDP) are themselves increasingly being attacked by
militias.

The regional spillover effects of this crisis on
Chad and the impact of Chadian groups crossing into
west Darfur are also cause for great concern. Tensions
between the 200,000 Sudanese refugees and Chadian
host communities remain high. Attacks on innocent
civilians by armed groups crossing from the Sudan
continue to be reported, including the massacre in
Modaina on 25 September, which the Council
condemned. Only yesterday, it was reported that 100
people were killed in an attack on the town of Adre, in
eastern Chad. Equally worrying are the recent political
and military developments in Chad, including the
mounting tension with the Sudan over Darfur. A further
deterioration of the situation would pose a threat to
ongoing relief operations to Sudanese refugees and
could trigger a serious humanitarian crisis.
The Council has taken many important steps to
address the crisis in Darfur. But unless those measures
have a real impact on the ground, the wound will
continue to bleed. Our massive humanitarian operation
will not be sustainable unless we finally see
commensurate efforts in the political and security
areas. The next few weeks will be critical, both for the
talks in Abuja and as the Security Council and the
African Union deliberate on the next steps. We need an
expanded and more effective security presence on the
ground as soon as possible: a presence that can provide
more effective protection and, ultimately, allow people
to return to their homes. That expanded presence is
needed whether or not the Abuja talks succeed. It
cannot be right that we have twice as many
humanitarian workers in Darfur as international
security personnel. I therefore appeal very strongly to
the Council to show the sense of urgency and
determination needed to achieve the objectives
identified in its resolutions and to help bring this crisis
to an end.

The second issue I want to address is the regional
crisis caused by the activities of the Lord's Resistance
Army (LRA) in Uganda, the Sudan and, most recently,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In mid-
September, a group of LRA fighters crossed from the
Sudan into the north-eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. They remain in that border
region, from where they threaten much of the Western
Equatoria area of southern Sudan. LRA attacks on
civilians and humanitarian workers have escalated,
severely undermining our ability to provide relief to
millions of people and disrupting the long-awaited
return of refugees to southern Sudan. While the overall
number of LRA combatants may not have increased,
they have spread out over a larger area and now
constitute a significant threat to regional security, with
appalling consequences for several million people.

The specific impact of LRA activities on
humanitarian operations has been as follows.

In northern Uganda, gains are being lost as
security erodes. Access to the nearly 1.7 million IDPs
encamped in the northern districts has decreased in the
past three months. Recent violence has hampered
assistance efforts, and we have seen a shocking new
tactic: the deliberate targeting of humanitarian
personnel. In October and November alone, five
humanitarian workers were killed by LRA ambushes in
the Sudan and Uganda.

The United Nations can access only 18 of the 200
camps for internally displaced persons in northern
Uganda without military escorts. Although the World
Food Programme (WFP) is able to distribute food
under heavily armed military escorts, many other
organizations find fees for escorts prohibitively
expensive or do not use them on principle. The non-
governmental organization Action Against Hunger has
reported that 57 per cent of internally displaced
persons in one area - 480,000 people - were not
accessible in November. Without access, the effects are
predictable: increased mortality, rising exposure to
human rights violations, and deepening vulnerability.

Life in the camps continues to be unacceptable. A
recent joint study conducted by the Ministry of Health,
the World Health Organization and non-governmental
organizations indicated that crude and under-five
mortality rates were more than double the emergency
thresholds. Access by internally displaced persons to
farming areas outside camps is extremely limited due
to movement restrictions imposed by the Uganda
People's Defence Forces. Less than half the internally
displaced persons in Acholi districts can access land
that is more than two kilometres outside of their
camps, severely hampering their ability to produce
their own food. At present, there is no prospect of a
large scale return before the critical March planting
season. Therefore, WFP will have to provide food aid
to 1.5 million internally displaced persons through
2006.

Given the conditions in the camps, it is not
surprising that many LRA combatants remain in the
bush. We have not done enough to create the "pull
factor" that could draw more of the LRA to
disarmament and reintegration programmes. Those
who have come in have found few chances to live a
safe and productive life. We must dramatically expand
our programmes for reintegration in order to give hope
to those who still see fighting as a better option.

The LRA is also wreaking havoc in the
Equatorias in the southern Sudan. Dozens of civilians
have been killed since the LRA crossed the Nile in
mid-September and over 100 people, including
children, have been abducted, many of whom have not
returned.

The impact on our humanitarian operations has
been dramatic. After three staff members of non-
governmental organizations were killed, large parts of
the Equatorias became inaccessible. In Central
Equatoria, international non-governmental organization
staff withdrew and critical health programmes in rural
areas have been curtailed. In Western Equatoria, a
UNICEF-led measles campaign has been disrupted and
only covered 10 per cent of the targeted population.
Some 180 primary health care facilities in Central and
Eastern Equatoria are currently inaccessible to
UNICEF and non-governmental organization partners.

The LRA attacks have also severely hampered the
preparation for the return of refugees from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic and Uganda. Many recovery projects to
support the returnees have had to be suspended for
now, including hospitals and water points. As long as
there is a significant LRA presence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo/Sudan border area, it is difficult
to imagine when refugees will be able to start returning
to Central or Western Equatoria, areas that previously
were among the safest in the southern Sudan. That has
clear consequences for efforts to rebuild and stabilize
that important region.

Much more needs to be done to address the
threats and conditions I have just described. The
Governments of Uganda, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Sudan bear the primary
responsibility to protect and assist their populations, as
well as to pursue the LRA. Unfortunately, their actions
so far have not prevented the LRA from causing the
devastation I have just described. The LRA continues
to maintain bases and moves relatively freely
throughout the region. A relatively small number of
fighters is threatening a huge area and millions of
people.

I would like to suggest a number of steps the
Governments in the region and this Council could take.

It is of the utmost importance that the three
Governments concerned fully acknowledge how
dangerous the situation has become for civilians and
humanitarian workers and that they do whatever they
can to protect their citizens, secure access for relief
workers and promote regional solutions.

As I noted in my recent briefing to the Council on
the protection of civilians, efforts to find a peaceful
solution to the conflict in northern Uganda must be
strengthened through an internationally supported
process. The United Nations must actively contribute
to that effort.

While I welcome steps taken by the Government
of Uganda to operationalize the national policy on
internally displaced persons, more should be done by
the Government and its army and police to assume
responsibility for the protection of the civilian
population. More must also be invested in the
provision of basic services in the affected areas.

The Security Council should pay close attention
to the regional dimension of the crisis and the threats
to humanitarian work, and could consider several
potential steps. The Council should strongly condemn
the LRA's attacks against civilians and humanitarian
workers. The Council should insist on an immediate
cessation of violence and of all support to the LRA
from all sources. To help the Council consider further
steps and improve its understanding of the LRA, it
could consider appointing a panel of experts. Such a
panel could explore the sources of funding and support
for the LRA and work with the three affected
Governments and other parties to determine how the
Council could most effectively contribute to reducing
the threat emanating from the LRA. The Council could
request regular updates on the effects of the LRA's
activities on the region.

I also hope that, in their reports to the Council,
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan and the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo can indicate what
else they can do, within their mandates, to provide
security to relief workers and help create the necessary
conditions for the return of refugees and IDPs.

Finally, I have just returned from Zimbabwe and
South Africa. As I reported to the Council in April, the
humanitarian situation in the subregion is already very
serious due to severe food insecurity, widespread
HIV/AIDS and inadequate basic services. More than 10
million people in the region are in need of food
assistance. The situation could deteriorate in 2006,
particularly in Zimbabwe and Malawi, unless actions
are taken to meet immediate needs and to reverse the
decline in key sectors.

In Zimbabwe, the humanitarian situation has
worsened significantly in 2005. More than 3 million
people - almost one third of the population - will
receive food through WFP in January and even more
will receive assistance come April. Annual maize
production, the basic staple, is one third of what it was
several years ago. Basic services continue to
deteriorate, particularly in the health, water and
sanitation sectors. Inflation currently stands at over
500 per cent. In that context, and as I told the
Government in my meetings in Harare, the massive
urban eviction campaign of hundreds of thousands of
people was the worst possible action at the worst
possible time.
We are now entering the peak of the "lean
season". Food prices are rising fast, placing some basic
commodities out of reach for a growing portion of the
population. I welcome the memorandum of
understanding finalized by the Government and the
World Food Programme, which will ensure that these
emergency needs are met. I also hope it will lead to
better collaboration between the Government and the
humanitarian agencies in other sectors.

Yet we much recognize that this huge need for
food assistance is symbolic of the vicious cycle that we
are caught in. It was raining when I left Zimbabwe, but
all expected that next year's harvest would be poor
because of the lack of a skilled agricultural labour
force, in part caused by the devastating toll of the
HIV/AIDS pandemic; counterproductive agricultural
policies and practices; and a lack of inputs such as
fertilizer, seeds and tools. It is not sustainable to
provide food assistance for millions of people year
after year without making the necessary investment to
get out of the situation. We can have a new approach
that again will provide food security for all
Zimbabweans. That will require major efforts from all,
nationally as well as internationally. There is no
substitute for engagement and dialogue at all levels in
order to address the humanitarian crisis in Zimbabwe.

From my discussions with the Government of
Zimbabwe, I am convinced that the United Nations and
the humanitarian community at large must try to
engage more actively with the Government to address
the enormous humanitarian crisis. We reached
agreement on some issues during my mission: a more
active and systematic dialogue on food security; a
more hands-on approach to resolving bureaucratic
problems for humanitarian organizations through one-
stop shops at both the Government and the United
Nations; and the initiation of a shelter programme for
households affected by the eviction campaign.

However, sustained progress will require the
following. The Government must stop further evictions
and be more flexible in allowing shelter and other
programmes for those affected. It must ensure that
beneficiaries are assisted solely on the basis of need.
The United Nations and our humanitarian partners, as
well as the donors, should be guided in their own
response by the needs of the population. We should
provide the appropriate level of assistance where and
when we identify the needs. Beyond food aid, we need
to invest in food security, livelihoods and basic
services. The Governments in the region and in Africa
at large should engage more proactively with
Zimbabwe to find constructive solutions, also given
their interdependence and the risk of increased
migratory movements. All parties must understand the
importance of neutral and impartial humanitarian
assistance.

More is currently at stake in terms of lives saved
or lives lost in Africa than on any other continent. At
the same time, there is great hope and opportunity,
given the forward-looking initiatives of the African
Union and the subregional organizations. Also, the
Group of Eight countries and other donors have
pledged more resources for Africa than at any other
time. In this coming year, we must and can see change.

As humanitarian workers, we cannot accept that
so many lives are lost every year on this continent to
preventable diseases, neglect and senseless brutality.
We cannot accept that low levels of funding impede
our operations in so many places. We must demonstrate
our humanity by responding equally to the needs of
those affected, whether they are families returning
home to the southern Sudan, young men and women
looking for a future beyond the IDP camps of northern
Uganda, or AIDS patients trying to sustain their
families through a drought in Zimbabwe. I call upon all
Member States to live up to their commitments to fund,
support and facilitate a much more ambitious
development and humanitarian agenda.

And finally, we must recognize that too many of

these humanitarian crises result from a total absence of
peace and security. Humanitarian aid cannot be an alibi
for an unwillingness to address the root causes of
conflict. The greatest contribution we can make to
addressing humanitarian crises in Africa is determined,
energetic and sustained efforts to bring an end to the
conflict and injustice that cause so much suffering in
Africa.

