Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I
congratulate Poland on its presidency of the Security
Council this month and for giving due attention to
the critical question of respecting and upholding
international law. The late hour this evening shows
the membership's high level of interest in this very
important subject. We thank Chef de Cabinet Viotti,
Judge Owada and Judge Meron for their informative
briefings this morning.

The United Arab Emirates chose to participate in
today's open debate because the foundational principles
that underpin the Charter of the United Nations and
the wider body of international law also form the
backbone of the our foreign policy. For small States,
the multilateral rules-based system and international
law are vital because they ensure us equal rights as part
of the community of nations and protect us all from the
abuse of power and hegemony of a few.

As such, the United Arab Emirates is deeply troubled
that respect for international law is faltering around the
world. A world without a rules-based international order
is one filled with chaos and instability, where rogue
actors disregard international norms with impunity,
the system of trusted relationships between countries is
broken and the most vulnerable in every society are left
to suffer without recourse to justice.

Nowhere is respect for international law being
challenged more than in the Middle East, which is where
I will focus my remarks this evening. Developments in
our region this week in particular affirm that fact. The
tragedy in Gaza escalated on 14 May and resulted in the
abhorrent murder of more than 60 innocent civilians,
perpetrated by a State Member of the United Nations. The
lives of the victims 4 men, women and children 4 are
no less human than those of anyone else in the Council
or in any Member State. But the Council's inaction has
made it appear as though somehow they are less human
and that they suffer and mourn their losses differently.
No one has the right to dehumanize any people that way.
The most recent acts on the Gaza border violate multiple
rules of international humanitarian law and cannot be
condoned or ignored by the international community.
Moreover, Israel's settlement activity in the occupied
Palestinian territories continues to defy international
law and numerous Security Council resolutions.

The United Arab Emirates believes that Israeli
and Palestinian people both have the right to secure
statehood. But when the Council's resolutions on the
matter are repeatedly ignored and innocent human life is
recklessly and violently taken, the fabric of international
law and the international framework that could make
that aspiration possible is thoroughly weakened.

It is not just in Palestine that international law is
being flouted. For seven years now, the Syrian people
have suffered chemical-weapon attacks and been
denied humanitarian aid. These are grave violations of
international humanitarian law. We call on all parties
to the conflict to cease such behaviour and for the
perpetrators to be held to account. Given the Security
Council inaction on Syria, the United Arab Emirates
supports the code of conduct of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group that calls on
Council members not to vote against any credible draft
resolution intended to prevent or halt mass atrocities.

Not just in Syria but throughout the Middle East,
Iran is flouting international law and Security Council
sanctions regimes in pursuit of its agenda of regional
hegemony. Iran's behaviour violates the fundamental
international legal principle of non-intervention. Its
support for terrorist groups in our region is in violation
of numerous Security Council resolutions. The United
States recently recognized that fact by withdrawing
from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, and other
countries should also hold Iran to similar standards.

Lastly, the financing and support of extremism and
terrorism persist in our region and around the world,
threatening the rule of law. All countries that engage
in such behaviour should be held accountable through
Security Council resolutions and the monitoring of
financial flows. If they are not held accountable by the
international community, States have the sovereign
right to act independently to defend their own security,
as we and our partners in the region have done.

Fundamentally, the rules and norms that make
up the body of international law are only as strong
as the commitment of all States to defending and
upholding them. That is why the United Arab Emirates
stands ready to do its part in reinforcing the pillars of
international law, including improving our own efforts
to practice what we preach. In Yemen, we will continue
to do our utmost to ensure that aid reaches those most
in need, while conducting operations at the request of
the legitimate Government of Yemen.
The United Arab Emirates acknowledges President
Duda's statement earlier today, in which he noted that
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations is
the most useful tool at the international community's
disposal in cases of disagreements and imminent
conflict. And the Polish presidency has asked for
practical recommendations from Member States for
today's discussion. To better uphold Chapter VI, the
United Arab Emirates proposes that the Security
Council request a report by the Secretary-General on
the various modalities of dispute settlement included
in it. Such a report would be a resource for all Member
States and would outline the use and practice of such
modalities in mitigating disputes that have come before
the United Nations and other United Nations system
entities, lessons learned that can be employed in present
and future disputes and used as a guide for Member
States in applying such modalities.

