Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): Armenia would
like to express its appreciation to the Senegalese
presidency of the Security Council for initiating today's
open debate and providing an excellent concept note
(S/2016/969, annex) on the subject. We also thank the
briefers for their thoughtful presentations earlier today.

The wide-ranging negative consequences ofclimate
change and their significant impact on water resources
have become palpable for societies and their health and
economies and the natural environment. Meteorological
records and climate projections provide abundant
evidence of the vulnerability of water resources and the
high cost for human societies and ecosystems.

Effective adaptation to climate change requires a
cross-sectoral approach, including at the transboundary
level. Transboundary bodies of water create
hydrological, social and economic interdependencies
among communities, societies and nations. They are
vital to economic development, poverty reduction
and the attainment of the Sustainable Development
Goals. Such interdependencies may have the potential
for disputes and conflict, both within and between
countries. Since growing populations, increased
urbanization and economic development all require
more water for agricultural, municipal and industrial
uses, the risks become greater.

However, the recognition of mutual interests
and mutual dependency should serve as the basis for
cooperation and the promotion of regional peace and
security, as well as economic growth. Through various
initiatives, Member States should be encouraged to
focus on tipping the balance from potential conflict
to cooperation. They should be supported in efforts
to improve the management of transboundary water
resources, including by strengthening joint efforts and
actions. Arrangements for cooperation andjoint actions
should take into account the specifics ofa given basin and
duly reflect the range of environmental, hydrological,
political, economic and social circumstances of each
case. The recognition of mutual dependency, a strong
political will and a genuine commitment to cooperation
on the part of States are critical prerequisites for
successful transboundary water management.

Armenia has consistently promoted and supported
regional and subregional cooperation, including
on environmental issues and transboundary water
management. Such cooperation is a basis not only for
addressing and advancing mutual interests between
neighbouring nations; it also represents important
confidence-building measures in situations of
unresolved conflict. We would like to emphasize the
potential of such cooperation in the broader context
of promoting regional peace and security, as well as
economic growth.

In that context, it is regrettable that we heard
another exercise of pouring scorn on Armenia and
accusations by the delegation of Azerbaijan. This time,
the usual accusations have been shaped in the context
of water-sharing. I would agree with the Ambassador of
Azerbaijan that indeed the Sarsang reservoir is located
on the Tartar River of the Martakert region of the
Nagorno Karabakh Republic. It was formed by the dam
of the Sarsang hydroelectric power plant built in 1976,
with a capacity of 560 million cubic metres and a height
of 126 metres. The Sarsang reservoir, which is of key
importance for the economy of the Nagorno Karabakh
Republic primarily for the purposes of agricultural and
generating electricity, is under the constant surveillance
and control of the relevant authorities of the Nagorno
Karabakh Republic. All maintenance and repair work is
regularly carried out in a timely manner, and there has
not been a single emergency situation that might pose a
threat to people and the environment.

As a gesture of good will, the Nagorno Karabakh
authorities have repeatedly proposed a water-sharing
mechanism and more efficient use of the water resources
of Nagorno Karabakh with Azerbaijan, which could
also serve as a confidence-building measure between
the parties to the conflict.
That is the situation concerning the Sarsang
reservoir. Although Nagorno Karabakh is proposing
concrete actions, the Azerbaijani side prefers to
promote groundless accusations and dubious evidence
that - as a matter of fact and to put it mildly - represent
misinformation. Instead of promoting caviar diplomacy,
we encourage the delegation of Azerbaijan and its
authorities to do a favour for the region and invest
their diplomatic efforts in the resolution of the conflict
within the agreed framework.

