The Secretary-General: I am pleased to be able
to participate in this meeting of the Security Council,
and I welcome the opportunity to focus both on
strengthening the relationship between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) and on efforts by
the international community to further enhance the
AU's capacity for peacekeeping.

Before I begin, I would like to welcome you, Sir,
as new Permanent Representative of your great
country, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, and congratulate
you on assuming your role as President of the Security
Council soon after having taken up your new
responsibilities. I assure you of my full cooperation
and support in discharging your duties not only as
President of the Council, but also as Ambassador of
your country. Let me also take this opportunity to
welcome to the United Nations His Excellency
Mr. Romano Prodi, former Prime Minister of Italy, and
to express my appreciation for his leadership of the
panel, whose report on modalities for support to
African Union peacekeeping operations (S/2008/813)
is before the Council today.

Last year's high-level debate on peace and
security in Africa (see S/PV.5868), chaired by former
President Mbeki on 16 April 2008, provided the United
Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace
09-27161

and Security Council with an opportunity to look more
closely at the partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union in ensuring peace and security
in Africa. The panel's report, before members today,
presents a number of ideas to strengthen that
partnership with a view to improving our collective
response to addressing conflicts in Africa.

The role played by regional organizations in
peace and security is indispensable to the work of this
Council. I am encouraged by the progress we have
made in our cooperative endeavours with the African
Union Commission towards achieving peace and
security in challenging areas such as Darfur and
Somalia. Lessons learned from these endeavours will
strengthen our cooperative work in the future.

The African Union continues to develop its
capacity for peacekeeping. The Department of
Peacekeeping Operations is supporting these efforts
with a dedicated capacity and through specific
programmes.

The panel's report (S/2008/813), while outlining
significant remaining challenges, offers various
recommendations that draw on the lessons of the past
and aim at an enhanced relationship in the future.
Central to this analysis is the strategic relationship
between this Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council, which is supported by that between
the United Nations Secretariat and the AU
Commission. In both cases, the relationship has been
much expanded, but it has yet to develop the
responsiveness that will enable us to work together to
prevent conflicts rather than only respond to crises.
The Department of Political Affairs has instituted a
series of desk-to-desk meetings with AU counterparts,
and I hope that we can build on this initiative to
quickly develop a more comprehensive approach for
the future.

Many of the challenges facing the African Union
result from the difficulties it faces in securing the
necessary resources to support both its deployments
and its own long-term development. A peacekeeping
mission that is under-resourced can imperil the initial
benefits gained by its deployment and can raise
expectations without providing the means of fulfilling
them.

It was in this context that the panel made its
recommendations to address issues of funding and
resources. These recommendations have far-reaching
3
implications and will require detailed analysis,
particularly in the case of assessed contributions,
which need to be considered by the requisite United
Nations legislative bodies and processes.
Notwithstanding the complexities, the report offers a
first step in a process through which these issues can
be examined comprehensively while allowing us to
develop a more effective partnership.

I look forward to constructive interaction with
key Member States, including the members of this
Council, AU members, troop-contributing countries
and other stakeholders. The forthcoming retreat with
Security Council members this weekend will offer a
valuable opportunity to look at this issue in greater
detail.

The development of the African Peace and
Security Architecture is crucial to an effective long-
term approach to conflict prevention and resolution.
This requires the sustained support of the international
community, including the European Union and many
bilateral partnerships. The strategic relationship
between the United Nations and the AU is at the heart
of this evolving framework and has the potential to
affect millions of people on the African continent.

