Mr. Al-Otoom (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Swedish presidency
for its efforts at the helm of the Security Council this
month. We wish your delegation, Madam President,
every success. I also wish to thank the briefers for their
valuable briefings.

Despite the world's major progress in developing
legal norms and frameworks for the protection of
children in armed conflict, and despite improvements
in the way the international community addresses the
protection of children during and after armed conflict,
we are nevertheless seeing an unprecedented increase
in violations, attacks and violence directed against
children as well as an expansion in their numbers
as victims in the world. This situation has been
compounded by an increase in attacks on hospitals and
schools in numerous conflict areas.

While the nature of armed conflict is changing, the
major challenges before the international community
are the following. How do we ensure that non-State
armed groups respect international humanitarian law
and human rights? How do we ensure accountability
for those committing these grave violations and crimes
against children in armed conflicts? How do we make
sure that they do not enjoy impunity for those violations?
In this context, it is necessary to draw attention to the
need to ensure that peacekeeping operations have all
the capabilities to protect children and save them from
being exploited.

We wish to highlight the ongoing violations being
committed against Palestinian children in the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip, as the Israeli occupying forces
do not hesitate to violate the human rights of children.
Every day, these children face numerous threats such as
arrest, imprisonment, torture and death, not to mention
the aggressions of the Israeli occupying forces and
settlers without impunity.

We underscore the importance of giving attention
to the situation of children living in others conflict
zones like Syria, Yemen, Libya and Myanmar, in order
to provide them with protection. We must also give
due attention to providing them with the rehabilitation,
reinsertion and reintegration programmes. We must
not forget to give appropriate attention to the rights of
the girl victims of trafficking, rape, sexual violence
and worse kinds of exploitation, as we have seen in the
atrocities committed by Da'esh against Yazidi women
in Iraq.

Education remains the best way to protect the
future of displaced children. That is why Jordan has
made and continues to make tireless efforts to provide
Syrian refugee children with the best possible education
services, given the means at our disposal. We have
also established a child-protection centre for refugees
and another centre related to promoting educational
environment and child protection. Ongoing financial
support for the host countries by the international
community is of course required in order to continue
providing education and health services until a political
solution is reached and the refugees return home.

Jordan insists that the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees remain free
from politicization and manipulation, and calls on
the international community to continue supporting
that vital entity, because any shortage in its funding
will lead to the closure of schools and the suffering
of tens of thousands of children who will not be able
to continue their education and their life as required.
Jordan also supports at all levels the historic resolution
2250 (2015), on youth, security and peace.

In conclusion, the eyes of millions of children
around the world are turned to you, Madam President,
and to the rest of the Security Council members and
the United Nations Member States for a better future.
We must promise that we will not deny them education,
growth opportunities and living in peace. Children are
our most important investment in a better future and in
achieving peace.

