Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to welcome
Ms. Federica Mogherini, High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, to the Security Council and to thank her very
warmly for her briefing.

The European Union (EU) project has been the most
important institutional source of peace and stability in
Europe since the end of the Second World War.

In that regard, the European Union will remain
a natural partner and ally to the United Nations
for the maintenance of international peace and
security. Moreover, as the European community,
we are already united in striving for the collective
commitment to deliver an even more peaceful and
sustainable world, as envisioned in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change.

With the growing need to strengthen partnerships
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
there is a space to be filled by a strategic partnership
between the European Union and the United Nations
in the areas of peacekeeping and crisis management.
Apart from regular high-level dialogues with the
participation of the EU/UN Steering Committee on
crisis management, further cooperation between
missions and Headquarters is required, as more
emerging multifaceted challenges occur.

Poland clearly understands such challenges and fully
supports the need for an enhanced EU-United Nations
partnership, as defined in the EU Global Strategy for
Foreign and Security Policy. We are glad that support
for global governance and the United Nations was one
of the EU's priorities in implementing the Strategy
until the end of the current institutional cycle.

Caring exclusively about safety and security in our
own European territory would be not only short-sighted
but certainly counterproductive. That is why the EU
has repeatedly reiterated its unwavering support for
Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity. Poland
and the European Union will remain active supporters
and advocates of international law and a rules-based
international order.

Our special responsibility falls to the region of the
Western Balkans, where the EU helps in strengthening
democracy and human rights agenda through its
enlargement policy. We want to welcome all those
countries into our European family in the near future.

We cannot forget about the European Union's
active engagement in peace and security in Africa
not only through significant contributions to the
relevant financial instruments but also, to name just
a few activities, by establishing training missions
in the Central African Republic, Mali and Somalia
or by supporting the United Nations efforts aimed at
combating human trafficking and the illicit trade in oil
and weapons on the high seas off the coast of Libya
through Operation Sophia.

The European Union is also a core partner of the
United Nations in reaching lasting solutions to the
crises in the Middle East region, exercising its influence
and using resources to address conflicts in Syria and
Yemen and to reignite the Middle East peace process.

One of the priority areas of further strengthening
and structuring the EU-United Nations partnership
should be migration. A few steps that could be
undertaken are the stronger involvement of the
international community in counteracting the root
causes of illegal migration and providing adequate
financing for humanitarian assistance.

Another priority should include strengthening
cooperation on preventive diplomacy and mediation. To
prevent conflict, one needs good development policies
and strong State institutions. The European Union
delivers necessary assistance in those areas around
the world with the United Nations helping to identify
the areas where the assistance is most needed. The EU
should maintain its commitments and continue to be a
world's leading donor of development aid.

The last topic I would like to highlight today
pertains to the establishment of an EU-United Nations
collaborative platform on women, peace and security.
Nineteen years after Security Council adopted the
landmark resolution 1325 (2000) there is still a need to
reaffirm the important role that women play in conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and peacebuilding.

The European Union is increasingly active as a
worldwide security provider. The EU member States
provide almost 40 per cent of the United Nations
peacekeeping budget. Collectively, we are the largest
United Nations budget contributor.

In conclusion, we think that cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and
the European Union could and should be further
strengthened to spread our common values and fulfil
the untapped potential with the very aim to bring peace
and prosperity in the whole world.

