Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Chinese Government supports the United
Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) in the fulfilment
of its mandate in strict compliance with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. We are concerned about
the recent verification problems, and we urge Iraq to
implement fully the relevant resolutions of the Council and
better cooperate with UNSCOM.

At the same time, we believe that a sovereign State's
legitimate security concerns should be respected by all
parties; that Security Council resolution 687 (1991) should
be fully implemented; and that Iraq's sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence should be respected.
Last June, UNSCOM. and Iraq signed a joint statement,
which should be fully implemented in real earnest.

The sanctions against Iraq have been in force for six
years now. According to UNSCOM's report, in the past six
years Iraq has basically maintained its cooperation with the
Special Commission, and UNSCOM. has also made great
progress in discharging the mandate entrusted to it by the
Council. Moreover, Iraq cooperated with UNSCOM. in most
of the more than 40 inspections it has conducted in recent
weeks. Under these circumstances, we should consider
gradually lifting sanctions against Iraq in order to alleviate
its humanitarian difficulties.

However, the resolution before us decides to suspend
the review of sanctions against Iraq by the Council in
accordance with the relevant resolutions and threatens to
impose further sanctions. This is not fair. The Chinese
Government has always opposed the wilful imposition and
threat of sanctions against a country. Experience has shown
that this is counterproductive and may not serve to solve
problems in an appropriate manner.

We have also noted that considerable changes have
been incorporated in the current resolution, with the
deletion of new sanctions against Iraq and of the
reference to the larger pattern of non-cooperation, and
with the addition of some positive elements. For instance,
the resolution reiterates the commitment of all Member
States to the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Iraq, and states that UNSCOM. should
conduct inspections in accordance with its mandate, as
authorized by the Security Council.

For these reasons, the Chinese delegation voted in
favour of the resolution before us.

