The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United States.

We call on all sides to avoid heightening the
tension in the Middle East and to think carefully about
the consequences of their actions. We were notified this
morning of the Israeli action in Syria last night, after
the event. This morning, at 9 am, President Bush
called Israeli Prime Minister Sharon and conveyed our
condolences for the victims of Saturday's terrorist
attack at a restaurant in Haifa, which claimed the lives
of 19 Israelis, including three children and five Israeli
Arabs, and wounded dozens more. The United States
and the Government of Israel agreed that it is important
to avoid actions that could lead to a further heightening
of tension in the Middle East.

The United States believes that Syria is on the
wrong side of the war on terrorism. We have been clear
of the need for Syria to cease harbouring terrorist
groups. Specific directions for terrorist acts continue to
be issued from terrorist groups based in Syria. During
his visit to Damascus this year, Secretary of State Colin
Powell told the Government of Syria that this was
unacceptable and intolerable. I myself made this point
to Syrian Foreign Minister Al-Shara' in June 2002 in
this Chamber.

We believe that it is in Syria's interest and in the
broader interests of Middle East peace for Syria to stop
harbouring and supporting the groups that perpetrate
terrorist acts such as the one that occurred in Haifa
yesterday.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

As a measure to optimize the use of our time and
in order to allow delegations to take the floor as
quickly as possible, I will not individually invite
speakers to take a seat at the Council or invite them to
resume their seats at the side of the Council Chamber.
When a speaker is taking the floor, the Conference
Officer will seat the next speaker on the list at the
table.

I thank representatives for their understanding
and cooperation.

I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the League of Arab States to the United Nations.

