Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): My delegation
aligns itself with the statement delivered earlier by the
observer of the European Union. I will add only a few
words, on the subject of criminal accountability.

Liechtenstein welcomes the recent ratification of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) by the State of Palestine. As an active State party
to the Rome Statute, we are fully committed to the goal
of an ICC with universal reach. Palestine's ratification
is especially important and significant given the small
number of States parties in the Middle East. Other
States from the region should follow that example.

We are aware of the long and complex history
that provides the political context for this ratification.
Nevertheless, any ratification of the Rome Statute
should first and foremost be seen as what it is: a legally
binding, multilateral commitment to ending impunity

for genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes,
with a view to preventing such crimes from occurring
in the first place.

The ICC is not a one-sided political tool that can be
employed by a party to a conflict. The ICC cannot be
used to sue any specific person or country. Should an
investigation be opened in Palestine, any and all Rome
Statute crimes committed on Palestinian territory
can be scrutinized, no matter who committed them.
Furthermore, the principle of complementarity applies.
The ICC - because it has to under the Rome Statute -
will yield to investigations and prosecutions genuinely
undertaken by States with jurisdiction over the crimes.

We believe that the recent ratification will open the
door for the rule of law to make its mark in this long-
standing conflict. Will the politics on the ground get
in the way ofjustice taking its course? Will the States
concerned cooperate with a potential investigation by
the Court? It is too early to tell, but we are convinced
that the Court itself, as an independent and impartial
institution, is fully equipped to fulfil its mandate in
accordance with the rule of law.

Almost exactly two years ago, 58 States, including
my country, requested the Security Council to refer
the situation in Syria to the ICC. Regrettably, that
request was answered with a double veto. That cannot
be the end of the conversation about accountability
in Syria. Recently, the General Assembly transmitted
to the Council all of the reports of the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on Syria. The
Council must not close its eyes to the overwhelming
evidence of massive and heinous crimes being
committed. That would be an affront to thousands of
victims and their families.

While the demand for an ICC referral remains
as valid as ever, we must explore all options that can
contribute to bringing some measure of justice to
the victims of crimes in Syria. One can find some
thoughts on this matter in the summary on our webside
concerning the small workshop hosted by Liechtenstein
last November at Princetown University. For example,
domestic prosecutions based on the "passive/active
personality" principle or on universal jurisdiction could
make a meaningful contribution. ICC States parties
could also refer the situation in Syria to the ICC to the
extent that crimes are committed by their nationals as
foreign fighters.

There can be no lasting peace without justice. If
we are to find solutions for the seemingly intractable
conflicts that plague the Middle East, accountability
for the most serious crimes under international law
must form part of them.

