Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert: I would like to begin
by recounting my recent visit to a mass grave in the
Samawah desert alongside President Barham Salih. That
burial site is a stark reminder of Saddam Al-Hussein's
horrific crimes against many people - his own people,
in this case the Kurdish people. It was a deeply moving
experience, underlining once again that Iraq's violent
and lawless past still impacts its present. Yet it also
made clear how extraordinary Iraq's transition is in this
twenty-first century: from dictatorship to democracy.
In order to truly take root democracy needs time, a
great deal of time and much hard work.

We must recognize that the ongoing political
infighting is a costly obstacle. A full year after
national elections, ministerial appointments have yet
to be made to the key posts: Interior, Defence, Justice
and Education. Political parties have not yet shown
themselves willing to compromise. However, it should
be understood that political compromise is not a sign of
weakness. In fact, it is a sign ofpolitical maturity and a
requisite for resilience.

Slowly but surely, chairs, deputies and rapporteurs
are now being selected for parliamentary committees.
That is a critical hurdle to clear for parliamentary work
to get under way. We are not there yet although it is
indeed high time, as critical laws are still pending.

Turning to the negotiations on the formation of
the Kurdish regional Government, I am pleased to
report recent important progress. After 218 days of
negotiations, an agreement on the formation of a new
Kurdistan regional Government was signed on 5 May.
Barring further problems, the new Government could
be in place in June.

It is no secret that the Iraqi authorities, institutions,
mechanisms and systems continue to struggle with
deep-rooted problems, often hampering swift and robust
responses from the Government to pressing needs, such
as reconstruction, development and security. Those
problems can be schematized as a range of individual
interests and arguments, many of which arise from
long-standing grievances and differences between
communities, political parties, the federal Government
and the Kurdistan regional Government. That all
becomes entrenched in the form of concealed private
networks of power that operate independently, pursuing
their own narrow objectives and goals. To a certain
extent, that also explains why the many opportunities
arising from so many reconciliation efforts are yet to
be fully embraced.

With that in mind, it is also necessary to touch
upon the scourge of corruption, pervasive at all levels
in Iraq. Corruption takes money that should be spent
on public services, placing it instead in private pockets.
It also deters economic activity, hindering business
development that would result in much-needed job
creation. As I stated the last time I briefed the Security
Council (see S/PV.8462), I am encouraged by the
Government's obvious engagement on this issue. Prime
Minister Adil Abd Al-Mahdi made it very clear in
saying that corruption distorts the image of the State
and its reputation, both locally and on the world stage.
That is indeed very true, as it hampers not only Iraq's
credibility but also its viability, responsiveness and
effectiveness. Change will not happen overnight. It is
therefore important to highlight the issue of corruption
again and again. Achieving tangible results will be
crucial in so many ways. Most importantly, it will
revive public trust, which is essential for the further
development of Iraq's democracy.

The hydrocarbon sector is the backbone of Iraq's
economy, with vast oil potential yet to be explored.
However, in order to attain that, significant challenges
will need to be addressed. Also in that regard and
in short, the common good should trump private or
partisan interests, enabling the whole country to benefit.
Accordingly, I look forward to renewed engagement on
the critical hydrocarbon and revenue-sharing laws.

Another point is that Iraq can achieve its full
potential only with the active political, social and
economic participation of women and youth. Recently,
we witnessed, organized and participated in a variety
of women and youth events throughout the country.
While they were meaningful experiences for all those
involved, I would like to warn a little against change
as mere window dressing. At the end of the day, it is
all about translating excellent intentions into positive
action. Regrettably, Iraq is yet to appoint its first
female minister.

On a different note but of great relevance to women
and girls is the anti-domestic-violence law, which is
an issue that is both sensitive and important for Iraqis.
I would like to commend Iraq's leadership in taking
important steps towards the enactment of the law. The
law would fully protect the legal rights and shelter
needs of all victims of domestic violence - and by all
victims, I mean all victims, not only women and girls.
I sincerely hope that legislators will proceed with a
law in line with the Iraqi Constitution that prohibits all
forms of violence and abuse within the family.

On an entirely separate and encouraging note,
Baghdad is opening up. Very soon the Green Zone will
no longer exist. Prime Minister Adil Abd Al-Mahdi
has lived up to his promise from day one by removing
T-walls and returning the city to its people. However,
the security situation will continue to require close
monitoring, not only in Baghdad but throughout the
country. Attacks continue, as seen with recent blasts
and suicide bombings. It is also very relevant in this
context that the threat of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) is still present. As a coalition
representative recently said, ISIL is resurging. They
rested, moved and are active.

In that regard, I am keenly aware of the importance
of continued, Wide-based international support to
ensure that Iraq leaves its violent past behind and that
it does not slip back into the turmoil from which it so
recently emerged. In other words, a long-term approach
is critical to prevent ISIL from regaining a strong
foothold in Iraq.

Equally important is the issue of returning ISIL-
fighters from Syria to Iraq, along with their families. The
return of thousands upon thousands of people - Iraqis
and non-Iraqis - raises not only significant security
and capacity concerns, but also urgent human rights and
humanitarian protection concerns. All that is not just
an Iraqi problem. We know that certain States prefer to
maintain a strategic distance with regard to their own
nationals. But, once again, to be clear, that is notjust an
Iraqi problem. If poorly managed, the issue will impact
us all in the region and far beyond. Moreover, if we
do not manage that adequately, we risk creating a new
breeding ground for the next generation of terrorists.

Another predominant security concern is the
issue of armed actors operating outside State control,
engaged in illegal or criminal activities and exerting
economic and social influence throughout the country.
Clearly, the activities of those actors undermine State
authority. They affect vulnerable communities, they
weaken the national economy and, sadly, they also
prevent the peaceful return of displaced persons. In my
conversations with the Iraqi Government, I welcomed
certain actions, such as the closing down of so-called
illegal economic offices, but the road will certainly be
long. It will therefore prove crucial to hold to account
all armed actors involved in criminal enterprises or
illegal activity.

More broadly, I welcome the Government's efforts
with regard to security sector reform. However, much
work remains to be done, and the reconfiguration
of the national security architecture is particularly
important. That notably includes the future positioning
of the popular mobilization forces and the reform of the
Peshmerga into a single, regional security force.

As we saw during last summer's protests in the
south, Iraq's water shortages have the potential to ignite
social unrest, which, if unchecked, can reverse any
gains made. Although this past winter saw extensive
rainfall, including widespread catastrophic flooding,
simple reliance on generous rainfall is not a solid
national water strategy. In an era of severe climate
change, it is of the utmost importance to plan carefully
for all weather extremes and, therefore, to develop a
comprehensive programme of water collection and
management, as well as to strengthen the country's
infrastructure and better prepare for floods.

I am pleased to report that Iraq's leadership
continues to reach out to international and regional
counterparts, positioning itself as a reliable and capable
partner. Indeed, Iraq could well be a stabilizing factor
in a very turbulent region. Instead of an arena for
conflict, Iraq could well offer a space for regional
reconciliation, preparing the groundwork for a regional
security dialogue. At the same time, we cannot ignore
the fact that Iraq faces serious challenges in preventing
its territory from becoming the theatre for different
competitions. To all those feeling challenged, placing
a further burden on Iraq is truly the last thing that
it needs.

On 29 April, the United Nations launched its
2019 humanitarian response plan in alignment with
the humanitarian plans of Iraq. The needs remain
substantial. Many displaced citizens continue to face
serious obstacles to returning to their homes. Those
include the lack of civil documentation, an unstable
security situation owing, for example, to clashes
between armed groups and checkpoint harassment,
damaged and contaminated houses, inadequate basic
services and discrimination, among other factors.
In other words, obstacles are varied, complex and
interlinked, painfully resulting in stalled returns on
the ground.

In addition to our humanitarian efforts, we continue
to support post-ISIL stabilization and rehabilitation
efforts in the worst-affected areas. Our Funding Facility
for Stabilization (FFS) reached a major milestone by
rehabilitating the first 1,000 out of the 15,000 houses
in Mosul's Old City. That builds on previous successful
housing work in Al-Anbar, where thousands upon
thousands of houses have already been rehabilitated.
In addition, FFS completed the rehabilitation of several
structures, such as Mosul University, which currently
hosts more than 20,000 students. A third major bridge
in western Al-Anbar has also been restored, allowing
more than 75,000 people to access essential services,
such as hospitals and schools.

Allow me to now turn to the issue of missing
Kuwaitis, third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti
property, including the national archives. I would like
to thank Member States of the Tripartite Commission
for coming forward with satellite imagery that, in
combination with Witness testimonies, has been vital
in identifying potential locations for missing Kuwaitis,
After years of hard work by many, and on this occasion
I would like to flag recent efforts, in particular by the
Iraqi Ministry of Defence. I sincerely hope that we will
be able to announce positive results soon. Obviously, it
is important that Iraq continue its efforts, including the
identification of the missing Kuwaiti national archives
and other property. We all recognize their importance
as an integral element of Kuwait's national heritage.

I would like to conclude by recalling my recent visit
to Sinjar, which brings together many ofthe points Ijust
made. In Sinjar, I saw the horrific destruction - the
work of ISIL of almost five years ago. Unfortunately,
little has changed since the liberation of Sinjar. Many
people are still living in tents on the mountain to which
they fled at the onset ofthe terror campaign. In August,
the world will commemorate the horrific events of five
years ago. But a single administration and the provision
of security, as the very basis for the reconstruction of
Sinjar, are yet to be realized. Frankly, continued failure
to make it happen is a clear injustice. Iraqi leadership,
both in Baghdad and Erbil, must now act with urgency
and decisively.

Finally, the challenges for Iraq are manifold but,
in all of those challenges, I would like to express
once again our continued and strong commitment to
assist and support wherever we can. President Barham
Salih very recently stated that the situation in Iraq
is not good. Iraqis deserve far better. However, the
situation is improving. It will take time but, with great
determination and concerted, decisive action, we will
succeed. How right he is.

