Mr. Ruzicka (Slovakia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this debate on the protection
of critical infrastructure against terrorist attacks and on
promoting discussion on preventive measures against
such attacks. In this context, I would like to recall the
outcome of the Arria Formula meeting on cybersecurity
and international peace and security organized by
Spain and Senegal in November 2016.

As the threat landscape changes and becomes more
complex, so too must our approach to security problems
change in the face of asymmetric and cross-border
threats. As such, they must be confronted at both the
national and international levels. No country is immune
to cyberterrorism threats, including mine. Slovakia
adopted its national strategy to combat terrorism, based
on four key pillars, in line with the objectives of the
European Union action plan on combating terrorism:
prevention, protection, prosecution and response.

The threats posed by major disruptions of critical
infrastructure to a country's economy, infrastructure
and national security are real. These threats can be
classified into three categories: natural, human-caused
and accidental or technical threats.

Although reducing the vulnerabilities of critical
infrastructure and increasing its resilience is the
responsibility of individual States, the need for
international cooperation is growing rapidly. As has
been mentioned, cyberthreats and attacks are becoming
more common, sophisticated and harmful to States
as we come to depend more and more on computer
communications systems. At present, cyberterrorist
attacks are generally considered to pose a relatively
low risk to States. But despite the fact that cyberattacks
are occurring with greater frequency and intensity
around the world, many either go unreported or are
underreported, leaving the public with a false sense of
security about the threat itself.
While Governments, businesses and individuals are
all being targeted on an exponential basis, infrastructure
is becoming a target of choice among both individual
and State-sponsored cyberattackers, which recognize
the value of disrupting what were previously thought
of as impenetrable security systems. Many countries
around this table have already dealt with these kinds
of actions in the recent past. According to Dell's 2015
annual security report, cyberattacks against supervisory
control and data-acquisition systems doubled in 2014,
to more than 160,000.

Today, according to INTERPOL, malicious code
can potentially be used to manipulate the controls of
power grids, financial services, energy providers,
defence systems, health-care databases and other critical
infrastructure, resulting in real-world catastrophic
physical damage, such as blackouts or the disruption of
an entire city's water supply.

Ourjoint action is necessary. Some studies suggest
that the following measures should be taken to improve
critical infrastructure protection: first, assess critical
infrastructure vulnerabilities; secondly, develop plans
to eliminate significant vulnerabilities; thirdly, propose
systems for identifying and preventing attempted major
attacks; fourthly, develop plans for alerting, containing
and rebuffing attacks in progress; and fifthly, rapidly
reconstitute minimum essential capabilities in the
aftermath of an attack.

It cannot be excluded that in future the use of
cyberspace by State or non-State actors may amount
to a threat to international peace and security and will
require the Security Council to take more decisive steps
to respond.

As stated by the Secretary-General in the
foreword to the 2015 report (A/70/ 174) of the Group of
Governmental Experts on Developments in the Field of
Information and Telecommunications in the Context of
International Security in 2015:

"Making cyberspace stable and secure can be
achieved only through international cooperation,
and the foundation of this cooperation must be
international law and the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations."

Unfortunately, however, international treaties
intended to address the problem have so far had a limited
impact because of, first, the inability to hold signatories
accountable and, secondly, the difficulty of accurately
determining the identity of responsible actors.

Enhanced information-sharing, combined with a
mandate to swiftly and accurately release information
regarding attacks on impacted citizens, provide
a sensible foundation for designing a protocol to
effectively address future attacks and may help, yet
very few Governments routinely engage in this practice.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy calls on Member States to improve efforts
related to ensuring the security and protection of
particularly vulnerable targets and to share best
practices, and stresses the importance of developing
public-private partnerships in this area. But again
so little has been done in practice, as shown by the
experience of many countries.

In this respect, Iwould like to underline the following
five points on which we should be concentrating.

There is a need, first, to support States with practical
assistance in the implementation of the provisions of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy;
secondly, to establish appropriate mechanisms to
facilitate the enhanced sharing of best practices;
thirdly, to strengthen the capacity of both the public
and private sectors and to increase the development of
public and private partnerships, including by promoting
awareness and understanding of the necessary balance
between economic and security interests, in order to
ensure an adequate level of protection and limit the
detrimental effects of disruption on society and citizens;
fourthly, to be more decisive in efforts to combat
money-laundering and the financing of terrorism, as it
is through this channel that a great deal of know-how
falls into the wrong hands; and, fifthly, for the Security
Council to consider making better use of the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force Working Group
on the Protection of Critical Infrastructure, Including
Vulnerable Targets, Internet and Tourism Security.
All of this should be aimed at avoiding, addressing
and preventing attacks on critical infrastructure such
as those that have taken place in recent decades to
many countries represented this Chamber and to other
Members of the United Nations.

Terrorism poses a threat not only to our security
but also to the values, rights and freedoms of our
societies and their citizens. My country is committed
to playing its part in regional and global efforts to fight
terrorism and violent extremism on all fronts, including
the protection of critical infrastructure and the sharing
of best practices and technologies.

