Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Mr. President, we
thank you for allowing us to participate in today's open
meeting and share our views on the question of Haiti.
We welcome the presence today of the newly elected
President of Haiti, Mr. Rene Preval. We extend our
warmest congratulations to President-elect Preval and
all the Haitian people who participated in the elections.
South Africa believes that the successful outcome of
the February elections in Haiti has given the country
yet another opportunity to tackle the long-term
political and developmental challenges it faces.

The people of Haiti have suffered for far too
long. The levels of poverty and underdevelopment in
that country are the highest in the western hemisphere.
We believe that the successful democratic election now
requires that the Haitian people, in partnership with the
international community, focus on the economic
development of Haiti to help set that nation on the path
to sustainable, long-term development. There can be no
security without development, and human rights are
difficult to promote and uphold in a situation where
there is no political stability. It is therefore incumbent
upon the United Nations and its agencies, together with
the Bretton Woods institutions, to work together with
the people of Haiti to achieve sustainable development
and strengthen democracy and to promote political
change and national reconciliation.

We believe that the new leadership of Haiti is
ready to seize the opportunity to work with all
segments of Haitian society in building national unity,
reconciliation, justice and peace. No one among us
would wish for a recurrence of the political instability
that Haiti experienced two years ago. For that reason,
we remain convinced that a long-lasting political future
for Haiti depends on the comprehensive resolution of
its internal political dynamic. We believe that the time
has come for all political parties in Haiti, including the
Lavalas party and its leadership, to join together to
create political stability in Haiti. The international
community must make a long-term commitment to
assisting all the Haitian parties to achieve a long-
lasting political solution in Haiti.

In conclusion, we wish to commend the efforts
made by the United Nations, in particular by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Haiti, Ambassador Juan Gabriel Valdes, in helping to
create a climate that is conducive to the people of Haiti
exercising their democratic rights, despite the difficult
challenges and obstacles they face.

South Africa, working through the African Union
and in partnership with CARICOM, is ready to join the
international community to assist the people of Haiti in
their efforts to build a peaceful, stable, just and
prosperous State. We are convinced that Haiti can
succeed only to the extent to which the international
community can provide political support and the much-
needed resources for development. That, we believe, is
the least that the Haitian people would expect from us.

