Mrs. Robinson: In recent years, the Security
Council has broken new ground in its efforts to
implement the Charter's blueprint for the maintenance
of international peace and security. It would be fair to
say that the security concepts and the strategies and
methods of the Council have taken on a distinctly more
people-oriented focus grounded in the norms of
international law and of human rights and humanitarian
law. I applaud and encourage that development.
The Secretary-General, in a series of reports, has
led the quest for the plight of the victims of conflicts
and of gross violations of human rights to feature more
prominently in the deliberations of United Nations
organs, including the Security Council. The
international community owes a debt of gratitude to
him for the leadership he has provided. In the current
report, he invites this Council to find the path-breaking
steps to enable it to implement recommendations for
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

This is the second time that I have had the honour
of appearing before this Council, and I should like to
thank the members for giving me these opportunities to
place before them normative considerations and
sources of information in the human rights area that I
believe are important for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

Throughout the world, civilians caught in armed
conflict look to the United Nations to protect their
rights as well as their needs. They expect us not only to
provide them with emergency food and shelter, but also
to protect them from further attacks on their lives,
dignity and basic humanity. They expect us to assist
them during the harsh days when they are most
vulnerable and insecure. They expect us to help them
in returning to their homes and families, in bringing to
justice those who are responsible for international
crimes, in knowing the fate of their loved ones and in
rebuilding their societies so that they can have the
chance to live in peace.

In the recommendations in his earlier report, the
Secretary-General invited the Council to consider
factors such as the scope of the breaches of human
rights and international humanitarian law, including the
numbers of people affected and the nature of the
violations. He also suggested that the Council consider
the question of the limited and proportionate use of
force, with attention to repercussions upon civilian
populations and the environment.

As the Secretary-General indicates in the current
report, these are matters of ongoing discussion among
Member States. I believe that the following normative
and factual sources would be relevant to the
deliberations and approaches of the Council in the
future.

International human rights law insists on
standards of protection that are applicable in all times,
places and circumstances. There is a rich jurisprudence
and practice in the human rights area that I believe
should be an essential point of departure for the
Council in judging the acceptability or unacceptability
of behaviour of combatants, States and non-State actors
during conflicts, internal or international.

Tackling impunity at all stages of conflict is an
essential component in ensuring that fundamental
human rights standards are maintained. I
wholeheartedly support the Secretary-General's
recommendations on this topic. Ending impunity for
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity,
whether committed by State agents or non-State actors,
is obviously an important objective for the
international community. The report calls on the
General Assembly and the Security Council to provide
support for tribunals and other arrangements designed
to bring individual perpetrators to justice. On several
occasions, particularly with regard to the conflicts in
the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, the Security
Council has demonstrated that it will not tolerate
impunity for acts that offend the conscience of
humankind. Those who commit or contemplate
committing gross human rights Violations, wherever
they are, should be left in no doubt that they will be
held accountable for their actions.

The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights has deployed a great
deal of effort to help combat impunity in a number of
situations, including in Sierra Leone and East Timor.
The experience that we are developing in the human
rights area, including advising on the establishment of
international courts and on truth and reconciliation
commissions, represents an important pool of practice
for this Council.

On the subject of human rights fact-finding
during situations of armed conflict, establishing the
facts can play a crucial part in the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. In a number of recent
instances, including in relation to Afghanistan,
Kosovo, East Timor and Sierra Leone, human rights
fact-finding missions have taken place. Reports of such
missions should be available to the Council.

Allow me in this regard to cite a case on which I
reported to the Commission on Human Rights only last
week. At the request of the Commission on Human
Rights, my Office, in cooperation with the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, undertook an assessment
of the situation on the ground relating to the issue of
the abduction of children in northern Uganda. In the
preliminary report that I submitted to the Commission
on Human Rights last Thursday, I reported that there
were about 26,365 cases of abduction of civilians
carried out by the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) in
northern Uganda, a third of whom were children under
the age of 18, and a fifth of whom were female. I
informed the Commission of the system of terror
perpetrated by the LRA and offered a number of
recommendations based on the work of the mission.
The report of the mission is being drafted and will be
published as a document of the Commission on Human
Rights. I am confident that members of the Council
will be interested in this source of information and
assessment.

As concerns the Commission on Human Rights'
consideration of gross violations of human rights
during armed conflicts, in recent years, the
Commission has considered and adopted resolutions
intended to help stop and prevent gross violations of
human rights during conflict situations. The efforts of
the Commission are complementary to those of the
Security Council and usually entail recourse to one or
more of the following methods: the gathering of
information, the dispatch of fact-finding missions,
public debates, the adoption of resolutions expressing
concern and offering recommendations, extension of
good offices and offers of technical cooperation and
assistance. My Office would be happy to brief
members of the Council on what the Commission on
Human Rights is doing in relation to such situations.

As far as human rights mechanisms are
concerned, I welcome the fact that the Security Council
is increasingly looking to and drawing on the expertise
of the special mechanisms of the Commission on
Human Rights. At the present time, the Commission
has 14 country rapporteurs and 21 thematic
rapporteurs. The efforts of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Internally Displaced
Persons are of direct relevance to this debate in the
Council on the protection of civilians.

One key challenge during conflict is gaining
access to the vulnerable populations. We often think of
this access in terms of the delivery of assistance for
humanitarian needs. But to many victims of armed
conflict, meaningful access also means breaking the
cycle of secrecy and suffering; it means that the plight
of victims is brought into light. The United Nations
human rights mechanisms provide the means for doing
just that - yet these mechanisms are often denied
access to situations of conflict. This means that victims
are often denied the right to be heard. I consider the
reports of country rapporteurs and thematic rapporteurs
to be an indispensable information base for the efforts
of this Council and of other United Nations bodies to
strengthen conflict prevention in the United Nations. I
believe that it is of the utmost importance that this
Council be provided regularly with briefings on the
information available in the reports of these
mechanisms of the Commission. I also draw the
Council's attention to the role of the human rights
treaty bodies and their increasing capacity to take
urgent action.

The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights has field offices in a
number of situations of recent or ongoing conflicts,
including in Burundi, Colombia and Cambodia. Field
offices such as these are blazing a new path in the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and in the
defence of human rights and humanitarian law
generally. We have given special attention to the
gender perspective and to protecting women against
trafficking and have been attentive to the HIV/AIDS
problem in such situations.

To give a specific example of the work these field
offices do, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
our office works with the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
gathers information about allegations of violations of
human rights, reports these to me and through me to
our colleagues in other parts of the United Nations, and
generally offers its advice and support to the
Government for the pursuit of national plans and the
establishment or strengthening of national institutions
for the promotion and the protection of human rights.

In addition to the field offices that we ourselves
have established, we have also helped establish and
steer human rights components in a growing number of
United Nations peace operations. We recognize the
significance for our work of the human rights
component of these mandates. These operations should
receive the political, financial and administrative
support they need and deserve.

Finally, I would like to turn to the issue of human
rights in conflict prevention, peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peace-building. I would point out
that, as part of the reforms instituted by the Secretary-
General, human rights are becoming more and more
integrated into efforts for conflict prevention,
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peace-building. This
developing experience will undoubtedly be of interest
to the Council, and it would be important that it be
briefed periodically on significant developments. My
Office will be more than happy to do this.

I would like to finish by commenting on several
other areas of particular focus in the Secretary-
General's report.

The Secretary-General appropriately emphasizes
combating hate speech as a measure to enhance
protection. The media can play a formidable role in
promoting diversity and respect for others. It is
unfortunate that the same technology is sometimes
used to stir up hatred and violence. But let us consider
why this is the case. The protection of civilians indeed
requires us to address the root causes of conflict, which
are frequently not only old and deep, but often include
ethnic and racial elements. Societies in conflict often
devote their energy to dehumanizing and excluding
those that are perceived to be different.

The World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance,
which will take place from 31 August to 7 September
2001, in Durban, South Africa, will provide the
international community with an invaluable
opportunity to set up a strategy to combat the ugliness
of racism in all its forms. Part of protection entails
adopting a strategy to ensure that racism is tackled
before it forms an organizing principle in armed
conflict.

The emphasis placed in the report on the role of
human rights defenders is welcome. Human rights
defenders often represent a first point of contact for
civilians in armed conflict. Their voices enable us to
understand the plight of those we are seeking to
protect. The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on human rights defenders presented her first
report to the Commission on Human Rights last week,
and outlined her proposed plan of work.

I see great merit in proposals for a focal point for
civilians in peacekeeping missions and for increased
emphasis on protection in peacekeeping mandates. The
need for adequate regional responses to conflict
situations is something I wholeheartedly endorse. I
have appointed advisers in each of the regions to
promote a strong regional approach to the protection of
human rights.

My Office is acutely aware of the fact that, as the
report puts it, "corporate royalties have continued to
fuel wars" (S/2001/33l, para. 61). The United Nations
has a key role to play in promoting responsible
behaviour by business in crisis areas. My Office is
committed to supporting efforts by corporations to
analyse the potential impacts of their presence in zones
of conflict and to ensure that systems are in place to
avoid unintended consequences of their operations that
may result in human rights abuses.

In making this presentation I have heeded the
advice given to me to provide to the Council practical
insights from our normative and information sources
that might be helpful to the Council in its quest for the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts. From the
examples I have placed before the Council it will be
seen that the efforts of the Council for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict are supported by the
endeavours of different parts of the United Nations
system.

I thank the Council once again for giving me this
opportunity to address it on this important topic.

