Mr. Kryzhanivskyi (Ukraine): The Ukrainian
delegation associates itself fully with the statement
made by the representative of Austria on behalf of the
presidency of the European Union. We would like to
touch upon some additional issues that are of
considerable importance for my country.

The 2001 United Nations Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects is the

comprehensive framework for dealing with the illicit
trade in small arms. It is the first big step forward
towards achieving the goal of controlling that scourge.
We hope that the follow-up process will find ways to
strengthen and further develop measures contained in
the Programme.

Ukraine shares the view that efforts to combat the
illicit trade in and proliferation of small arms and light
weapons are largely hampered by inadequate capacity
at the national, regional and global levels to trace the
sources and lines of supply of illicit arms. Effective
control over brokering activities and transfers of small
arms and light weapons in general is an area where the
international community should take active steps.
States should make their best efforts to ensure that the
production, export, import, stockpiling, marking,
record-keeping and transfer of small arms and light
weapons are all carried out in strict adherence to
international and national laws and regulations.

It is evident that promoting long-term conditions
for development and security is impossible without
resolving ongoing conflicts and taking adequate
measures aimed at ensuring stability in post-conflict
situations. We fully support the Council's consideration
of actions against States, entities and individuals that
deliberately violate United Nations arms embargoes. It
is also important to review the lessons learned in order
to ensure the efficiency of additional measures that
could be taken by the Security Council. It would be
useful to focus on the financial sources for purchases
of illegal weapons and to define the role that
international organizations, business and financial
institutions and other actors at the regional and local
levels can play in implementing arms embargoes.

We would like to propose some additional
elements to be further explored while discussing the
issue of illicit small arms and light weapons, namely, a
restriction on the supply of ammunition to areas of
instability and the destruction of old excess stockpiles
of small arms and light weapons. Ukraine believes that
the effective destruction of accumulated old stockpiles
of small arms and light weapons may make an
important contribution to the fight against illicit small
arms and light weapons. NATO's Partnership for Peace
trust fund project in Ukraine, whose purpose is to
destroy 1.5 million small arms and light weapons and
100,000 tons of ammunition, is a good example in that
regard.

Ukraine follows a responsible policy in the field

of arms control. Our national export-control system

provides for effective procedures for the licensing of

exports and imports. New measures were recently put

in place to improve national legislation in that field,

including the implementation of the 2001 Programme

of Action and the Organization for Security and

Cooperation in Europe's 2000 Document on Small
Arms and Light Weapons.

Ukraine will continue to take an active part in the
international efforts to combat the illicit trafficking in
small arms and light weapons and in restraining their
uncontrolled proliferation.

