The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General, Ministers
and other representatives present in the Security
Council Chamber. Their presence today underscores
the importance of the subject matter under discussion.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Somalia to participate in this meeting.

On behalf ofthe Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke, Prime Minister
of the Federal Republic of Somalia, and request the
Protocol Officer to escort him to his seat at the Council
table.

Mr. Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke, Prime
Minister of the Federal Republic of Somalia, was
escorted to a seat at the Council table.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Susana
Malcorra, Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General;
Mr. Nicholas Kay, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia; and His Excellency
Mr. Tete Antonio, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2015/840, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Angola, Chad, France,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria, Spain, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America.

I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/20lS/702, containing the
report of the Secretary-General on Somalia, and to
document S/2015/762, which contains a letter dated
7 October 2015 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Angola, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2245 (2015).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make a statement after the vote.


