Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by conveying the call made by
Mr. Emmanuel Macron, President of France, for a
humanitarian truce in Syria. France firmly condemns
the current bombing of eastern Ghouta, where the
civilian population are the principal victims, and calls
for the Council to adopt the draft resolution prepared
by Sweden and Kuwait as soon as possible, in order to
enable a cessation of hostilities in Syria. The need for it
is urgent and total, since the situation there is as dire as
it has been since the tragedy in Syria began.

Let me thank the Kuwaiti presidency of the Security
Council for having convened this debate on a topic that
we hold dear, namely, respect for the purposes and the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations as a
central element of the maintenance of international peace
and security. This debate is being held at a particularly
salient moment - 27 years after the liberation of your
country, Kuwait, Mr. President, in which France is
proud to have participated. Your presence, Sir, marks
the importance of this meeting. Although our Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, could
not attend, he has asked me to convey to you that he
welcomes and fully supports your initiative. I also
welcome the Secretary-General and thank him for his
briefing. As well, I welcome Mr. Ban Ki-moon and
thank him for his briefing.

The maintenance of international peace and
security is the primary purpose of our Organization,
as enshrined in Article 1 of the Charter, which for
more than 70 years is the framework that brings us
together and the founding cornerstone of our action.
The Charter is the heart and the origin of our system
of global governance, which is the foundation for
multilateral order - built on the rubble of the Second
World War with the universal ambition, from the
beginning, of sustaining peace through a realistic
system of rules applicable to all. To quote President
Macron in his statement before the General Assembly
in September, "in today's world, nothing is more
effective than multilateralism." (A/72/PV.4, p. 8) Our
greatest challenges - the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, terrorism, climate change, migration,
unequal development, massive violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law and the new
challenges posed by technology - are global and can
be addressed only globally on a multilateral basis. It is
France's deep conviction that, each time that we accept
that the resolution ofinternational crises is taking place
outside of the multilateral framework and the system of
rules we adopted in 1945, we are allowing the law ofthe
jungle to prevail.

More than 70 years after the signing of the
Charter, which instructs us to "take effective collective
measures for the prevention and removal of threats to
the peace, and for the suppression of acts of aggression
or other breaches of the peace, and to bring about by
peaceful means", the Council must continue its efforts
to fully utilize the tools that the Charter provides us to
enable us to fulfil our primary responsibility, namely,
the maintenance of international peace and security. In
that regard, I would like to highlight three main areas
for our current and future work.

First of all, we must make our peaceful settlement of
disputes more effective by making conflict prevention
a reality. The peaceful settlement of disputes is one of
the principal tools of the Charter, as set out in Chapter
VI. It plays a key role, particularly when the States
involved are willing and able to engage in sincere and
constructive dialogue or to resolve their dispute through
an independent and impartial body. It may seem self-
evident, but Article 33 of the Charter helpfully reminds
us that negotiation is one of the main tools for the
peaceful settlement of disputes. It regularly yields
concrete results in the maintenance of peace and in all
domains of international affairs. As a product of long
and complex negotiations and fruit of the perseverance
of those involved, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action, approved by the Council in resolution 2231
(2015), regarding the Iranian nuclear question, is an
excellent example. The Colombian peace process is
another case in point, in a different framework, of
success as a result of the patient work of negotiation
and mediation. Indeed, the Charter identifies mediation
and conciliation among the tools at our disposal.

In that regard, we welcome the efforts of the
Secretary-General to strengthen that dimension of his
work by making full use of his good offices, as well
as the mediation mechanisms and expertise in the
Secretariat, which France wholeheartedly supports.
That mobilization depends on the ability to anticipate
and act prior to crises, through early warning and
action. The establishment of a High-Level Advisory
Board on Mediation is likely to further strengthen the
Secretary-General's capacity for action. In many of
the issues on the Council's agenda today, the Special
Representatives and Special Envoys of the Secretary-
General have the primary function of being mediators
for complex but necessary negotiations. That applies
particularly to Syria, Libya and Yemen today.

Mediation is one of the ingredients of what should
be, more generally, a priority - prevention. As the
Secretary-General has emphasized since the start of
his mandate, we must, collectively, be more effective
in preventing the deterioration of situations and the
outbreak of conflict and its recurrence. We must
mobilize to make that goal a reality. That implies having
a proactive and global vision. Mediation can help ease
political tensions, but beyond that, we must take into
account the multiple factors of fragility, foremost
among which are human rights, the economic and social
dimensions and the impact of climate change.

Promoting sustainable peace following the twin
resolutions of 2016 (Council resolution 2282 (2016) and
General Assembly resolution 70/262) is essential to
meeting that goal. The report of the Secretary-General
on peacebuilding and sustainable peace (S/2018/43)
is an important contribution to that end, but I also
wish to highlight the efforts of Mr. Ban Ki-moon in
that connection.

Secondly, we must continue to promote respect
for international law and our reliance on international
justice, which fully contribute to the peaceful settlement
of disputes. In that respect, France underlines the
essential role ofthe International Court ofJustice, one of
the organs established by the Charter to strengthen the
international rule of law. We recognize its formidable
contribution to this indispensable framework. Through
its work, it helps us understand that the rule of law
is not limited to the handling of theoretical concepts
and concretely serves the maintenance of peace and
international security.

The maintenance of international peace and security
cannot be understood without respecting and protecting
human rights and international humanitarian law. Yet
human rights violations and humanitarian disasters
continue in front of our eyes, in an unbearable litany. In
Syria, as I stated at the outset, in Yemen, in Burma and
in many other armed conflicts, we must take action to
ensure respect for international humanitarian law. That
is not only a requirement to protect the peoples of the
United Nations - as enshrined in the Charter - but it
is also the best guarantee that the most reprehensible
actions will not be committed during a conflict.

More than ever, we must remember that respect
for human rights and international humanitarian law is
not a concession or a favour but an imperative. Finally,
the fight against impunity is a necessary safeguard to
prevent the recurrence of those violations and to ensure
that peace and reconciliation are still possible. The
international partnership launched on 23 January to
combat impunity on the part of those who are guilty of
the use of chemical weapons is a reminder of France's
decisive role on that issue.

The mass crimes still being committed today
shock our universal conscience and remind us of every
principle that inspired the drafting of the Charter.
Each of those crimes is a collective failure of our
responsibility to protect civilian populations. It is due to
those collective security failures that France highlights
the role of the International Criminal Court, which is
celebrating its twentieth anniversary this year, so that
victims of mass atrocities can find redress and justice.
But the Council also has a role to play in ensuring
that such tragedies do not occur. Since 2013, the French
President of the Republic has called for a suspension
of the veto for mass atrocities - as an expression of
the political, voluntary and collective commitment of
the five permanent members of the Security Council
with regard to their special responsibility. We have
taken that initiative with Mexico and more than half of
the States Members of the United Nations support that
effort and that ambitious and pragmatic reading of the
Charter. It is indeed our duty to stress that holding a
permanent seat is a responsibility, not a privilege, and
implies the exercise of that responsibility in the light of
the purposes and principles of the Charter. Allow me,
Mr. President, on this occasion, to warmly welcome
your country's support for this initiative.

Thirdly, and finally, where circumstances so
require, the Council not only has the opportunity but
also the obligation to use tools to enforce the purposes
and principles of the Charter. Foremost among those
tools are peacekeeping operations. Since 1948, 3,438
men and women have lost their lives in such operations,
and I want to pay special tribute to their sacrifice today.
We are all indebted to them for our safety.

The principles by which the nearly 100,000
peacekeepers around the world today operate are at
the very heart of the Preamble to the Charter - to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
to work together to maintain international peace and
security and to affirm our faith in fundamental human
rights. In the face of increasingly complex conflicts, our
peacekeeping operations have to carry out difficult yet
essential tasks, including, first and foremost, protecting
civilians and promoting the political settlement of
conflicts. While we have seen peacekeepers succeed in
C6te d'Ivoire, Liberia, Sierra Leone and Timor-Leste,
for example, we are aware of the difficulties they have
to deal with, and we must work collectively - with
troop-contributing countries, the General Assembly,
host States and regional organizations - to make
peacekeeping an ever more effective tool, strategically
and operationally.

In that respect, it is particularly important to
support the rise of our regional partners, who have
become major players in the resolution of crises. Here
again the Charter has proved its foresight, in Chapter
VIII. It is through the Council's consolidated and
coordinated action with regional organizations on both
the political and operational fronts that we will be able
to respond to today's challenges to peace and security.
Chapter VII of the Charter offers us another tool that
does not require the use of force, by which, of course, I
mean international sanctions, and here I want to stress
that they are both coercive and incentive. They are
intended to be reversible once the targeted individuals
and organizations no longer threaten international peace
and security or flout their international obligations. In
this way, the incentivizing sanctions that the Council
imposed on Iran paved the way for resolution 2231
(2015). That shows the strong potential for effective
interaction among the various tools available to the
Council when they are implemented strategically.
I would also like to point out that the increasingly
targeted nature of sanctions against individuals and
organizations threatening international peace and
security minimizes their impact on civilians. The
Council has done a great deal of work in that regard,
and the progress in recent years has been remarkable.

Finally, as you said, Mr. President, Kuwait's
experience of its liberation in 1991, which resulted from
the joint work of many States with the authorization of
the Security Council, showed that the use of force, in
accordance with the rules of the Charter, is sometimes
necessary to uphold international law.

In conclusion, I would like to say that respect for
the purposes and principles of the Charter should not be
a reason for rejected any reform of it at all. The Charter
was reformed in 1965 in order to enable the Security
Council to be expanded. It should be reformed again in
order to adapt the Council's composition to the realities
of the world today, and to ensure a fair representation
of emerging Powers, while preserving its executive and
decision-making nature. France is in favour of Security
Council reform, and our position on it is well known. It
includes an expansion of the two categories of members,
for which we support adding a permanent seat for the
members of the Group of Four and an increased African
presence, including among the permanent members.

The new international order, the proliferation of
crises and threats and the tragic persistence of the
wars and horrors that they leave in their wake - as the
situation in Syria reminds us every day - demand that
we reform our Organization in order to adapt it to the
challenges of our time. That will require the Council
to make demands of itself in order to find the means
to overcome its divisions, with a View to ensuring that
the purposes and principles of the Charter continue to
be an effective guide for our action in the service of
international peace and security. It is both our shared
responsibility and in our common interest.
