Mr. Wan Chat Kwong (Mauritius): I would like at
the outset, Sir, to convey to you the congratulations of my
delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month, along with our appreciation for
the excellent manner in which its work has been
conducted so far. I would also like to thank your
predecessor for his exemplary leadership during the
month of May.

Today we shall witness another milestone in the
peace process in Angola. The end of the mandate of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) and the establishment by the Council of the new
follow-on United Nations observer mission in Angola
(MONUA) signal a new turn in the sometimes troubled
history of the implementation of the Lusaka accords.

My delegation welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General and thanks him for his valuable contribution to
the peace process. However, much remains to be done,
and while peace may have been formally established
between the Government and UNITA and while, with
some notable exceptions, relative calm seems to have has
prevailed in the country so far, peace unfortunately has
not yet settled in the minds of all Angolans. While the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation has
been formed, unity and reconciliation have yet to rest in
the hearts of all Angolans.

That is why my delegation strongly supports the
appeal made by the Secretary-General and by other
speakers before me for Mr. Savimbi to meet President
Dos Santos at the earliest possible opportunity on
Angolan soil. The importance of such a meeting for the
consolidation of the peace process cannot be sufficiently
stressed.

The experience of my own country is quite
illustrative in this respect. Shortly after a fiercely fought
electoral campaign preceding my country's independence,
the leaders of the rival factions literally joined hands
together, with the good offices of a friendly Government
whose country is a permanent member of the Security
Council. This historic reconciliation was no doubt crucial
in helping to establish the necessary firm foundations on
which my country's economic development has rested.

 

We firmly believe that the meeting of the two leaders
would signal the start of the necessary process of healing
the deep psychological and political trauma left by more
than 20 years of bitter internal conflict. That is why my
delegation strongly supports the establishment of the
observer mission, whose mandate will be precisely to assist
the Angolan parties in consolidating peace and national
reconciliation, to enhance confidence-building and to create
an environment conducive to long-term stability, democratic
development and the rehabilitation of the country.

My delegation welcomes the role of the observer
mission in ensuring that after the end of the mandate of
UNAVEM. III, both parties will continue to respect the
terms of the peace process. The recent events in the former
Zaire show only too well that UNITA has not yet
surrendered the bulk of its armaments and has not
disbanded all of its armed elements as previously claimed.
The vigilance of the Council will therefore have to continue
to be exercised.

My delegation would also join others in renewing the
appeal for the continued generous assistance of the
international community in the humanitarian, economic and
social sectors. Without such assistance, the remarkable
accomplishments of the United Nations in bringing peace
to Angola could be jeopardized.

Finally, my delegation would like to pay a resounding
tribute to the women and the men of UNAVEM, who have
contributed so much to the securing the peace in this part
of Africa. We would like to make a special mention of
Maitre Alioune Blondin Beye, whose role and leadership
have been decisive.

