Ms. Migiro (United Republic of Tanzania):
Allow me at the outset to express our profound thanks
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu,
for presenting the insightful and touching report of the
Secretary-General. It will, obviously, serve to
strengthen our resolve to fully address children's
issues, especially as they relate to situations of conflict.

My delegation would like to register its
appreciation to the delegation of Benin for organizing
this open debate on children and armed conflict. The
issue before us resonates our commitments in the
Declaration and Plan of Action of the World Summit
for Children. In the Declaration, we pledged, amongst
other commitments, to strengthen the protection of
children affected by armed conflicts, to end the
recruitment of children for armed conflicts and to
factor issues of protecting children into peacekeeping
processes. Nevertheless, the recruitment of children for
combat activities by non-State actors and militias
continues unabated in many parts of the world. By the
same token, several Governments and regimes cannot
escape culpability and/or complicity.

My delegation welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict,
issued in document S/2005/72. The report is the
culmination of a succession of initiatives on behalf of
children by the United Nations, beginning with
advocacy and followed by standard-setting based on
relevant Security Council resolutions to this stage of
implementation, contained in the document before us
for deliberation by the Council today.

The proposals and methodologies for monitoring,
reporting and compliance are professionally well-
thought-out tools. However, we foresee some
difficulties which could be encountered in the
collection of information for monitoring and reporting
purposes. We are of the view that there is a need for
United Nations country teams, and in particular for a
focal point for children, to have a dialogue with, and
sensitization programmes for, concerned Governments
on the need to provide such information. It should also
be noted that some Governments may be willing to
provide such information, but that the information may
not be kept in a systematic manner or simply not have
been recorded.
The establishment of a comprehensive monitoring
and reporting system, as recommended by the
Secretary-General, has to take these constraints into
account. Similarly, in developing such a system, it
should be noted that, whereas a generic system may be
desirable, there is a need to tailor it to be country-
specific, as situations may differ from one country to
another. To ensure the availability of monitoring and
reporting information, countries that are not willing to
provide such information should be helped to develop
the needed capacity and encouraged to meet
compliance requirements.

While we welcome the progress that has been
made in some countries, such as Liberia and
Afghanistan, my delegation is deeply concerned by the
continued use of child soldiers in many situations of
armed conflict. We strongly condemn those parties that
kill children who wish to opt out of or refuse
recruitment. We also condemn all those parties to
conflicts that attack schools and hospitals or commit
atrocities that are in violation of international
humanitarian and human rights law. Stern measures
need to be taken against such parties to conflicts. The
report of the Secretary-General recommends that action
be taken at various levels - national, regional and
international, including by the Security Council, which
bears the primary responsibility for the maintenance
and enforcement of international peace and security.

A long-term solution to the problem of children
in armed conflict lies in conflict prevention - by way
of building solid foundations of good governance,
democracy and all-round development. In the Great
Lakes region, for example, this matter has been
incorporated in the Dar es Salaam Declaration, adopted
on 20 November 2004 during the first Conference of
the Great Lakes Region on Peace, Security, Democracy
and Development. The Declaration, which is expected
to culminate in a peace pact later this year, prohibits
the recruitment of children into armed forces and calls
for the reunification of such children with their
families or their rehabilitation and reintegration into
their communities. In that regard, we welcome the
recommendation of the High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change for the establishment of a
peacebuilding commission to address comprehensively
the reintegration and rehabilitation of children ex-
combatants, with particular emphasis on ex-girl
soldiers.

The challenge before us, therefore, is to develop
appropriate laws and policies and to enact relevant
laws. Their enforcement will require political will and
commitment at the highest political levels to the
protection of children, which translates into
programmes that lead to poverty eradication and
improved opportunities for the education and
development of children. The Government of the
United Republic of Tanzania has established a
children's department within the Ministry of
Community Development, Gender and Children to
ensure that children's and gender issues are
mainstreamed in national policies. At the same time,
the majority age in Tanzania is 18 years, which also
applies to the recruitment of soldiers in the Tanzania
People's Defence Force.

The gravity of the situation of children in conflict
requires our concerted efforts. We have at our disposal
a number of instruments that provide the framework
for protecting children and ending child soldiering.
What is now needed is compliance with those
instruments. The use of child soldiers needs to be
added to the list of existing regimes of sanctions, and
criminal procedures against the perpetrators must be
undertaken. My delegation welcomes the action plan
proposed by the Secretary-General as a starting point
for discussion on a framework for monitoring and
reporting and ensuring compliance.

In conclusion, we welcome what has become a
standard practice - authorizing the protection of
civilians, including children, in peacekeeping missions.
However, we are astounded by reports of sexual abuses
against girls and women in peacekeeping missions.
Those responsible seem to be taking advantage of the
weak judicial institutions in the countries they serve to
violate their own professional ethics. We support the
zero-tolerance policy of the Secretary-General aimed at
stopping such repulsive practices. They should be
stopped. We urge troop-contributing countries to take
stern disciplinary measures against the culprits and to
work with the Secretary-General in that endeavour.

