Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank the Egyptian presidency
for the opportunity to discuss a particularly important
issue in the context of the maintenance of international
peace and security.

The interest of the subject that brings us together
today, namely, sanctions as measures decided on by the
Security Council that do not involve the use of force,
is that it highlights a central element of our collective
action aimed at achieving our common goal ofpeace and
security for all, as set out in the Charter of the United
Nations, namely, the maintenance of international
peace and security.

As highlighted by the High-level Review of United
Nations Sanctions and the subsequent Compendium
issued in June 2015 (S/2015/432), sanctions form an
important tool for maintaining collective security and,
as such, have been used with increasing regularity in
order to deal with various increasingly complex threats
to international peace and security, such as terrorism, the
proliferation of nuclear weapons, violations of human
rights and the illegal exploitation of natural resources.

It is, therefore, understandable that the design,
implementation and scope of such measures should
be the subject of a common understanding, mutual
reinforcement and equal commitment by all the parties
concerned, in particular all of the entities of the United
Nations system. It is in that spirit that the 2005 World
Summit Outcome recalls that we must

"ensure that sanctions are implemented in ways
that balance effectiveness to achieve the desired
results against the possible adverse consequences,
including socioeconomic and humanitarian
consequences, for populations and third States."
(General Assembly resolution 60/1, para.106)

It is now recognized that United Nations sanctions
have evolved significantly over the years. They tend
to be more clever, more intelligent and more adapted
to the situations to which they apply. Experience has
shown, however, that their effectiveness and positive
contribution to the improvement of given situations
depend to a large extent on the transparency and clarity
of their purpose and the objectives that the sanctions
hope to achieve, as well as on the adherence of the
different parties. Additionally, the effectiveness of
sanctions depends especially on the consistency of the
sanctions concerned with other measures or actions
carried out by the United Nations with their partners,
in particular regional and national partners, in response
to the given problem or situation.

The issue of the effectiveness of sanctions can
be approached from various angles - notably angles
related to their legitimacy and their timeliness, the
political will of the actors in charge of their application
and their adaptation to specific situations and to the
various methods of the Council or its various sanctions
committees used to monitor the development and
implementation of the regimes established. However,
my delegation would like to highlight some aspects that
we consider to be essential for the effectiveness and
efficiency of sanctions regimes.

The challenge is, first and foremost, to address
the challenge of consistency with other United
Nations responses and actions, as advocated by the
aforementioned High-level Review, which indicates
that the integration of sanctions in other United Nations
interventions is essential for identifying synergies,
preventing incompatible actions and enhancing the
overall effectiveness of the collective security system.
Given the increasing importance of the regional
dimension in the system of collective peace and
security, we believe that the second challenge is to
place greater emphasis on the synergy of the efforts of
regional, sub-regional and international actors with the
policies and actions of the United Nations. Indeed, in
most of the regimes in effect, cooperation between the
sanctions committees and the countries in the region has
proved to be an essential element of the effectiveness of
the measures adopted.

Finally, we believe that in a context characterized
by the growth of the Internet and digital technologies,
coupled with the growing complexity of the financial
environment - a context in which the free movement
of people and goods is developing - capacity-building
is a crucial dimension of international cooperation. The
level of the capacities of the countries and institutions
involved in the implementation of sanctions is decisive,
if one bears in mind that most sanctions regimes relate
to developing countries.

It is therefore important to pay particular attention

to those developing countries that fully understand that
in an international environment where emerging threats
are transnational challenges, those countries cannot
be the weak links in the collective security system. It
should be noted, for example, that the same national
systems for combating illegal financial transactions or
the financing of terrorism can also detect assets from
individuals or entities subject to sanctions and can
allow countries to act accordingly. In most developing
countries, therefore, such technical assistance is
necessary in order to ensure an adequate flow of
information, harmonize actions between the competent
services of the State and integrate aspects relating to
sanctions into the domestic judicial systems of States.

I cannot end my remarks without raising the
issue of natural resources, which are increasingly
being addressed by sanctions regimes, particularly
in the context of African countries. The challenge
for sanctions regimes in the area of natural resources
is to thwart the exploitation of natural resources by
the entities or individuals targeted so as to prevent
them from benefiting from such resources without
impinging on legal activities and the rights that the
countries and regions concerned have over their own
natural resources.

Once again, it is through the strengthening
of dialogue and cooperation between the Security
Council and its sanctions committees, on the one
hand, and the countries and regions concerned, on the
other, that sanctions on natural resources can become
more effective and legitimate. That takes place by
strengthening the national economies of the countries
in question and ensuring that those natural resources
are preserved for development and not used as a source
of conflict and instability.

