Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): In
the light of your announcement, Mr. President, I would
first like to express my solidarity with the delegation of
the Russian Federation in the face of the attack suffered
by the Russian Ambassador in Ankara, victim of the
unreasonable and the intolerant.

I am grateful to the briefers for their valuable,
enlightening and complementary briefings, which
described the difficult reality that Afghanistan is
experiencing today. Once again, through the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, we wish to reiterate our gratitude to all
United Nations staff, while underscoring the efforts of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
in the fulfilment of its mandate and ofthose involved in
the delivery of humanitarian aid throughout the country,
who, despite working in extremely arduous conditions
and being victims of frequent attacks, continue to bring
a measure of relief to the people who need it so much.

We also welcome and commend the work that has
been done over the past two years by New Zealand as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011). We wish every
success to Japan, which will take up the position
in January.

Uruguay reiterates its call upon the Afghan
Government and urges its authorities to continue on the
path towards lasting peace. In that respect, I welcome
the activities undertaken by the Government to achieve
the peace so long desired by the Afghan people. The
peace agreement signed recently by the Government
and the High Peace Council with Hezb-i-Islami, on
22 September, represents an important step forward
and reflects the efforts of the Government to initiate
a dialogue. We hope that this step will serve as an
example and as a way to achieve dialogue and direct
talks between the Government of Afghanistan and the
Taliban, so as to create conditions conducive to the
establishment of peace.

Afghanistan continues to face a number of
challenges in seeking political stability and meeting the
needs of its people. Nonetheless, Uruguay welcomes the

Government's efforts to overcome obstacles, and in that
respect we encourage it to continue to work towards
reconciliation, showing the leadership necessary to
reach an agreement that will ensure stability in the
short, medium and long term and enable Afghanistan
to continue with the reforms necessary to rebuild
the country in an environment of peace, security
and development.
At the recent Brussels Conference on Afghanistan,
commitments were made by the Government, through
the reform agenda, and by the international community,
through the provision of political and financial support,
to address the country's development priorities
through 2020. It remains key for the United Nations
and the international community to provide support
and assistance to the National Unity Government,
in strict compliance with the principles of national
ownership and leadership. The support of the countries
of the region in achieving economic growth and in
overcoming issues related to peace and security in
Afghanistan is vital.

We are deeply concerned at the worsening
humanitarian situation. Recent reports have indicated
that 5 million people require assistance, some 13 per cent
more than last year. The rapid rise in the number of new
internally displaced persons as a result of intensified
fighting; the increase in the number of refugees and
undocumented Afghans from Pakistan - more than
600,000; the limited resources in a number of sectors,
in particular the health sector; restricted access to aid;
and insufficient supplies to meet existing needs means
that humanitarian aid is urgently needed. We hope that
these obstacles can be overcome quickly.

Quick and unfettered access of humanitarian aid
to conflict areas is absolutely key. Uruguay reiterates
that restricting the delivery of humanitarian assistance
constitutes a violation of international humanitarian
law. In this context, the protection of civilians,
especially women and children, is critical, and Uruguay
therefore deems it imperative to respect international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
In that context, we call for the full implementation of the
provisions of resolution 2286 (2016), on the protection
of the wounded and the sick and medical facilities and
personnel, adopted last May.

We wish also to refer here to the key role of Afghan
women. Last September, at our previous debate on the
issue, the Special Representative, quoting President

Ghani, said, "the face of Afghan poverty is female"
(S/PV777], p.3).

We stress the need to redouble the efforts made
to ensure the economic empowerment of women.
Likewise, the role of women in the peace process
and in Afghan society is vital. We therefore urge the
Government of Afghanistan to continue with its ongoing
efforts to empower women and strengthen their role
and active participation in the peace process. As noted
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/1049),
those commitments need to be translated into action,
including continued concrete work and national
financing to implement the national action plan on
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and relevant
legal and policy frameworks protecting the rights of
women and especially protecting women from violence.

