Mr. Oyarzun (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation appreciates this opportunity to participate in
5
this meeting of the Security Council, and congratulates
Austria on organizing this open debate on the activities
of the three Security Council counter-terrorism
Committees. In this regard, I fully endorse the content
of the statement made by the Permanent Representative
of Sweden on behalf of the European Union.

Terrorism infringes on people's human rights and
fundamental freedoms, and has become a threat to
peace and international security. To counteract
terrorism, it is essential to formulate collective, all-
inclusive and coordinated response in which the United
Nations system must play a relevant role as an
expression of an organized international community.
To that end, we should all move forward towards an
effective and balanced implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and its
Action Plan (General Assembly resolution 60/288),
adopted by consensus by the General Assembly in
September 2006.

Spain, as a country that has suffered terribly from
terrorism in its myriad manifestations, is actively
engaged, both domestically and abroad, to prevent and
combat it. We have learned from experience that we
can be successful in this difficult task only within a
multilateral framework and always in strict respect of
international law and human rights.

I would like to thank the Chairmen of the
Security Council Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) - the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and 1540 (2004) for the
information they provided today and for the work of
their respective expert groups in the fulfilment of their
mandates. We commend their intention to strengthen
cooperation among them, which should be intensified
even further in order to make optimal the use of the
available resources, avoid duplication and achieve
better results. Likewise, we should strive for a better
interaction between the work done by the Security
Council and its specialized Committees and the work
done by the General Assembly in the fight against
terrorism, in order to allow for the participation of all
in combating this shared threat.

 

First of all, we would like to highlight the work
of the 1267 Committee, which ensures the
implementation of the Security Council sanctions
regime against Al-Qaida and the Taliban and other
associated groups, as well as the adoption of resolution
1822 (2008), which modified earlier procedures in
6
order to arrive at more rigorous and transparent
implementation of sanctions. In this context, I would
like to point out that last week a delegation from 1267
Committee Monitoring Team visited Spain, which was
very interesting and useful for both parties.

My delegation would also like to draw attention
to the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
its Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED), which is now focusing on the
implementation by Member States of anti-terrorism
policies as well as the dissemination of best practices.
Spain appreciates the tools employed by CTED to
analyse the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001)
at the national and global levels, and values the
Executive Directorate's technical assistance and
capacity-building activities aimed at strengthening its
dialogue between donor and recipient States in order to
achieve better performance in this task.

Since its creation, Spain has offered technical
assistance to CTED in different regions of the world
and in different fields, such as the development of
legislation in the fight against terrorism and its
financial sources or in areas such as border control or
the work of police and security agencies. Additionally,
Spain has strengthened the cooperation between CTED
and other international, regional and subregional
organizations by financing events such as the
Conference on Terrorism and Cyber-Security, which
took place in Madrid in April 2009.

The international community has before it the
challenge of preventing the access by non-State actors
to the use of weapons of mass destruction, missiles and
related material. In this respect, the efforts of the 1540
Committee to create control mechanisms aimed at the
effective global implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and towards greater dialogue, assistance and
cooperation among Member States are of the greatest
importance. Spain underscores the need for Member
States to comply with the obligations set forth in this
resolution and to advance in areas such as legal
prohibition of activities of proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction in their respective territories, the
protection of sensitive materials and an effective export
control system.

The scourge of terrorism continues to threaten the
international community, as, unfortunately, we have
witnessed throughout recent weeks. My delegation
believes that, to combat this barbarism, it is imperative
09-60696
to reinforce the commitment of the international
community to fight it while maintaining strict respect
for human rights and international law.

For this reason, we consider these open debates to
be extremely useful in order to allow all Member
States to express their views, ideas and suggestions
about the complex work performed by these three
Security Council Committees dedicated to the fight
against terrorism with a view to providing for its final
eradication.

