Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy De Mistura and Director Ging for their
briefings this morning.

We are no closer to peace in Syria and no closer
to addressing any of the Security Council's concerns
about the Al-Assad regime's denials of humanitarian
access. The situation in the south-west de-escalation
zone has become extremely serious. On Monday during
the Council's meeting on threats to international
peace and security in the Middle East, the Russian
representative said,

"No one has done more than Russia [to] reduce
the level of Violence" (S/PV8293, p. 28).

That is just not true. The United States is deeply
concerned about the Syrian regime's new offensive
in the south-west, with direct support from Russia,
where ongoing air strikes and barrel-bomb, artillery
and rocket attacks are taking a significant toll on the
civilian population. That is a part of the country that
had enjoyed relative calm for almost a year because
all parties were abiding by the de-escalation zone. But
at least 45,000 people are now confirmed to have fled
their homes in southern Syria since the beginning of
the offensive, just 12 days ago. We are now hearing that
that number might be as high as 70,000.

It is deeply alarming that we see are seeing an
additional escalation in the south-west despite formal
arrangements to keep that area calm. When Jordan,
Russia and the United States established the south-west
de-escalation zone last year, the terms were clear. Above
all, there was to be a ceasefire that would allow the
parties to engage in combating extremist and terrorist
groups designated as such by the Security Council. The
arrangement remains in place, and the United States
and Jordan have upheld our commitments in good faith,
but now the situation is changing. Once again, Russia is
justifying a military offensive by the Al-Assad regime
by saying that more than half of the de-escalation zone
is controlled by terrorists. That is just not true. The
predominant armed opposition groups operating in the
de-escalation zone belong to the moderate Free Syrian
Army. The de-escalation arrangement does not allow
for military operations against its members. Rather,
it only allows for combating the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham, the Al-Nusra Front, Al-Qaida and other
terrorist groups as designated by the Council.

For years, the Al-Assad regime and Russia have
justified brutal assaults on civilian populations and
infrastructure, schools, bakeries and hospitals under
the pretext of counter-terrorism. We are now seeing
the same pattern in the south-west. The United States
can confirm that Russia itself launched air strikes in
the south-west de-escalation zone in recent days. To be
clear, the unilateral military operations under way by
the Al-Assad regime and Russia in south-west Syria
represent a violation of the ceasefire arrangement
reaffirmed by President Trump and President Putin.
The United States remains determined to keep its
commitment to the ceasefire. We urge our Russian
partners to also uphold the ceasefire that it helped
establish in partnership with Jordan and the United
States. We further urge Russia to take immediate steps
to de-escalate violence in the south-west and throughout
the whole of Syria consistent with previous Security
Council resolutions.

The Council has already witnessed the horrific
suffering of the people of eastern Ghouta during a
ruthless assault by the regime and Russia in which
thousands were killed and displaced. Russia yet
again appears to be choosing a military rather than
a political option It is incumbent upon those sitting
at this table, and the international community more
broadly, to demand that this escalation of Violence in
Syria stop immediately. In addition, the offensive in
south-west Syria is threatening the Vital Al-Ramtha
border crossing, which the Council has authorized for
cross-border humanitarian deliveries. A closing of the
crossing would inflict untold suffering on civilians who
depend on life-saving assistance.

It is vital that cross-border humanitarian aid
deliveries continue to serve the millions who depend
upon them. In last week's report on cross-border
humanitarian operations, the Secretary-General
asserted that,

"[t]he full and complementary use of all delivery
options, both from within the country and from
neighbouring countries, is necessary in order
to gain access to people in need" (S/2018/617, para. 29).

Because the regime routinely fails to facilitate
humanitarian assistance and often removes medical
items and other aid from convoys, it is Vital that the
Council use its authority to support the continuation
of cross-border operations. Alternative proposals from
Council members on implementing a new humanitarian
operations mechanism that requires the Syrian regime's
approval are out of step with reality. Most importantly,
those new proposals will harm the Syrian people. We
cannot put humanitarian assistance and the cross-
border mechanism that ensures its delivery in jeopardy.

As always, the need for a political solution to
end this crisis is obvious. The United States urges
that a constitutional committee be formed as quickly
as possible under United Nations auspices. If such a
committee is to work and lead to a lasting settlement,
it must be inclusive. That is why we support the efforts
of the United Nations to include representatives
of civil society, women and the opposition from
the Syrian negotiations committee. The United
Nations must be given a free hand to determine the
committee's composition, scope of work and schedule.
The statement from Russia's conference in Sochi in
January makes it clear that the United Nations has
the authority to make decisions about who sits on the
constitutional committee, and that must be respected.
Lastly, we reiterate our commitment to the Geneva
process and the full implementation of resolution 2254
(2015). Geneva remains the sole legitimate venue for
a peaceful resolution of the Syrian conflict. Council
members around this table often reiterate that message,
but actions on the ground appear to suggest that some
are hedging their bets and seeking to create alternatives
to Geneva. We must not delay progress on the political
process any further.

The fact that we were able to work with Russia
on a de-escalation arrangement that held for nearly a
year shows that when we have the political will we can
help reduce violence and suffering in Syria. Progress
is possible, and that is why the United States remains
committed to the de-escalation agreement and to
working with the Council to support peace in Syria.
Like Special Envoy de Mistura, we will not give up.

