Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): At the outset, I
would like to thank the President and Prosecutor of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals for their detailed briefings this morning. We
commend their significant efforts to constantly improve
the functioning of the Mechanism.

South Africa places great emphasis on women,
peace and security, and when we read the report of
the President (see S/2019/622), our attention was
drawn to the significant work that has been done to
achieve gender parity among the personnel. While it
is regrettable that only 45 per cent of the staff overall
are female, it is particularly encouraging that there has
been a 2 per cent increase in the members of the female
professional staff of the Mechanism since the previous
reporting period. That bodes well for achieving gender
parity across all staff. South Africa also welcomes the
recent adoption of a code of conduct for preventing
harassment, including sexual harassment, at United
Nations system events, as well as the continued work
on a Mechanism-specific policy on harassment.

Regarding the issue of fugitives, the Prosecutor
expressed regret about South Africa's lack of action
so far on the Mechanism's requests for assistance in
arresting and surrendering a fugitive who, according
to available information, appears to be in South Africa.
We echo that regret. South Africa fully respects its
obligation to provide assistance to the Mechanism in
the investigation and prosecution of crimes within
its jurisdiction, in accordance with article 28 of the
Mechanism's statute, and the delay in positively
responding to the Prosecutor should in no way be
regarded as a repudiation of that obligation.

South Africa has been in regular communication
with the Prosecutor's Office and has met with the
Prosecutor on several occasions to explain the steps
we are taking to implement the request. Following
active engagement at the national level, I am pleased to
announce that the international arrest warrant has been
endorsed in accordance with South Africa's domestic
law, paving the way to giving effect to the request for
assistance. We appreciate the Prosecutor's efforts to
open channels of communication with the relevant South
African authorities, and the constructive dialogue that
has since ensued. We take our international obligations
seriously and assure the Mechanism and the Security
Council that we are firmly committed to combating
impunity and implementing this request for assistance.
We will continue to cooperate with the Prosecutor's
Office in order to ensure that the fugitive is brought
to justice.

In conclusion, we thank the Prosecutor and
his Office for their commendable work during the
reporting period.

