Mr. Djani (Indonesia): At the outset, I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo and Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller for their important briefings. As the seventy-fifth anniversary of our Organization approaches, we are reminded once again that no durable peace can be achieved without upholding the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, as well as multilateralism. The absence of those elements, in practice, has shaped the protracted Arab-Israeli conflict and made the two-State vision harder to achieve. Recent regional tensions have also reminded us all of the critical necessity of upholding the principles of the Charter and multilateralism. We once again urge all parties to exercise maximum restraint, restart dialogue and renew international cooperation. Allow me to stress the following points. First, there is an urgent need to reverse negative trends. The prevailing negative trends in the Israeli- Palestinian conflict escalate the threats to achieving durable peace and security in the region. On the settlement issue, for example, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs reported that 621 Palestinian structures were demolished or seized in the West Bank in 2019, displacing 914 Palestinians. Those figures represent a 35 and 95 per cent increase, respectively, as compared with 2018. If the de facto annexation is not brought to an end, it will cause profound human suffering to the Palestinians and make peace and stability impossible to attain. We must not let such unlawful acts go unnoticed. The Security Council must instead seriously address the issue and find a durable solution based on the United Nations Charter and in conformity with its resolutions. In that regard, I wish to reiterate Indonesia's profound commitment to, and support for, all efforts to bring the peace process back on track, based on the internationally agreed parameters. Secondly, the Council must stand firm in upholding international law and multilateralism. The Council must not be silent in the face of continuous Israeli threats of formal annexation of the occupied territory,including East Jerusalem. In resolution 2334 (2016), the Council affirmed that changes to the 4 June 1967 lines, including with regard to Jerusalem, other than those agreed by the parties through negotiations, constitute a flagrant violation under international law. There is no other way forward on this matter, apart from ensuring Israel's compliance with international law and the relevant resolutions. My third and final point pertains to the dire humanitarian situation of the Palestinian people. It is imperative to stop the blockade and related restrictions against civilians in the Gaza Strip, as they constitute collective punishment on the Palestinian people, imposed in clear violation of international humanitarian law. Meanwhile, the expansion of illegal settlements in the West Bank poses a serious threat to the life of every Palestinian, including women and children. Itis the responsibility of the international community to help those enduring the serious humanitarian situation in Gaza, the West Bank and places of refuge. Let me join other colleagues in stressing the vital role of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), not only as a lifeline but also as a safeguard for the Palestinian right of return. I am glad to hear from Under-Secretary- General DiCarlo and Assistant Secretary-General Mueller about the capabilities and ability of UNRWA to increase employment among Palestinian youths. That is why we continue to support UNRWA. I wish to reaffirm the solidarity of the Government and the people of Indonesia with the Palestinian people, as well as our unwavering support for their inalienable rights. We heard from Assistant Secretary-General Mueller about the plights of Salwa, Jamil and Manar and Anas. How many more names will we learn, as the reality and the suffering of the people of Palestine are given a human face? That paints a clear picture of what is happening on the ground, as well as of what has to be done by all of us here in order to ensure that such suffering does not continue. It is disturbing to hear that, on the first day of the year 2020, Israeli authorities uprooted 147 olive trees in the village of Al-Jaba'a, in Bethlehem, belonging to eight Palestinian families. For Palestinians and many communities, the olive tree represents peace and resilience. In the current context, the olive tree may also represent the two-State vision - a vision of peace in the Middle East. It remains the obligation of the Council to safeguard that vision, first and foremost for the sake of the Palestinian people but also for the stability of the region and beyond. Lastly, I find it find it hard to understand how we are expected to hold a dialogue in the Council when the delegation of Israel has not responded to a single query posed by our Palestinian colleagues today. We should have a conversation in this Chamber. We should have a discussion on how to move things forward. But the fact that the Israeli representative did not make a single reference to Palestine in his statement today shows that there is something wrong in the process and in our discussions thus far. I find it bewildering and shameful. It does not serve the purpose of peace. It is time for us in the Council to move forward and to find a solution.
