Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing
on the report of the assessment mission to the Sahel
(S/20l2/42). The report provides a basis for discussing
the challenges facing the region in the aftermath of the
Libyan crisis.

Pakistan is extremely concerned at the report's
conclusion that the humanitarian and economic
challenges confronting the Sahel region have been
exacerbated by the fallout from the Libyan crisis. The
influx of returnees has placed an added burden on the
already strained situation of host communities that had
been facing food insecurity, shrinking economic
opportunities, and lack of health and social
infrastructure. This has also resulted in the loss of
remittances that were so vital to the economies of these
countries.

Although the report does not quantify the
economic impact of these factors, what is apparent is
that the countries of the Sahel have become unwitting
victims of the Libyan crisis. Therefore, there is an
urgent need to redress the economic impact of the
crisis on these countries through an appropriate
assistance package.

As regards the security impact of the Libyan
crisis on the Sahel region, the report confirms our fears
that large quantities of weapons and ammunition may
have been smuggled into the region from Libya, which
could further fuel the activities of criminal and terrorist
groups. Although there is still no confirmed evidence,
man-portable air defence systems (MANPADS) may
also have found their way into the region. If that were
the case, these weapons could fall into the hands of

terrorists, with potentially devastating consequences.
This should be a matter for alarm to the countries of
the region, as well as to members of the Council.

It is obvious that, despite the caution advocated
by some members of the Council as the crisis was
unfolding in Libya, its implications were totally
overlooked. The region has now been left to deal with
its aftermath. Immediate steps must be taken to address
the problem of the proliferation of all types of
weapons. In this regard, we look forward to the report of
the Panel of Experts on Libya, pursuant to paragraph 5
of resolution 2017 (2011), in particular concerning
MANPADS.

The report further highlights the fact that there
has been an increase in terrorist activity and organized
crime in the Sahel. The possible establishment of
linkages among various terrorist groups could be a
destabilizing factor for the region. We support steps
being taken at the national and regional levels to
counter that trend. There is also a need to build the
capacities of these countries to deal with these
challenges.

The need for better coordination between various
mechanisms for addressing the crisis in the region is
underscored in the report. We would appreciate
receiving more details about how the existing United
Nations presence is assisting the Sahel countries. On
the whole, it would have been better if the mission had
restricted the scope of its work to the impact of the
Libyan crisis on the region, which is of immediate
concern to the Security Council. The long-term
development problems and their solutions require more
detailed analysis and examination by relevant agencies.
The Security Council is not the appropriate body to
discuss those aspects.

In conclusion, we would like to highlight one
recommendation in the report that is intriguing to us.
The report talks about the application of the principle
of "hot pursuit". We are not aware if there is any such
agreed principle in international law, and its
appearance in a United Nations document is not
understandable. We believe that the introduction of any
such notion will have negative implications, not only
for the stability of the region but also for the
development of legal norms. We would therefore ask
the Secretariat to remove that recommendation from
the report.

