Mr. Kim Sam-hoon (Republic of Korea): In
support of the Security Council's efforts to highlight
the often-overlooked issue of reconciliation in post-
conflict nation-building, the delegation of the Republic
of Korea extends its appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for convening today's open meeting.

While a mutually acceptable agreement between
conflicting parties may symbolize a formal end to strife
and violence, it has become evident in recent years that
formal agreements often fall short of ensuring peaceful
relations in post-conflict societies. Since the terms of
such agreements are largely negotiated by an elite
group of leaders, the vast majority of the society may
not feel that the issues that fuelled the conflict have
been sufficiently redressed. The resultant instability
can cause a stalemate or a relapse into conflict. Thus,
only when an agreement is underpinned by a spirit of
reconciliation shared by all segments of the society can
a genuine and lasting peace be secured.

The creation of reconciliation through the
promotion of trust and mutual understanding in the
aftermath of prolonged conflict is an essential, albeit
daunting, task in the process of post-conflict nation-
building. For reconciliation to take place, all
conflicting parties must recognize its vital necessity,
and an atmosphere of compromise and tolerance must
dictate a new set of self-sustaining relationships. The
United Nations, with its wealth of experience in
building bridges of understanding between conflicting
parties, has an indispensable role to play in this regard.
We are therefore pleased to note the increasing number
of Security Council resolutions that mandate a role for
the United Nations in promoting national
reconciliation.

While bearing in mind that reconciliation cannot
be imposed upon a society from the outside, the United
Nations has been able to help the victims of conflict to
address their plight, bring estranged communities
together and find ways for various parties to establish
common ground.

Despite setbacks in Angola, the United Nations
continues to assist both sides in resolving their
differences and paving the way for national
reconciliation. We further note that the Government of
Guinea-Bissau has recently requested that the Security
Council mandate be extended, so that the United
Nations can continue to facilitate dialogue and
reconciliation among all of the actors there. Moreover,
it has become clear that the United Nations presence in
Afghanistan will continue to be essential in helping to
overcome the decades of intra-Afghan conflict. In this
regard, we welcome the efforts that are being made to
develop effective reconciliation processes with a View
to establishing a multi-ethnic Afghan society.

Clearly, each instance of conflict requires a new
approach that takes into account the cultural and
historical context of the conflict. However, many
common themes have run through the processes of
reconciliation in Afghanistan, East Timor, Angola,
Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We are encouraged by the United Nations peace-
building support offices' efforts to draw upon these
lessons learned in order to provide an enabling
environment for national reconciliation and dialogue.
Moreover, the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General continue to play a key role in
promoting confidence-building measures, mediating
differences and establishing forums for constructive
dialogue among warring parties. Additionally, the
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General serve
as effective coordinators among the various
international actors on the ground, including the United
Nations agencies. In particular, the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General in Myanmar,
East Timor, Liberia and Afghanistan have made
significant contributions to the promotion of national
reconciliation.

While landing the contributions that the United
Nations has made to post-conflict societies around the
world, we cite the need for exit strategies to be
discussed at the Security Council from the early stages
of mission development, so that peacekeeping
resources may be deployed to the areas of greatest
need. From the outset, one of the goals of peacekeeping
missions should be to coordinate the various United
Nations agencies, non-governmental organizations,
local governments and civil society in guiding the
country down the path to self-sufficiency.

As the Secretary-General aptly stated in June
2003 with regard to Liberia, while the United Nations
remains committed to pursuing a resolution to the
conflict, it is the country's leaders themselves who are
ultimately responsible for making the difficult choices
and compromises that will bring peace and stability to
their people. The overarching purpose of reconciliation
efforts is to ensure that the atrocities of conflict never
beset that society again. As we have seen in the case of
South Africa, post-conflict nation-building is an
ongoing process out of which the pursuit of truth and
reconciliation may eventually lead to the rebuilding of
trust, confidence and hope in a society.

In the pursuit of truth and reconciliation, forums
for transitional justice in which the perpetrators of
violence are brought to justice are indispensable. The
ad hoc international tribunals established to prosecute
crimes in the former Yugoslavia, Rwanda and Sierra
Leone constitute effective judicial forums that are
actively helping to overturn the culture of impunity in
these post-conflict societies. While judicial forums can
help restore dignity to the victims through the
condemnation of acts of violence and violations of
human rights, the granting of amnesty can be equally
important in overcoming the past. The right balance
between leaving the past behind through amnesty and
revisiting its injustices through prosecution must be
struck so that post-conflict societies can build a shared
future from the ashes of their divided past.

In conclusion, we hope that the Security Council
will remain unswerving in its efforts to promote and
support national reconciliation in a comprehensive and
coordinated manner. As success in this regard will
largely depend on the commitment of all stakeholders,
including the international community, I assure you,
Mr. President, that the Republic of Korea stands ready
to make its contributions to this end.

