Mr. Motoc (Romania) (spoke in French): First of
all, I wish to associate myself fully with the statement
made by the Ambassador of the United Kingdom in his
capacity as President of the European Union (EU). I
also wish to thank Lord Ashdown for his very
interesting briefing, which serves to supplement a very
instructive and comprehensive report. I would like to
take this opportunity to convey to him our great
gratitude and appreciation for his outstanding and, I
would say, memorable work in Sarajevo.

I wish also to place on record our appreciation for
the activities of the European Union Force in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (EUFOR). This force has successfully
played a key role in stabilizing the peace, in keeping
with the terms of the Dayton agreement, in cooperation
with the presence of NATO.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is a country of
importance to Romania. We pay the greatest possible
attention to its stability, its development and the full
implementation of the Dayton agreement, as well as
the vital reforms required for its European integration.
Having said this, we are glad to learn the good news
about Sarajevo and, more particularly, the opening and
negotiations on a Stabilization and Association
Agreement with the European Union. This progress is,
to a large extent, the result stemming from the
endeavours and resolve of the people and Government
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the outstanding work
done by Lord Ashdown and his Office, along with the
constant support of the European Union, NATO and
other international organizations.

Ever since Romania began serving in the Security
Council, it has constantly underscored the potential for
peacemaking and change inherent in European and
Euro-Atlantic rapprochement for the Western Balkans.
The success seen thus far in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
convincing confirmation of this point of view.

In this context, we see very clearly that Bosnia
and Herzegovina is making palpable progress in all
areas that are important for State cohesion. This shows
that Bosnia and Herzegovina is still on the right path.
Of course, much still remains to be done, and
consequently we encourage the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities to speed up the necessary
reforms in these areas. The only way to become
integrated into the European Union and NATO is by
establishing a modern State based on the rule of law,
reform of the economy and the strengthening of
institutional capacities, internal stability and good-
neighbourly relations.

Here, I should like to underscore that full
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia remains a basic milestone
on Bosnia and Herzegovina's road towards
membership in NATO and the European Union.

Romania is also interested in progress made and
progress planned in strengthening the police force and
in combating organized crime.

We welcome the strength of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's regional cooperation activities,
including in the context of the Southeast European
Cooperation Initiative. Romania is also developing
sustained cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina on
the political and economic levels, having as well a
presence in the country in terms of soldiers and police
officers participating in the international forces.

Ten years after the Dayton Peace Agreement, we
hope that Bosnia and Herzegovina can once and for all
put the years of conflict behind it, while still recalling
the tragic lessons of Srebrenica, as the representative
of the United Kingdom rightly said, and that the
country will be able decisively to commit itself to the
common European destiny as described at the
Thessaloniki Summit.

