Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I also want to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of February. I also
thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing today.

In recent weeks there have been new, alarming
reports of alleged chemical-weapon attacks in Syria.
The most recent allegation was this weekend in
Idlib. These reported attacks must be immediately
investigated by the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Fact-finding Mission, to
which we offer our full and unreserved support.

We reiterate our strongest condemnation of the
use of chemical weapons. It is a serious violation
of international law and it constitutes a threat to
international peace and security. Their use in armed
conflict amounts to a war crime. Perpetrators of
such crimes must be held accountable. We cannot
accept impunity.

That is why Sweden joined the International
Partnership against Impunity for the Use of Chemical
Weapons, initiated by France. As a member of the
Security Council and of the OPCW Executive Council,
we support all international efforts to combat the use
and proliferation of chemical weapons by State and
non-State actors alike anywhere in the world. We
count on this initiative to complement and support
our collective work in multilateral forums, as well as
the existing multilateral mechanisms to achieve unity
around those important goals. That also includes the
Human Rights Council's Commission of Inquiry
and the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism, both of which have important mandates in
collecting information.

I again thank High Representative Nakamitsu for
her briefing today. She reminded us that work remains
on the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). The
outstanding issues relating to Syria's initial declaration
must be resolved without further delay. We again call
upon the Syrian authorities to fully cooperate with the
OPCW in that regard.

As the Secretary-General has stated, the continuing
allegations highlight yet again our shared obligation
to identify and hold to account those responsible for
the use chemical weapons on Syria. We need to heed
his call, come together and act. That is why Sweden
has engaged in the negotiations on establishing a new
independent and impartial attributive mechanism. The
Council has a responsibility to protect the international
disarmament and non-proliferation regimes and for
ensuring accountability. Negotiations need to be in
good faith, but with the objective of establishing a
truly independent, impartial and effective mechanism
for accountability.

