Mr. Motomura (Japan): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this public meeting of the
Security Council on this very important subject. The
situation in Central Africa, where many States are
suffering the consequences of long years of conflict, is
an issue that continues to demand the Council's urgent
attention.

In addressing the root causes of conflict, my
Government has consistently advocated the importance
of Africa's own initiatives and self-help efforts or
ownership, as well as the partnership between Africa
and the international community that supports such
African efforts. But because those efforts cannot bear
fruit unless there is peace and stability, it is imperative
that all parties concerned turn away from conflict and
devote their energies to nation-building and
development. Towards that end, initiatives at the
subregional level are indispensable.

From this point of view, we attach great
importance to subregional organizations such as the
Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa
(COPAX), which, in close cooperation with the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union, may play
an essential role in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts. One very positive example of such efforts at
the subregional level is the communique recently
adopted at the CEMAC Summit regarding the border
issue between the Central African Republic and Chad.

It is incumbent upon the international community,
including the entire United Nations system, to support
the initiatives of those organizations. The
recommendation on strengthening the relationship
between the Council and African regional and
subregional organizations, put forward by the Ad Hoc
Working Group of the Security Council on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, chaired by
Ambassador Koonjul, should be the starting point.

At the same time, the Japanese Government
would like to encourage all countries in Central Africa
to continue to fully cooperate with the United Nations
offices and organs located in the subregion, such as the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), the
United Nations Mission in Angola (UNMA), the
United Nations Office in Burundi (UNOB) and the
United Nations Peace-Building Support Office in the
Central African Republic (BONUCA), as well as the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Great Lakes Region. Their cooperation
is essential in consolidating the recent, still fragile,
progress that has been made in the peace process in
such countries as Angola and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

There will be no stability and prosperity in the
world in the twenty-first century unless the problems of
Africa are resolved. In the recognition that these
problems pose tremendous challenges not only to the
region itself but also to the international community as
a whole, my Government has designated the period
leading up to the Third Tokyo International Conference
on African Development (TICAD III), to be held next
October, as the "Year for Soaring Cooperation with
Africa." It is our sincere hope that other Member States
will join in making this aspiration a reality.

