Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands joins others in welcoming
the Prosecutor back to the Security Council. We
thank Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for her briefing and
her report.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands wishes to avail
itself of this opportunity to reiterate its full support
for the International Criminal Court. That institution
was created to strengthen the international rule of law
by bringing those responsible for gross human rights
violations and international crimes to justice. The
International Criminal Court is the only permanent
international court that can judge the perpetrators of
the most serious crimes of concern to the international
community. We express our gratitude for the continued
commitment of the Prosecutor and her Office while
working in the most difficult conditions.

Please allow me to focus on three important aspects:
first, the situation in Darfur; secondly, accountability;
and thirdly, cooperation with the Court.

First, the Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes
the decrease in fighting in Darfur and in the level of
violence against civilians in recent months. However,
we remain deeply concerned about continued human
rights violations committed by several parties to the
conflict, including the Government of the Sudan. We
are also extremely concerned about continued reports
regarding sexual and gender-based violence, arbitrary
arrests and extrajudicial killings.

At the same time, the situation with respect to
the 2.1 million internally displaced persons seems
unchanged. We underline that any return should be
safe, voluntary and in accordance with international
law. We remind the Council that charges in the Sudan
case include genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity. The severity of these charges led the Council
to refer the situation in the Sudan to the ICC 13
years ago.

This leads me to my second point, concerning
accountability. Accountability for international crimes
and gross human rights violations is not only vital to
justice, but the only way that leads to sustainable peace.
Ultimately, it is about bringing justice to the victims
by ensuring the accountability of the perpetrators. The
people of Darfur, including those present here today,
deserve this.

Gross human rights violations can also trigger
further conflict and need to be addressed to ensure
any form of sustainable peace. If we do not take this
seriously and act upon this belief, opportunism will
continue to prevail and the international rule of law
will continue to be undermined. We need to end the
climate of impunity. It is the Council's responsibility to
stop such developments and ensure the effectiveness of
the decisions it has made in the past. That is the only
way to ensure international peace and security.

My third point concerns cooperation with the
Court. In 2005, the Council unanimously referred the
situation in the Sudan to the International Criminal
Court. Today, over 13 years after the adoption of
resolution 1593 (2005), all suspects in this case remain
at large, while the charges remain in effect. Paragraph 2
of the resolution requires the Government of the Sudan
and all other parties to the conflict to cooperate fully. It
also calls upon all States and regional and international
organizations to cooperate fully with the Court and
the Prosecutor.

The Court is heavily dependent on cooperation to
function effectively. It is unacceptable that fugitives
of the Court continue to travel unhindered. We align
ourselves with the Prosecutor in urging those States
that invite and host suspects on their territory to consult
with the Court. The Kingdom of the Netherlands will
continue to call upon all States to meet their obligations
under resolution 1593 (2005), to cooperate fully with
the Court and to fulfil their international obligations.
We also urge the Council to continue to work on ways
to address cases of non-cooperation with the Court.

In conclusion, we remind our fellow Council
members that we bear a shared responsibility in the area
of cooperation to ensure that the International Criminal
Court can execute the mandate that the Council decided
to give it 13 years ago. Let me reiterate our great thanks
to the Prosecutor and her Office for their tremendous
efforts under difficult circumstances.

