Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Sidikou
and Mr. Zerihoun for their briefings. We are convinced
that the agreement reached in October between the
main political and social stakeholders ofthe Democratic
Republic of the Congo, within the framework of a
national dialogue on organizing democratic, credible
and transparent elections, is the foundation for a
road map that will lead to the holding of presidential
elections. In that regard, the establishment of a
Government of national accord and the appointment of
a new Prime Minister are positive achievements, in line
with the agreement reached by the parties.

We believe that the national dialogue initiative
must be ongoing and inclusive because it is perhaps
a way to assist in achieving political and institutional
stability. We are convinced that it will strengthen the
climate of trust needed to achieve consensus among
all political stakeholders, including those who are not
yet part of the national dialogue. In that regard, the
Security Council must continue to support the efforts at
dialogue in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
initiatives of the support group for the facilitation of the
national dialogue led by the African Union facilitator,
the good offices of the Conference episcopale nationale
du Congo, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and the Southern African Development
Community. All political stakeholders must be
encouraged to participate in a constructive dialogue to
dispel any institutional uncertainty in the coming days.

With regard to security, we remain concerned
about the recurrence of violent incidents perpetrated by
insurgent groups, Congolese and foreign alike, in north
and south Kivu, which exacerbates a humanitarian
situation with grave impact on the civilian population
in the eastern part of the province. In addition, we are
concerned about the rise in the number of internally
displaced persons, clashes among communities and
insecurity in the region. We believe that the decision
on the steps to be taken now lies in the hands of the
Congolese people without the intervention of external
actors. The international community must assist the
Congolese, in strict compliance with the principles
of independent sovereignty, in the goal of preventing
violence as a way to resolve political differences, which
are a threat to the stability of the country and the region
as a whole.

