Ms. King (Australia): I would like to thank the
Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her briefing. We
are pleased to learn that the Office of the Prosecutor
is continuing its work in relation to the situation in
Darfur, despite the significant challenges it faces.

We continue to be deeply concerned by violence in
Darfur. Inter-tribal hostilities have increased this year,
including over resources, and large numbers of Darfuris
have been displaced both internally and across borders.
Those displaced face severe food and water shortages.

Against that background of violence, displacement
and humanitarian needs, the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) faces
access restrictions that continue to hamper its ability
to implement its mandate. We continue to call for
UNAMID to be allowed to access all areas of Darfur,
including places where clashes have occurred. The
19 April attack on UNAMID peacekeepers in which one
was killed and two were injured must be condemned
in the strongest terms and the perpetrators must be
brought to justice.

It is important that the Council provide strong
support to political reconciliation efforts underpinned
by the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. But
recent violent incidents demonstrate the risks posed to
those embracing the path of dialogue, as well as the
importance of a commitment to ensuring that those
who disrupt that path with violence are held to account.
Without a commitment to justice and accountability, it
will be difficult to achieve and sustain peace.

Indeed, the current climate of impunity in Darfur
sends a dangerous message of tolerance to would-be
perpetrators of serious international crimes and other
violations of international law. In that context, we
commend the Office of the Prosecutor for its continued
monitoring of possible crimes under the Rome Statute.
We are deeply concerned by the references in the
Prosecutor's report to attacks on civilians, sexual
and gender-based violence, attacks on those trying to
help the people of the Sudan, including peacekeepers,
and the denial of humanitarian access. The Council's
condemnation of such crimes was set out clearly in
resolution 2091 (2013).

In particular, reports of alleged aerial bombardments
by the Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF), resulting in
civilian casualties, must be properly investigated.
That has been impossible due to restrictions on
access to affected areas, meaning that the provision of
humanitarian assistance was also prevented at critical
times. It is unacceptable that UNAMID personnel
were denied access to investigate an alleged aerial
bombardment carried out by the SAF; it is equally
unacceptable that UNAMID personnel have been
prevented from investigating alleged reports of sexual
violence.

It is against that background, and with deep regret,
that we note also the Prosecutor's unambiguous account
of the Government of the Sudan's non-cooperation with
the Court, in disregard of resolution 1593 (2005). The
Council needs to do more to support the Court and to
secure the Sudan's cooperation, so that we can meet our
commitment to bringing to justice those responsible for
serious international crimes.

We are also deeply disappointed at the failure of
some ICC States parties to arrest and surrender the
four Sudanese individuals subject to outstanding ICC
arrest warrants. We commend the Prosecutor on the
outreach efforts she has made to remind States of the
importance of meeting their obligations to cooperate
with the Court. We look forward to consulting with
other Council members as to what the Council can do
to assist the Court in that regard.

There are steps that can be taken to underscore the
international community's commitment to ensuring
that those accused of serious international crimes are
held to account. We have previously expressed the view
that the Council's Sanctions Committees should give
consideration to ICC arrest warrants and summonses
to appear, with a View to ensuring greater consistency
between sanctions lists and ICC indictments.

Other steps are outlined in the useful document
produced by the ICC Office of the Prosecutor that
maps the instances of outstanding arrest warrants. It
highlights the need to intensify efforts to isolate ICC
fugitives in a coordinated way, as well as the importance
of making collaborative efforts to plan for and execute
arrest warrants. The Secretary-General's guidance for
the Secretariat on contact with those subject to ICC
arrest warrants is also helpful in that context.

In conclusion, we note the recent debate about the
role of the International Criminal Court. Australia
remains firmly of the view that the ICC can play an
important role in ending impunity in conflict and post-
conflict situations. But it is also important to recall that
all States fulfil their obligations under international
law - whether those obligations derive from being a
party to the Rome Statute or from resolutions of the
Council.

The Council must also strongly support the Court
in its efforts to conduct its work, and Darfur is no
exception. We need to continue to think about ways
by which the Council can assist the Court in ending
impunity for crimes in Darfur and achieve at least a
measure ofjustice for victims.

We look forward to further updates from the
Prosecutor and would be pleased to have an opportunity
to participate in an informal interactive dialogue with
her on the situation in Darfur.

