Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like at the outset to thank the French presidency
for having organized this very timely debate, and
I hope that this meeting will provide elements that
will make it possible to renew the commitment to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and strengthen
the instruments available to peace operations to carry
out this task.

I will focus on the specific aim of this debate, but
first I should like to point out that the task of protecting
civilians through United Nations peacekeeping
operations represents the top of a pyramid whose base
must include efforts to address the structural causes
of conflict and to strengthen the institutions and tools
necessary to achieve a sustainable peace.

In any case, no political, economic or other type of
consideration should supersede the human dimension of
international action. It is a legal and ethical imperative
to protect vulnerable people and those who are most
exposed to violence, exploitation, discrimination
and the deprivation of their rights. This imperative
underpins the responsibility of the United Nations to do
everything in its power to protect civilians. That is why
the protection of civilians must be the cornerstone ofthe
mandates and resources allocated to peace operations.
This is also crucial for the legitimacy and credibility of
the entire United Nations system.

In this connection, Uruguay deems it crucial that
we be capable of assessing the current state of this
contribution and work to adapt the capabilities of the
United Nations peacekeeping system to new challenges.

First, it is crucial to understand that protecting
civilians is a multidimensional task that includes many
players and that does not mean only the use of force
as a response to the imminent danger of Violence.
The protection of civilians is much more than rules
of engagement.

In that respect, we believe that it is crucial that we
strengthen non-armed strategies, which have a great
potential. From our experience on the ground, we can
conclude that the ability of peacekeepers to carry out
protection tasks depends largely on their ability to
gain the trust of the local population. The creation of
confidence-building mechanisms is crucial in order to
comply with the mandate to protect civilians, because
it makes it possible to involve the local population in
the work of the mission and provides access to larger
information networks, which, in many cases, makes
it possible to prevent crimes from being committed
against civilians.

Likewise, I would point out the importance of
forging communication networks with local populations
through various early-warning mechanisms. By way of
example, I would point out the early-warning network
established by the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo through the distribution of cell phones
to members of the local population, thus fostering
direct contact in a context where there are few means
of communication.

The development of a climate of tolerance and
understanding through recreational activities, including
mixed activities, among communities in conflict, such
as the Uruguayan contingent has promoted in the
town of Pinga, in North Kivu, can help to improve the
relationship between troops and civil society, which
leads to positive results in terms of establishing an
environment conducive to peace.

It is undeniable that beyond these experiences
of cooperation, early warning and direct links, as I
mentioned earlier, there are extreme situations that
require physical protection measures for which the
troops that are deployed must be mentally prepared and
appropriately equipped and trained. As was pointed
out in the Ramos-Horta report in relation to the basic
principles of peacekeeping operations, although they
were still valid they should in no case be used as an
excuse to not protect civilians.

In this respect, we reaffirm Uruguay's full
commitment to the protection of civilians through
peacekeeping operations. That is why our country
has adhered to the Kigali Principles, reaffirmed the
importance of strengthening pre-deployment training,
and encourages the consideration and implementation
of the recommendations emanating from the Ramos-
Horta report, such as the establishment of sequential
mandates. We also support resolution 2272 (2016).
United Nations personnel at the very minimum must
not undermine the trust placed in them by the civilian
population, nor should they exploit the vulnerability of
those whom they are supposed to be protecting.

We reject the impunity that continues to be enjoyed
by the perpetrators of deplorable acts of violence and
remain convinced of the importance of the Security
Council strengthening its cooperation with the
International Criminal Court.

In this connection, we believe that we should assess
the role of peacekeeping operations in this framework,
for example, when it comes to collecting evidence.
We highlight the importance of developing a record
of victims of mass attacks, both to help in attributing
responsibility and also to prevent future atrocities.

In 2008, the General Assembly was able to reach
consensus on the use of the term "protection of
civilians" as applied to peacekeeping missions. Today,
eight years later, much progress has been made, but
we are aware that the road ahead is long and fraught
with difficulties. Let us therefore walk it together, like
a mother in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
who recently walked more than five hours through the
jungle to give away one pineapple to our contingent at
the Kimua base to save the life of her son.

