I would like to express my sincere appreciation to Your Excellency Mr. Ralph Gonsalves, Prime Minister of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, for convening this open debate. It is very timely for the Security Council to discuss multifaceted challenges to peace and security amid the intergovernmental process of the 2020 peacebuilding architecture review, co-facilitated by the Permanent Representatives of your country and New Zealand. I wish to share Japan's views on the questions posed in your concept note (S/2020/1064, annex), namely, the lessons from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the climate crisis, closer collaboration among the United Nations bodies and the integrated approach across the humanitarian-development-peace nexus to tackle contemporary challenges to peace and security. Japan regards COVID-19, climate change and other persistent development challenges through the lens of human security. They are threats of another nature compared to armed conflicts but have adverse effects on regional stability and eventually on peace and security by imposing a burden on people's survival, livelihood and dignity. The COVID-19 pandemic has put to the test the resilience of national health systems in many countries, and its socioeconomic impacts will inevitably hit the most vulnerable people. Nationally owned measures supported by effective, accountable and inclusive institutions are the key not only to combating the virus, but to earning people's trust in Government, which is a precondition for building and sustaining peace. This is the first lesson learned and the reason why Japan emphasizes the importance of institution-building throughout this year's peacebuilding architecture review process. We call on others to take advantage of the quinquennial opportunity to strengthen the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) by promoting focused discussion on institution-building support. Climate-related natural disasters are compromising human security, and in places where the communities lack resilience, they become a multiplier of conflict risk. Our response must be people-centred, context-specific and prevention-oriented and aim to protect and empower all people and communities. Our actions must be comprehensive, breaking down silos and taking full account of the humanitarian- development-peace nexus. This is the second lesson we draw from another contemporary driver of conflict and insecurity - climate change. How can we strengthen the United Nations peacebuilding architecture so that it facilitates system-wide collaboration capable of proposing integrated actions across the United Nations system? In Japan's view, the PBC has much to offer and improve itself. "The main purpose of the Peacebuilding Commission is to bring together all relevant actors to marshal resources and to advise on and propose integrated strategies" (General Assembly resolution 60/1, para. 98). These are the words of our Heads of States and Governments, who decided to establish a Peacebuilding Commission in 2005. The PBC should deepen substantive discussions on critical components of peacebuilding and sustaining peace, such as institution-building, and become the primary platform for exchanging good practices and lessons learned, engaging with countries willing to discuss their priorities, raising awareness, mobilizing technical and financial support and strengthening partnerships within and beyond the United Nations system. Japan, as the Vice-Chair of the PBC for 2020, looks forward to a fruitful outcome of the peacebuilding architecture review process.
