Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): My delegation
warmly welcomes you, Sir, to the presidency of the
Security Council. We would like to thank the
delegation of Singapore for organizing this important
debate. We commend its unremitting efforts to
introduce an outreach approach in the work of the
Security Council in order to increase its transparency
and credibility by seeking input from all of the United
Nations membership. The background documents,
which have been helpfully prepared by the presidency
to facilitate today's constructive discussion, deserve
our high appreciation.

I wish also to thank Ambassador Koonjul of
Mauritius, a devoted initiator and the chairman of the
Working Group, for his very useful briefing on the
Group's activities. Our thanks also go to Assistant
Secretary-General Ibrahima Fall for his very important
and forthright statement today.

I would also particularly like to welcome the
presence at this meeting of the President of the
Economic and Social Council, Ambassador Ivan
Simonovie, and the Permanent Observer of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), Ambassador
Amadou Ke'be', as they represent major partners of the
Security Council in the areas of conflict prevention,
resolution and peace-building in Africa.

We support the ideas that were presented to us
concerning ways of enhancing cooperation with the
Working Group in pursuing common objectives within
each body's mandate.

I have the honour today to speak on behalf of a
country that has always been committed to
strengthening relations of true partnership with Africa.
This commitment of ours was confirmed by substantial
participation on the part of from Ukraine in the United
Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa, by our
consistent position in the Security Council, and by our
ongoing efforts to expand and foster bilateral relations
with African countries and to strengthen interactions
with regional organizations.

Today, our attention is devoted to the activities of
the ad hoc Working Group on Africa, which we
consider a useful, proactive mechanism of the Security
Council. My delegation endorses the concept that the
Working Group on Africa should assist the Security
Council in addressing the conflict situations on that
continent. With regards to specific elements of the
terms of reference and the programme of work, I would
like to make some brief comments.

As far as the participation at the meetings of the
Group, we support the importance of inviting major
institutional, financial and academic views to address
specific conflict situations. At the same time, we
believe it would be useful if participation could be
extended, as appropriate, specifically to the parties to
the conflict and to troop-contributing countries.

Welcoming in principle the establishment of
groups of friends for specific conflict situations, we
consider that such groups should be open to anyone
who does make and can make a constructive
contribution to the resolution of conflict. With regard
to the setting up of groups of friends for African
conflict situations, we support a greater involvement of
African actors in such endeavours.
We also recognize the importance of effective
cooperation and coordination between the Working
Group and other existing, relevant mechanisms within
the United Nations, in particular those in the General
Assembly and in the Economic and Social Council.

Now that the Group is focusing on confidence
building in the Mano River Union, it is vitally
important that closer contacts be established between
the United Nations Office in West Africa and the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in order to consider ways of strengthening
cooperation between the countries of the Mano River
Union and supporting ongoing subregional peace
initiatives. We wish every success in promoting these
objectives to Assistant Secretary-General Ibrahima
Fall, who is going to take up responsibilities as the
head ofthe United Nations Office in West Africa.

In conclusion, I wish to express the hope that this
brainstorming session today will provide additional
impetus to the activities of the ad hoc Working Group
on Africa and ensure an effective role for the Security
Council in the maintenance of international peace and
security in Africa.

