Mr. Lamek (France) (Spoke in French): I would
like to thank Senegal for having organized our debate
today on the role of police. I would also like to thank
Mr. Ladsous and the heads of police components with
us today for their briefings.

Allow me to address the general approach of
improving United Nations police performance. In
convening the Chiefs of Police Summit in June for the
first time, the United Nations took an important step
in that direction, as was the distribution this year of
the conclusions on the external review of the functions,
structure and capacity of the United Nations police. We
must all prioritize the United Nations police's ability to
guarantee better protection of civilians and improve the
performance of staff deployed in missions. It is in that
spirit that I would like to focus on three aspects that we
believe to be most important.

First, training is a precondition for a long-term
improvement of police capacity, beginning with force
generation when we send individual police officers and
formed police units that are vetted and well trained,
including on the linguistic front, a point to which I
will return. Secondly, United Nations police support
for capacity-building of the host country's police
remains critical. It requires sharing best practices and
establishing a full criminal chain in the host country,
including the police, the judiciary and penitentiary
administration.

The ability to clearly assess the effectiveness of
the police is essential to improving its performance.
We must take all experience at all levels into account.
There is also a need to assess good coordination
with the police component with other components
of peacekeeping operations, including the military
component and the human rights division, which will
ensure that the police are part of the comprehensive
strategy of the operation. I know that the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Police Division are
working on the matter of assessment, and we eagerly
await those results.

Thirdly, developing neighbourhood police activities
within peacekeeping operations should contribute to
fostering long-term stability. Within peacekeeping
operations, police can help to progressively rebuild
confidence between populations and State institutions
by keeeping criminals off the streets. Of course, to that
end police detachments cannot remain on the sidelines,
but must instead be held accountable to the communities
they serve. Through its neighbourhood policing
activities, the police component of peace operations
naturally forges close links with police forces and local
gendarmerie. Such cooperation can take on various
forms, such as mentoring or joint patrolling, and is
therefore crucial to bolstering national capacity.

Allow me now to touch upon three challenges
that were addressed in the briefings that we heard this
morning from the Police Commissioners.

First, I wish to talk about linguistic challenges.
In order to be effective, police forces should be able
to become part of local communities, particularly
in missions involving the protection of civilians. For
that reason, it is essential to deploy police officers
and gendarmes who speak the language and know the
culture of the host country in order to foster, facilitate
and ensure smooth relations with the population.
The Paris Ministerial Conference on Peacekeeping
in Francophone Environments, which took place in
October, identified approaches to be adopted in the area
of training. France will of course participate in training
efforts regarding the French language through police
training activities.

On that topic, I would like to pose a question to
each of the Police Commissioners present. The actions
undertaken by peacekeeping operations, which include
capacity-building in host countries, are of course key to
long-term stability. However, daily contact with local
forces and the population requires full knowledge of
the language of the country. I am therefore wondering
if the Police Commissioners of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti,
the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan and even the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur might provide us with
additional information on the challenges their police
officers face in the area of language? What measures
do they think should be undertaken to address that
challenge? Should such measures be taken during force
generation, training or during the deployment of a
mission?

I will now move on to the second challenge, that
of gender. We endorse efforts aimed at deploying more
female police officers, who can greatly contribute to
the performance of police components, in particular by
fostering better interaction with vulnerable populations
and with victims of human rights violations, as well as
by participating in investigations into particular types
of violence, including sexual violence. We must combat

sexual abuse and exploitation by ensuring that all receive
equal treatment before the law. Protecting victims and
identifying and punishing perpetrators requires greater
communication between United Nations agencies and
organizations, on the one hand, and civil, military
and judicial authorities in the countries involved in
peacekeeping missions, on the other.

The third and last challenge that we believe to be key
is the use of modern technology by police components,
which involve the activities of the police in general, as
well as, for example, the gathering of evidence. That
requires police officers within peacekeeping operations
to be properly equipped, and better cooperation with
international organizations, access to databases and the
use of modern techniques for investigation. All such
measures allow the police force to better protect people
and to prevent violations of human rights.

