Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to first express my thanks to you, Mr. President, for
having organized this debate on a subject that has been the
object of such great interest on the part of Member States.

I am also grateful for the concept note (8/2012/853, annex)
prepared by India and Portugal to guide our discussion,
which provides an important list of efforts aimed at
improving and modernizing the working methods of
the Council and additional measures that we should
consider in order to continue work in that respect.
I would like to thank and particularly congratulate
Ambassador Jose Filipe Moraes Cabral, the Chair ofthe
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, not only for his statement just
now, but also for the very hard work he has done this
year at the head of that subsidiary body of the Council,
which has made a considerable contribution to progress
in that area.

With respect to the working methods of the Council,
our main goal must be to identify those areas and
matters requiring the attention of the Council in order to
achieve a greater degree of transparency, participation,
efficiency and accountability as the Council carries out
its responsibilities in the maintenance of international
peace and security. Over recent months, we have
achieved some progress. On the one hand, on 5 June,
we received a note by the President (8/2012/402) that
complements the guidelines contained in the annex
to document S/2010/507 with respect to rationalizing
conference service resources and strengthening
interaction. Other important procedural aspects have to
do with penholders, the chairs of the subsidiary bodies,
open debates, the drawing up of the annual report to the
General Assembly and the monthly assessments carried
out under each presidency. We are sure that discussions
on those matters will continue in the Working Group,
and that we will be able, before the end of the year, to
adopt new guidelines for the future work of the Council.

We have also made progress in ensuring a more
equitable distribution of the Council's work throughout
the course of the year by adjusting mandates and their
renewal periods and by aligning their requirements
for the presentation of reports. The recommendations
submitted in that respect by the Chair of the Working
Group in July and duly reflected in the annual report
presented to the General Assembly (A/67/2) just a few
days ago indicate a good course of action for Council
members in their efforts to improve the future planning
of Council work.

I would now like to refer to some of the outstanding
matters and the ways in which we can address them to
achieve greater efficiency.

First, on open debates, my delegation believes that
an important development contributing to improved
transparency is the increase in the number of open
debates organized each month. The participation of
non-members ofthe Council in such debates contributes
to the very purpose of illustrating and enriching the
background on the basis of which Council members
take decisions. Therefore, non-members of the Council
have expressed a natural expectation that their concerns
and contributions should be taken into account when
the outcome document of a debate - in most cases, a
presidential statement - is adopted.

Secondly, the established practice of having the
President meet every month with the Member States to
consider and comment on the provisional programme of
work is a very useful practice and makes a significant
contribution to transparency in the work of the Council.
The Charter and the Council's provisional rules of
procedure anticipate having States non-members of
the Council be invited to participate in the Council's
deliberations on situations that could have an impact on
their immediate interests. There are therefore specific
provisions that enable them to participate in such
meetings.

Moreover, in the concept note already mentioned,
reference is made to the importance of an increase
in the interaction of the Council and its members
with other interested parties. We believe that the
Council would indeed reap considerable benefits, if a
mechanism were established to improve its links with,
for example, regional organizations with subsidiary or
complementary responsibilities for the maintenance of
peace and security, troop-contributing countries and
the chairs and country-specific configurations of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

I would like to pay tribute to the extremely valuable
assistance that the Council receives from the Secretariat
on an ongoing basis and with the utmost discretion. In
the past year, we have seen that considerable efforts
have been made to improve the Council's web page,
those of its subsidiary bodies and the tools available to
all Member States and the public in general, including,
most notably, the very useful repertoire of Security
Council practice. We are grateful for the work and
resources invested in that regard, which have led to a
noticeable increase in the transparency of the work of
the Council and an improvement in the general public's
perception of the Council.

Finally, we believe that the discussions on
procedural issues and the working methods of the
Council and its subsidiary bodies, in particular the
Sanctions Committees, are of great importance, and
non-permanent members can make considerable
contributions to those discussions in order to improve
the work of those bodies. We believe that it is important
to move in that direction.

