Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I would like to thank the Assistant
Secretary-General, Mr. Annabi, for his briefing.

The Chinese delegation wishes to express its
satisfaction at the smooth carrying out of the elections
in Kosovo as scheduled. These elections are an
important step in the peace process in Kosovo. We
commend the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia for its efforts to encourage the Serbs to
participate in the elections. We also wish to commend
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) for their efforts in
monitoring and preparing for the elections. We are
looking forward to the elected assembly playing its due
role.

In our view, the main question that Kosovo now
faces is whether the leaders of the various ethnic
groups can put past enmities behind, set aside their
differences, establish a broad coalition Government
that represents the interests of all the ethnic groups,
ensure the ethnic diversity of Kosovo and the stability
of the communities, and discuss together a broad future
plan for the development of Kosovo. We hope that the
elected leaders of the various ethnic groups can take
stock of the overall situation, effectively carry out their
functions under the leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, work to
establish trust between the communities, bring about
national reconciliation and lay the foundations for the
economic revitalization of Kosovo and the long-term
stability of that region.

At the same time, UNMIK should make further
efforts in combating crime, improving the security
environment in Kosovo, promoting national
reconciliation, establishing mutual trust and assuring
the safe return of refugees and continue to strengthen
cooperation and coordination with the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

The peace in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia is still very fragile. The situation in Kosovo
still directly affects peace and stability in Macedonia
and the whole Balkan region. UNMIK still needs to
carry out effective measures to curb the illegal flow of
arms on the Kosovo-Macedonian border and cut off the
source of arms for the illegal armed groups. In this
respect also, the elected leaders of Kosovo should
assume their responsibilities.

