Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Allow me at the outset to thank the leaders of
both Tribunals for their briefings and for the reports
they have submitted to the Security Council under
resolution 1534 (2004) on the implementation of the
Completion Strategy for their work.

We have a positive assessment of the work of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. We
welcome the adoption by the Rwandan Government of
the law excluding the application of the death penalty
to cases referred from the Tribunal. We believe that
that will allow the Tribunal in the future to transfer a
greater number of cases to courts of national
jurisdiction. We continue to believe that the transfer of
cases to national courts is a fundamental way of
facilitating compliance with the timetable laid down by
the Security Council for the implementation of the
Completion Strategy for the work of the Tribunals.

At this stage, we note the active work of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. At the same time, however, we are not
satisfied by the forecasts from the Tribunal's leadership
that have been repeated in report after report regarding
the need to plan first-instance trials for the year 2009.

We note the arrest and transfer to the Tribunal of
the accused Zdravko Tolimir. The arrest testifies to the
desire of the authorities of Serbia and the Republika
Srpska to cooperate with the Yugoslav Tribunal and to
fulfil the obligations entrusted to them by the Security
Council.

We are also seriously concerned by the current
situation with respect to the case against Ramush
Haradinaj. The witness-protection issues surrounding
the case and, above all, the allegedly accidental deaths
of the major witnesses must not be whitewashed either
by the Tribunal or by the relevant States and agencies
of the United Nations. We cannot ignore the fact that
the Security Council will have to address that problem.

I shall dwell separately on the case of the accused
Mr. Djordjevic, who was arrested on Saturday in
Montenegro. The arrest took place in Montenegro and
not in Russia, where he was long sought by the
Prosecutor at non-existent addresses and which the
Prosecutor accused of concealing him. Unfortunately,
the usually eloquent Prosecutor was unable to find the
words to acknowledge that the presumption of
infallibility does not apply to prosecutors of
international tribunals.
In conclusion, I stress once again that we expect
the Tribunal strictly to comply with the schedule laid
down by the Security Council for the completion of its
work. We will not accept attempts to reinterpret the
Completion Strategy of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. The fact that
several accused remain beyond the Tribunal's reach
cannot serve as justification for the indefinite extension
of its activities.

