Mr. Kronfol (Lebanon)(spoke in Arabic): Allow
me first, Mr. President, to express to you my hope that
your presidency of the Council this month will be
successful in achieving peace and security in the whole
world, especially in our region. Let me thank your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom, for his skilful presidency.

At the beginning I wish to state that my
Government today addressed a letter to the President of
the Security Council and to the Secretary-General of
the United Nations in which it requested the convening
of an immediate meeting of the Security Council to
consider the violation by Israeli military planes of the
Lebanese airspace in order to strike a site inside the
territory of the Syrian Arab Republic. Our
understanding now is that the Secretariat is in the
process of translating that letter from Arabic so that it
may be circulated to all members of the Council. I
request that that fact be reflected in the official records
of this meeting.

I will now read the text of that letter:

"His Excellency, the President of the Security
Council, Ambassador John Negroponte:

"We would like to advise you, Sir, that in
the morning of Sunday, 5 October 2003, Israeli
military planes violated the airspace of Lebanon
in order to strike a site inside the territory of the
Syrian Arab Republic. On the same date, at noon,
eight other Israeli military planes violated the
airspace in southern and northern Lebanon.

"It is to be noted that despite the repeated
positions of the Secretary-General, and
notwithstanding the announcements and warnings
by his representative in Lebanon, the Israeli
violations continue without any grounds or
justifications.

"The most recent of those violations is the
use of Lebanese airspace in order to commit an
act of aggression against a sister neighbouring
State. That action consititutes a serious escalation
of the situation and a new development in the
method of Israeli attacks.

"On this basis Lebanon requests that the
Security Council meet immediately to examine
these acts of aggression and to take proper
measures to deter Israel. Those violations,
especially the most recent, constitute blatant
aggression against the Blue Line, which is
sponsored by the United Nations in southern
Lebanon. They also endanger stability along that
line and represent Israel's intention to export its
current dilemmas in the occupied territories to
other places.

"As it draws the attention of this Council to
this grave situation, Lebanon is fully confident in
the measures the Council will take to condemn
Israel and to deter it from similar acts of
aggression that would lead to dire consequences
that would destabilize the current situation along
the Blue Line as well as seriously endanger peace
and stability in the region."

That letter, dated 5 October 2003 from Beirut, is
from the Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Minister for Expatriate Lebanese, Mr. Michael Smaha.

Lebanon requested a meeting of the Security
Council due to Israel's excessive violations of
Lebanon's air space and of the Blue Line arrangements
sponsored by the United Nations in southern Lebanon.
Those actions led to an act aggression against a
Member State of the United Nations and current
member of the Security Council, in addition to being
an act of aggression against a sisterly State with whom
my country has the closest of relations.

The Charter of the United Nations and the norms
of international law, which all of us must respect, warn
against any act of aggression by any Member State
against another irrespective of the reason. They also
hold that a State should first resort to the Security
Council to argue its case.

The Government of Israel has no right to exploit
the international campaign against terrorism as a
stalking horse to implement its policy against the
people whose lands it occupies. Mixing up the Haifa
bombing with an action against Syria or linking it with
the State terrorism practised by Israel is a
contravention of the norms of international law. No
crime can be justified by the commission of an even
more serious crime.

Israel has all along rejected all forms of
international advice. It has also completely disregarded
the advice and warnings of the Secretary-General and
of his Representative in southern Lebanon. The danger
of these violations and the disregard for the United
Nations remarks constitute flagrant acts of aggression
against peace and stability along the Blue Line, which
is a strategic line that represents the strategic position
of Lebanon, Syria and the Arab Group to reach a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the region, as
reflected in the Arab peace initiative adopted at the
Beirut Arab summit.

Lebanon requests the Security Council to fully
meet its responsibilities and take the proper measures
to condemn Israel and deter it from committing acts of
aggression, violations and the constant threats that have
become a daily routine against Lebanon. Israel is doing
all those things without any real grounds or reasons,
except to mislead Israeli public opinion by fleeing to
the front and exporting its domestic crisis outside Israel
and to give world public opinion the false impression
that it is a victim of aggression.

The letters that my Government has repeatedly
addressed in the past to the Secretariat and to the
Security Council constitute clear proof of the fact that
Israel's intentions are aggressive and not defensive.
Israel's violations of the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations and of international agreements are the
cause of pain, anguish, misery, evil and turbulence
throughout the Middle East. The tactics pursued by
Israel to justify its presence in neighbouring countries
are known to all. But if the Government of Israel wants
to send a message of terrorism and intimidation to
Lebanon and Syria, it has missed the mark. These
actions by Israel will further fuel the cycle of violence
in which that country will itself become trapped.

Lebanon hopes that the international community
will lay bare the true nature of these Israeli practices,
bring them to an end and strongly condemn them, just
as it should condemn those who order them and
implement them. Lebanon also hopes and expects that
the Security Council will condemn Israel's aggression
against another peaceful Syrian village, just as it
condemned the Israeli air force's attacks against many
peaceful villages and towns in Lebanon.

Given the current practices of the Israeli
Government, which can only be described as reckless,
and given its blind violence, the Security Council
should not compromise all its peace efforts. More than
ever before, the Council has a clear responsibility
today to rein in Israel's wholly illegitimate acts of
aggression.

