Mr. Menzione (Italy): Italy voted in favour of the
resolution just adopted by the Security Council, in which
the mandate of the United Nations Mission in Haiti
(UNMIH) was renewed until February of next year. We
believe, in fact, that the presence of UNMIH has provided
an effective and crucial contribution to the affirmation in
that Caribbean country of an institutional framework
inspired by democratic principles, just as it has
contributed to launching the process of national
reconciliation.

It is our hope that the efforts of the international
community will be matched by those of the country's
authorities and political forces so that the process may
come to a positive conclusion. The efforts of all will be
necessary so that the progress attained thus far, in
particular through the holding of administrative elections
and the first round of legislative elections, is consolidated
in coming months, and so that at the end of its mandate
UNMIH can be a witness to and a participant in the birth
of a new democracy - on quite a fragile foundation, to
be sure, but with solid possibilities for success.

Progress on the political and institutional fronts too
will be determined to a large extent by the success of
efforts currently under way for economic recovery. The
Secretary-General's initiatives on coordinating UNMIH's
peace-keeping mission with development activities, in a
manner consistent with its mandate, to strengthen Haiti's
institutions will have particular importance in this regard.
Once again, the unbreakable bond between political
stability and economic development is highlighted. The
presence of the United Nations contributed to liberating
the Haitian population from physical fear and to setting

 

out the conditions for the development of democracy. Now
the other primary needs must be addressed, and a real
improvement in living conditions must quickly be achieved.

One last word on an aspect of great importance - the
security of the population. UNMIH has achieved a lot, with
the help of the international community as well, towards
improving general security conditions in the country. The
next few months will be crucial for establishing police
forces that must, of course, be totally different from those
of the past, but at the same time efficient and well
organized. This too will determine the future of Haiti.

