Mr. Graf zu Rantzau (Germany): It is a pleasure to
welcome you today, Mr. Deputy Foreign Minister, to the
Council and to see you in the President's chair.

I too wish to extend our condolences to the
Government of the United States and to the families of
those who died in the terrible explosion in Oklahoma
City.
Let me begin by expressing the gratitude of my
Government to the members of the Mission of the
International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia
(ICFY). The Mission plays an essential role in monitoring
the closure of the border between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which closure is the subject of the resolution just adopted
by our Council. We are fully aware that the Mission is
working under extremely difficult conditions. My
Government hopes that, in keeping with today's
resolution, Member States will provide the ICFY Mission
with additional material and financial support.

This is the second time that the Security Council has
taken a decision to continue the limited sanctions relief
originally extended to Belgrade under resolution
943 (1994). In order to do so, the Council needed to
determine whether the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
was continuing to implement the closure of its border
with the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The reports
received from the Co-Chairmen of the ICFY indicate that
the Belgrade authorities are continuing to cooperate with
the Mission. Based on the information available to them,
the Co-Chairmen conclude that the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia is continuing to meet its commitment
regarding border closure.

However, the reports also note a number of serious
violations and presumed violations of the border regime.
Indeed, the last two certifications contain an important
caveat regarding helicopter flights, which are a question
of particular concern to my Government. In addition, we
have become increasingly concerned about circumvention
of the border regime by way of Serb-controlled areas in
the Republic of Croatia.

Today's resolution, while extending the suspension
of certain sanctions, is designed to address these
problems. The question of helicopter flights will be the
subject of a thorough investigation and a report to the

 

Council. The Secretary-General will also submit a report on
ways to improve the effectiveness of the border regime.
The continued suspension of sanctions is now tied to
preventing diversions of goods through the Republic of
Croatia to areas under the control of Bosnian Serb forces.

Finally, in light of the problems during the period just
past, the duration of the suspension has been curtailed.
However, the authorities in Belgrade can count on further
renewals of the suspension if they comply with the
provisions of the resolution.
I should like to underline that Belgrade can expect
additional sanctions relief if it moves beyond an effective
border closure and extends its full support to the approach
pursued by the Contact Group. We call on the authorities
in Belgrade to accept mutual recognition of the successor
states of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
work with the international community to bring an end to
the conflict in the Republic of Croatia.

As regards the leadership in Pale, we hope that it will
finally recognize that it must return to the negotiating table.
It must accept the Contact Group's peace plan as a starting
point. The Bosnian Serb leaders will not improve their
position by procrastinating: instead, they will increase the
sufferings of the Serbs of Bosnia and Herzegovina together
with the sufferings of the rest of the Republic's civilian
population.

Germany believes that the pressure on Pale must be
maintained in order to achieve an overall settlement of the
conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina. My Government
remains convinced that a peaceful settlement can be
achieved. That is why we appeal, once again, to the
Bosnian parties to extend without further delay the
agreements on a cease-fire and a complete cessation of
hostilities.

