Mr. Ward (Jamaica): My delegation extends its
appreciation to Mr. Adeniji, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and head of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), for his
briefing and for his introduction of the Secretary-
General's report, which provides a detailed assessment
of the peace process in Sierra Leone. We welcome the
convening of this open meeting.

I will heed your appeal for brevity, Sir. Having
addressed most of these issues in the past, I will draw
attention to only a few aspects of the peace process that
we simply cannot ignore.

I agree with Ambassador Greenstock and others
that both the Truth and Reconciliation Commission and
the Special Court are essential dual tracks to
reconciliation in Sierra Leone. I urge the donor
community to respond positively to the appeals for
funding of these programmes. Jamaica looks forward to
the Secretary-General's upcoming report on
establishing the Special Court.

While we stress the importance of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission and the Special Court in
terms of reconciliation, we cannot overemphasize the
importance of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme. There can be no lasting peace
in Sierra Leone without an adequately funded
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme. We note the conclusion of the Secretary-
General that, unless voluntary contributions are
received in sufficient amounts on an urgent basis,
alternative funding mechanisms will have to be
considered. We are grateful to those donor countries
that have so far contributed according to their ability to
do so, and we join in the appeal to others who have not
yet done so.

We cannot overemphasize the importance of the
reintegration of ex-combatants into Sierra Leonean
society and of finding them sustainable employment
opportunities. This is critical to the success of the
peace process. Past experience has taught us that, if ex-
combatants are not gainfully employed, they could
easily return to a life of war or banditry. That warning
was given this morning by Mr. Adeniji. We all agree
that this prospect constitutes a major risk to the long-
term stability of the country.

My delegation welcomes the positive reports
concerning improved access to humanitarian workers
across the country. While it is necessary that the short-
term needs of refugees and internally displaced persons
be addressed, it is equally important that long-term
plans regarding assistance to the Government of Sierra
Leone to absorb the returnees into society also be
considered. We support the view that there needs to be
more focused attention to the provision of basic
services and infrastructure, which no doubt will require
funding.

Finally, my delegation is heartened that
UNAMSIL continues to enhance its capacity to
disseminate information to Sierra Leonean society
regarding its role in the peace process. We especially
commend the public information programmes being
undertaken by UNAMSIL, which seek to engage
society at large.

In conclusion, allow me to commend Mr. Adeniji
and the staff of UNAMSIL for their sterling
contributions to promoting peace in Sierra Leone.

