Mr. Mayr-Harting: I am speaking on behalf of
the European Union and its member States.

As this is the first time I have the chance to speak
in this Chamber in the month of May, I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, and Azerbaijan on assuming the
presidency of the Council and to thank the United
States for its efforts during the month of April.

The acceding country Croatia, the candidate
countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland and Serbia, the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

Thank you very much, Sir, for organizing this
useful briefing. We appreciate the efforts of the Chair
of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities, the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism and the Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), and we thank them for providing us with
information on their activities and undertakings. Let
me also underscore the essential role of the resolutions
themselves in the global counter-terrorism efforts.

With regard to counter-terrorism-related
sanctions, we welcome the further procedural
improvements introduced to the Al-Qaida sanctions
regime in June last year in resolution 1989 (2011). The
Office of the Ombudsperson has made an important
contribution to ensuring fair and clear procedures for
individuals who seek delisting, and I am honoured to
have been involved, in my former capacity as
Ambassador, in the development of that Office.
Pursuant to resolution 1989 (2011), we encourage
designated individuals who are considering, or are in
the process of, challenging their listings through
national and regional courts to submit a petition for
delisting to the Office of the Ombudsperson. We
underline the importance of all relevant information
being shared with the Office of the Ombudsperson, and
that it particularly welcomes arrangements on the
provision of confidential information.

Countering and preventing terrorism can be
successful in the long run only when core universal
values and the rule of law are respected, and
international law - including human rights law,
international humanitarian law and refugee law - are
fully complied with. The promotion and protection of
human rights is essential for all components of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. In
that context, an international conference was organized
on 12 March by Denmark, which holds the presidency
of the Council of the European Union. The aim of the
conference was to help identify ways to better bring
counter-terrorism measures and capacity-building
efforts into line with the requirements of human rights
and the rule of law. That task is of utmost importance if
we wish to succeed in our long-term efforts to counter
and prevent the scourge of terrorism. We also look
forward to the upcoming review of the Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy.

We commend the recent activities of the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate and look forward to
its future work, in particular the upcoming workshops
for Sahel and Maghreb countries. We welcome the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force, including, among others, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime with its Terrorism
Prevention Branch, as well as the United Nations
Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute. We
also look forward to the development of the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre.

In addition, we welcome all efforts aimed at
enhancing the visibility of United Nations counter-
terrorism activities and at ensuring greater cooperation,
coordination and coherence among United Nations
entities, including, when appropriate, the contribution
of relevant United Nations political offices and
missions in the field. In that context, we welcome the
Secretary-General's recommendation. for consideration
by Member States, of the appointment of a United
Nations counter-terrorism coordinator, as a step
towards further improving cross-institutional
coherence in the United Nations counter-terrorism
efforts.

Finally, let me turn to the resolution 1540 (2004)
regime. As recognized during the recent Seoul Nuclear
Security Summit, the full and effective implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) will strengthen global efforts
to prevent the acquisition and use by terrorists of
nuclear, biological and chemical weapons and
materials. We strongly support the robust and effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). To that end,
the European Union is currently finalizing a new
council decision focused on State assistance. We have
also launched an extensive technical assistance
programme on export control, focused in the first
instance on neighbouring countries and which will be
gradually expanded to South-East Asia and the
Mediterranean. In that context, the European Union
also co-sponsored the Conference of International,
Regional and Sub-Regional Industry Associations on
United Nations Security Council Resolution 1540
(2004) in Wiesbaden, Germany, in April.

The timing of today's joint briefing coincides
with the regular European Union-United Nations
political dialogue on counter-terrorism. I would like to
conclude by underlining the importance that we attach
to the close collaboration between the United Nations
and the European Union.

