Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): Mr. President, allow me at the outset to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. The Chinese delegation
pledges you its full cooperation. We are confident that,
given your wisdom and extensive diplomatic experience,
you will guide the Council's work this month towards
success.

I also wish to take this opportunity to thank your
predecessor, Ambassador Merimee of France, for his
outstanding contribution to the complete success of the
Council's work last month.

This is the first time since I took up my functions
here that I have made a statement at a formal meeting of
the Security Council. As the Permanent Representative of
China to the United Nations, I can say that I should like
to establish a good working relationship with members to
help fulfil the purposes and principles of the Charter and
bring peace and development to the world.

The practice of United Nations peace-keeping
operations over the years has shown that such operations
can succeed only when they adhere strictly to the
purposes and principles of the Charter and to principles
that history has proved effective. In our view, such
principles include, primarily, respect for the sovereignty
of the countries concerned; non-interference in their
internal affairs; the non-use of force except in self-
defence; observance of strict neutrality by refraining from
involvement in internal disputes and conflicts; and
obtaining the countries' consent and cooperation.
Furthermore, United Nations peace-keeping operations
should be carried out in light of the current realities and
the actual capabilities of the United Nations. Any
operation that deviates from these principles will suffer
setbacks or failures.

There have already been many examples, both
positive and negative, in this connection. At present,
United Nations peace-keeping operations are going
through a critical period of reflection and transition. It is
therefore all the more imperative for the Security Council
to draw the lessons of past experience and consider each
operation carefully, in the light of these principles, so as
to make decisions that are practical and feasible.

Since its establishment, the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) has made
some contributions to the stability of Rwanda and to the
delivery of humanitarian assistance. The situation in
Rwanda is now moving towards normalcy. That this is so
is inseparable from the positive efforts of the Rwandese
Government, particularly the tremendous work it has done
in promoting national reconciliation and healing the
wounds of war; gratifying progress has been achieved
here.

Schools have been reopened. Water and power
supplies have been partly restored. Rwanda is already on
the road towards rebuilding and reconstruction. However,
it still faces difficulties: the security problem remains
grim; the repatriation of refugees and the return of
displaced persons have again come to a halt; and the flow
of weapons into Rwanda has yet to be controlled. The

 

task facing the Rwandese Government and people therefore
remains a very arduous one: they must rely mainly on their
own efforts to facilitate, through national reconciliation, a
smooth repatriation and return.

The actions of the international community, including
the actions of the Security Council, should aim first of all
to meet the priority needs of the Rwandese people; in this
way, they can be of genuine help to the Rwandese
Government and people in achieving political and social
stability. In this connection, the will of the Rwandese
Government and people must be respected.

The Security Council proposes, in light of the changed
situation in Rwanda, to modify UNAMIR's mandate and
reduce the scope of its activities; UNAMIR will mainly
play a good-offices role in future to help achieve national
reconciliation within the framework of the Arusha Peace
Agreement. We are of the view that this change is in the
interests of the Rwandese people.

The draft resolution before us basically reflects this
spirit. The Chinese delegation will vote in favour, a
decision based on our consistent support for the Rwandese
peace process. We hope that the adoption of the draft
resolution will further promote peace and stability in
Rwanda and help the Rwandese people achieve national
reconciliation so that soon they will be able to live and
work in peace and contentment.

