Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate the Russian Federation
on its accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, and to thank it for convening
this very important meeting to share our points of
View with regard to international peace and security
in the Middle East and North Africa. We welcome the
presence of the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Russian Federation to preside over this meeting. Let
me also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing,
which analysed the realities of the region. We also
extend our heartfelt thanks to Poland for its work during
its presidency of the Council in May.

The best way to ensure lasting peace, tolerance
and the prevention of conflicts is to ensure sustainable
development, equal opportunities and the equitable
distribution of national wealth, inclusive of everyone
irrespective of ethnicity, religion or gender. We believe
that, in order to promote peaceful and open societies,
secured on a solid foundation and in accordance
with Sustainable Development Goal 16 of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, Members
States must respect the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and those governing international
law, which prohibit interference in the internal affairs
of other States, which promotes ethnic, religious and
community divisions, thereby entailing national
destabilization and the outbreak of conflicts that only
lead to the destruction, ruin and demise of the local
communities and the developmental gains that were
achieved by them. Those conflicts are also destroying
the development progress made by some countries in
recent years, despite ongoing wars. In addition, we
believe that the equitable distribution of international
water resources among coastal States around a shared
body of water prevents crises because injustice
resulting from water quotas undermines sustainable
development in countries sharing any body of water,
which is a matter of water law and human rights law.

The Middle East has always been one of the
regions most exposed to political, security, economic
and strategic upheavals. We are concerned about the
harmful impact of the presence of weapons of mass
destruction in the Middle East because they constitute
a strategic threat to regional and international peace
and security. In every international forum, Iraq has
therefore called for the establishment of a nuclear-
weapon-free zone in the Middle East. We have also
called for the implementation of the comprehensive
safeguards agreement of the International Atomic
Energy Agency in all of the countries of the region.
We have therefore committed to strengthening the
international weapon-of-mass-destruction disarmament
and non-proliferation regime. We try to be a force of
stability both regionally and internationally, far from
all tension and instability in the world. The Government
of Iraq is committed to respecting its obligations under
international treaties and conventions on disarmament
and non-proliferation based on the provisions of the
permanent Constitution of the Republic of Iraq.

The Israeli occupation is the cause of tension in the
Middle East. The security and stability of the Middle
East depend on finding a just solution that takes into
consideration the Palestinian people's legitimate
right to freedom. It also hinges on the creation of an
independent Palestinian State with June 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. Moreover, we must
take the necessary measures to mitigate the risk of
inflaming religious sentiment, which could transform a
political conflict on the ground into an endless religious
war. That is what the extremists want, as it would
exacerbate violence, terrorism and extremism in the
region and throughout the world. We urge everyone to
act responsibly and make efforts to reach a just solution
to the Palestinian issue and to put an end to the Israeli
occupation, while ensuring the full withdrawal of the
Israeli occupation from all occupied Arab territories.
Iraq is committed to the stability and territorial
integrity of Syria. That requires a balanced and peaceful
inter-Syrian solution that is accepted by the Syrian
Government and all the parties concerned. The question
of security and stability in Syria is very important and
it is inextricably linked with the security and stability
of Iraq, as the Da'esh terrorist organization operates in
the region between Syria and Iraq. That means that the
fight against the Da'esh terrorists is a common goal of
all countries that are combating terrorism. That fight is
of strategic importance for the entire world, especially
countries of the region.

In addition, Iraq supports a peaceful solution in
Yemen. We call for a national dialogue with a view
to safeguarding the rights of the Yemeni people and
putting an end to the carnage in order to restore security
and stability to Yemen.

We reaffirm that it is critical to reach a
comprehensive political solution to the Libyan crisis and
to respect the Libyan Political Agreement, which is the
only political framework to resolve the political crisis
in Libya, in order to achieve stability and prosperity
in Libya.

The spread of takfiri ideology in the Middle East
has led to the emergence of terrorist groups such as
Da'esh, Al-Qaida and other associated groups, which
have sown the seeds of sectarianism and division
and committed atrocious crimes against all segments
of the Iraqi population. They have also pillaged
monuments and destroyed cultural heritage in Iraq. We
are counting on the international investigation team
established pursuant to resolution 2379 (2017) to hold
the Da'esh criminals accountable and to ensure justice
for the victims.

My Government works to strengthen cooperation
with international bodies and organizations in order to
ensure aid to the Iraqi people, who have confronted the
most powerful terrorist group in the world with the help
of the Global Coalition against Da'esh. We would like
to thank friendly countries that have helped us regain
control of our territory. 1 would like to reaffirm that
my country's Government is taking all the necessary
measures to ensure the definitive return of displaced
persons in order to revitalize the economy and
bring back the social life of former times, to ensure
development and to restore stability throughout the
country, while attracting investment. We will abide by
the Constitution of Iraq in the settlement of all problems
and act in the best interests of the people of Iraq. We are
committed to protecting the federal system of Iraq, its
unity and its territorial integrity.

The Council must make efforts to peaceably settle
conflicts, including through arbitration and mediation.
It must also play an important role in supporting
international law in order to achieve international peace
and security, especially international humanitarian law
and international human rights law.

