Mr. Lamani (Organization of the Islamic Conference) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset
to express my sincerest congratulations to you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. We are fully confident that the deliberations
of the Council will be crowned with success under your
wise leadership.

Let me also take this opportunity to express our
appreciation to Ambassador Gunter Pleuger and to the
German delegation for their successful and effective
presidency of the Council last month.

Let me also thank you, Sir, for convening this
open meeting. I should like also to thank the delegation
of sisterly Malaysia and to the Non-Aligned Movement
for their initiative to call for the convening of this
meeting.

This meeting is being held as grave challenges
face us from every side and as the clouds of war gather
on the horizon, promising evil, grave and unforeseeable
consequences and repercussions. The Organization of
the Islamic Conference (OIC) has in the past repeatedly
expressed its clear and forthright position on the threats
facing Iraq. We have stressed that the resolution of the
issue of disarmament of weapons of mass destruction
must be achieved peacefully, as set forth by the
Security Council. We believe that there is absolutely no
justification for waging a military campaign against
Iraq that would affect not only the region but the
world. We have also called for the need to respect the
unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq.

The position opposed to war against Iraq enjoys
overwhelming and unprecedented popular support, as
highlighted by the many rallies and demonstrations
held in hundreds of cities and towns throughout the
world and as expressed in many resolutions adopted
and recommendations made by governmental and inter-
governmental organizations in many countries.

The heads of State and Government of members
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference held an
emergency summit in Doha, Qatar, on 5 March 2003.
They issued a declaration expressing their outright
rejection of an assault on Iraq and of any threat to the
security and safety of any Islamic State. They stressed
the need for a peaceful settlement to the Iraqi issue
within the framework of the United Nations and in
accordance with the relevant international resolutions.
They reiterated their solidarity with the Iraqi people
and called for the lifting, within international
legitimacy, of the embargo imposed on that people.
They rejected all attempts to change the region and to
interfere in its internal affairs, as well as any disregard
for its interests andjust causes.

We believe that the use of military force against
Iraq in the current circumstances, in which that country
is cooperating with the demands of the Security
Council and with the international inspectors - as
indicated in the reports of Mr. Blix and
Mr. ElBaradei- would be rejected and unjustified,
and represents an assault on the pan-Arab and Islamic
world. It would be a serious attack on the central role
of the United Nations, which is entrusted with
maintaining international peace and security. It would
be a grave threat to international relations, stability and
security throughout the world. It would weaken the
global campaign against terrorism and, indeed,
encourage extremism and violence instead of
eliminating them.

Faced with these grave circumstances, we cannot
fail to urge Iraq to continue cooperating fully and
positively with the international inspectors. We call on
Iraq to facilitate the inspectors' mission and fully to
implement relevant Security Council resolutions. We
continue to stress the need to respect the independence,
sovereignty and security of all States, as well as the
principles of good-neighbourliness. We emphasize the
need for substantive and concrete progress on the issue
of Kuwaiti detainees and prisoners of war, the State
archives and other property of the State of Kuwait. We
also call on Mr. Blix to respond to the request put
forward by a number of Council members and non-
Council members to list the remaining disarmament
tasks in order to enhance efforts at implementing
resolution 687 (1991).

It is sad indeed that the noise surrounding the
possibility of war in Iraq is distracting from the
aggressive and illegitimate practices of the extremist
Israeli Government against the Palestinian people. The
increasing pace of assassinations, the demolition of
homes, acts of destruction and other forms of collective
punishment continue unabated. The Security Council
stands with its arms folded as it witnesses Israel's war
crimes. It is unable to provide security and protection
to the Palestinian people, which is languishing under a
brutal and illegitimate occupation.

We wonder how long this double standard with
respect to the norms governing international issues will
continue, given the current international situation, in
which Iraq is being threatened with destruction and
annihilation and the killing of tens of thousands of
innocent citizens, while the State of Israel is allowed to
acquire all types and categories of weapons of mass
destruction, openly and in large quantities. It is also
allowed to perpetrate all forms of war crimes
proscribed by international law and international norms
and conventions against the Palestinian people -
whose rights, freedoms and lands have been raped;
whose economy has been destroyed; and which has
been dispersed in refugee camps and exile.

We hope that the Security Council will, at this
critical juncture, shoulder its historic responsibilities,
address the difficult situation facing it and overcome
its deficit of wisdom. Let it prove to the international
community that it is worthy of the trust placed in it to
maintain international peace and security.

