Mr. Ishikane (Japan): Facing the past and seeking a better future - that is the spirit at the centre of international transitional justice. Successful transitional justice initiatives contribute to building and sustaining peace and, in the long term, to achieving Sustainable Development Goal 16 by strengthening institutions and establishing the rule of law, which are crucial to makinglasting peace possible. It is important to make sure that transitional justice initiatives do not harm peace but rather help sustain it. I believe that trust is what makes a peaceful society - trust among people and trust of the people in their Government. A society that has endured conflict often lacks the foundation for trust or has seen that foundation destroyed in the course of conflict. In such moments, people are full of fear, uncertainty and grievances and are deprived of access to justice. That is exactly why the human security approach is so important in the implementation of transitional justice initiatives. What we should aim for is not solely to punish perpetrators through a top-down approach but also to support the transformation of our society into a State where people can lead an empowered life free from fear. The building of strong, effective and trustworthy institutions is an integral part of building and sustaining peace and should remain a crucial part of transitional justice as well. Here I would like to emphasize that legitimacy, inclusivity and local ownership are key to the successful implementation of transitional justice, particularly with regard to institutional reforms. There is no one-size-fits- all approach. Rather, the local context, history and culture in each case need to be taken into account. Transitional justice processes and mechanisms must be considered legitimate and inclusive and be based on local ownership if they are to gain the trust of the population. International support must aim at helping countries engaged in a transitional justice process in their endeavour to stand on their own feet. Japan is committed to supporting the development and improvement of judicial and security systems and institutions. We have continuously supported conflict-affected countries, such as Cete d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali, Afghanistan and Iraq, by providing capacity-building and supporting judicial and security-sector reform. Japan is also actively involved in United Nations efforts for building and sustaining peace and is a proud advocate of the importance of institution-building, including in the context of transitional justice. Last month, Japan was appointed one of two vice-Chairs of the Peacebuilding Commission for 2020. Japan looks forward to working closely with Canada as Chair and Colombia as co-Vice-Chair. We would like to take that opportunity to further strengthen cooperation between the Commission and the Security Council.
