Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock
for their briefings today.

The Stockholm Agreement has given the
international community and the Yemeni people a
glimmer ofhope for a peaceful settlement ofthe conflict
in Yemen. The Security Council should therefore
consolidate those gains and work on implementing
the Agreement. All Yemeni parties must honour their
obligations under it and cooperate with the United
Nations, especially the Special Envoy and his team,
retired Major General Patrick Cammaert and United
Nations humanitarian agencies, to reach a sustainable
solution in Al-Hudaydah port and governorate and
thereby ensure the supply of humanitarian assistance
to those in need.

I would also like to commend the efforts of the
Special Envoy since he and his team took office to move
the peace process forward in Yemen, as well as Major
General Cammaert's positive steps to implement the
Stockholm Agreement. In addition, I want to express
our deep gratitude and appreciation to those working
in the humanitarian field for their efforts to improve
the humanitarian situation in Yemen. We stress the
importance of all parties working to ensure the safety
of United Nations personnel in order to enable them to
carry out their work effectively.

We will unquestionably face many obstacles on
our path to achieving a comprehensive and permanent
peace in Yemen if we continue to fail to push decisively
for the implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2216 (2015). It is
therefore crucial to ensure their implementation. The
Stockholm Agreement and resolution 2451 (2018) are
important steps on the path to peace, and we must focus
on confidence-building measures to promote them.

We must begin with gradual steps to build
and enhance trust between the Yemeni parties. An
important concrete measure that would alleviate the
suffering of many Yemeni families is the exchange
of prisoners and detainees. We encourage the Yemeni
parties to continue their efforts to achieve that goal
and to prioritize the national interests and the security
and safety of the Yemeni people above all other
considerations. All parties must work diligently to
implement the Stockholm Agreement, starting with
respecting the ceasefire, refraining from hindering the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to those in need,
removing all obstacles to the work of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee and issuing the necessary
visas and permits to United Nations personnel. All of
those steps are essential to ensuring the Agreement's
successful implementation. In that regard, I commend
the announcement by the coalition to restore legitimacy
in Yemen that it remains committed to the ceasefire in
Al-Hudaydah governorate, which entered into force on
18 December. The coalition also remains committed
to implementing the Stockholm Agreement and is
continuing to coordinate with Major General Cammaert.
We look forward to the Secretary-General's proposal
on the ways in which the United Nations should support
the Stockholm Agreement, pursuant to paragraph 6 of
resolution 2451 (2018), so that the Council can discuss
the matter and reach agreement on it.

On the humanitarian front, last year the international
community came together to alleviate the suffering
in Yemen. This year we must redouble our efforts by
funding the projected 2019 United Nations humanitarian
response plan. The countries of the coalition, notably
Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and Kuwait,
were among the largest supporters of the Yemen
humanitarian response plan in 2018, alongside the
United States and the United Kingdom. The support of
those five countries basically covered 83 per cent of the
Yemen humanitarian response plan in 2018.

We once again welcome the Secretary-General's
determination to hold an international pledging
conference in Geneva on 26 February to support the
humanitarian response plan. The State of Kuwait looks
forward to participating in that conference, in keeping
with its humanitarian policy and in support of efforts to
alleviate the suffering of the brotherly Yemeni people.

In conclusion, Yemen is passing through a complex
and decisive stage in its contemporary history. Our
brotherly people in Yemen now have an historic
opportunity to take important steps towards achieving
peace. It is in no one's interest for the conflict to
linger, especially in the light of the fact that those most
affected by the conflict are the Yemeni people. We call
once again on the Yemeni parties to implement the
Stockholm Agreement on Al-Hudaydah and its ports,
the prisoner exchange agreement and the declaration
of understanding on Taiz. We hope that the parties
will be committed to the full implementation of the
agreements in order to complement the efforts of
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, so that he can hold the upcoming round of
negotiations and reach a political solution based on
the three agreed terms of references, namely, the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative and its implementation
mechanism, the outcome of the National Dialogue
Conference and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, especially resolution 2216 (2015). That
would end the crisis in brotherly Yemen, maintain its
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, and
ensure non-interference in its internal affairs.

