Six months have passed since the Berlin Conference on Libya. In these six months, the coronavirus disease has turned the world upside down. While doctors and patients on all continents were fighting to save human lives, hospitals in Libya were being bombed. While the whole world closed its borders and went into lockdown, ships, aeroplanes and trucks with weapons and mercenaries kept arriving in Libyan cities. It is time to stop this cynical absurdity. This is why we decided to invite all Council members and all the participants in the Berlin process here today to discuss and agree on the next steps. First, foreign interference remains the main driver of the conflict in Libya. It must be brought to an end. That means no more aeroplanes, no more tanks, no more trucks or cargo ships full of weapons and no more lies. We will use the measures at our disposal, including targeted sanctions, to make sure that Libya is no longer the battleground in a foreign war. Secondly, backdoor deals by which foreign actors carve out spheres of influence must stop. We must instead unite behind the United Nations Support Mission in Libya and the peace efforts led by the United Nations to help the Libyan people find a political solution, to achieve lasting peace and to preserve Libya's territorial integrity and sovereignty. Thirdly, the current calm on Libya's battlefields is more than fragile. Our duty is now to translate it into a negotiated ceasefire within the framework of the United Nations-facilitated 5+5 Joint Military Commission talks. We call on the conflict parties to bring these negotiations to a successful conclusion without preconditions and without further delay. A first important step could be a demilitarized solution for Sirte and Al-Jufra. We call on the parties in Libya and on all those present to unite behind this idea. We encourage the Secretariat to provide us with options on how this could be implemented on the ground. Five months ago, the Council endorsed the conclusions of the Berlin Conference in resolution 2510 (2020). A week ago, we backed the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire during the pandemic in resolution 2532 (2020). Today, the time has come to put our words into action.
