Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like at the outset to thank the Deputy Secretary-
General, Louise Frechette, and the executive officers of
United Nations specialized agencies, for their briefings.
I am pleased to hear about the progress that has been
achieved with regard to United Nations humanitarian
assistance activities in Iraq. I would like to express
appreciation for the efforts made by the relief workers
under difficult circumstances to ease the suffering of
the Iraqi people and to resolve the difficulties that they
are facing.

As has been pointed out by a number of my
colleagues, after a decade of sanctions and in the wake
of the recent war, the humanitarian situation is grave.
There are deficiencies in the areas of nutrition, basic
supplies, infrastructure and sanitation, and in some
parts of the country epidemics have broken out. In all
these areas urgent assistance from the international
community is required.

The Chinese Government has been closely
following the humanitarian situation in Iraq. After the
outbreak of war, we quickly provided emergency
humanitarian supplies. I would like to reaffirm that
China is ready to work with the international
community in its efforts to alleviate the humanitarian
situation in Iraq. At present, the situation in Iraq is still
unstable. Security conditions there are worrying, and
this is impeding the humanitarian assistance efforts of
the United Nations.

China calls on the parties concerned to fulfil their
obligations as set out in the Fourth Geneva Convention
and the Hague Regulations and to facilitate the
activities of humanitarian relief workers so that they
can have full, unimpeded access to all the Iraqi people
who need assistance, while ensuring their safety,
security and freedom of movement in Iraq.

This morning the Security Council adopted
resolution 1483 (2003), which lays the groundwork for
enabling the United Nations to play a significant role in
the post-war reconstruction of Iraq. China is pleased to
note that, in accordance with the resolution, the
Secretary-General is to appoint a Special
Representative as soon as possible, to assist in the
various aspects of the post-war reconstruction of Iraq.
China believes that that will facilitate the efficient and
orderly carrying out of humanitarian assistance in Iraq.

The oil-for-food programme has long played a
significant role in easing the humanitarian situation in
Iraq. After the outbreak of war, the humanitarian
programme was adjusted to take account of any
possible humanitarian crises. In accordance with
resolution 1483 (2003), which was adopted earlier
today, the oil-for-food programme will be gradually
phased out. China hopes that the Office for the Iraq
Programme will work with the parties concerned to
minimize any negative impact on the humanitarian
situation in Iraq that might be caused by the
termination of the programme. At the same time, China
believes that we should fully implement the
programme and fully utilize its resources, especially
the resources that have been approved, so that the post-
conflict reconstruction of Iraq can proceed smoothly.

