Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): My
delegation joins in expressing satisfaction that the
Secretary-General was with us earlier this morning. We
are also grateful for the presentations that were made
by Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, and Mr. Amos Namanga
Ngongi, former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We welcome back to the Council Mr. Javier
Solana, the Secretary-General and High Representative
for the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the
European Union.

The United States welcomes the inauguration
yesterday of the Transitional Government in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and agrees that this
is an extremely important and vital step towards
unifying the country, ending five years of war and
launching the country on a democratic path. I would
like to affirm here that the United States strongly
supports the Transitional Government. We believe that
several important questions and challenges face the
new Government as it strives to re-establish security
throughout the country, to integrate its military and
police, to reform the economy and to implement the
two-year democratic transition. To succeed in those
tasks, it is critical that members of the Government
work collectively and collaboratively and that States in
the region act cooperatively to support the process of
bringing peace and stability to the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and others in the
Great Lakes region who have been so severely affected
by the conflict.

The United States would like to thank Mr. Solana
and, through him, the European Union and the
countries contributing to the multinational force,
especially the Government of France for the lead role
that it has played in that regard. The European Union's
effort to improve the security situation in Bunia is
much appreciated. Troops from the contributing
countries have been asked to carry out a dangerous and
important mission, and the United States praises their
courage, their effort and the contribution that they have
made to peace in the Congo, especially in the Ituri
region. In that connection, it will be important to lend
continuing support to the fledgling Ituri administration
so that the citizens of that province can lead their lives
in peace and tranquillity, rather than under the terror of
rival militias.

Finally, I would like to express appreciation for
the excellent work that Mr. Amos Namanga Ngongi has
done in his capacity as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General during the two years that he spent in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I would also
like to thank him personally for the many courtesies
that he extended to the Security Council mission during
its recent visit to the Central African countries during
the month of June.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
express satisfaction that Mr. Ngongi's successor, the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, is
Ambassador William Swing, a fellow American with
vast experience in the African continent. He is one of
our most accomplished diplomats. We are confident
that he will serve the Secretary-General and the United
Nations well in that new capacity.

