Mr. Vieira (Brazil): The mere existence ofweapons
of mass destruction constitutes a threat to humankind,
and therefore to international peace and security.
The possibility that those weapons might fall into the
hands of non-State actors, particularly terrorists, is a
matter of special concern, as the recent use of chemical
weapons in Syria and Iraq by Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant demonstrates.

As a member of the Security Council at the time,
Brazil actively participated in the discussions leading
to the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), and we have
remained firmly committed to its implementation.
The international community must maintain a
balance between development and security, without
obstructing the legitimate right to development and
the use of technology for peaceful purposes. It should
be highlighted, moreover, that States have the primary
responsibility for control over the tangible or intangible
goods that leave or enter their territories.

Our Constitution forbids the conduct of any
non-peaceful nuclear activity in Brazilian territory.
Brazil is a party to all of the major treaties and
conventions in the field of disarmament and
non-proliferation. We have incorporated into our
national legislation all obligations deriving from those
instruments, as well as those based on resolution 1540
(2004).

Brazilian legislation clearly safeguards the peaceful
applications of sensitive and dual-use goods and items,
especially in activities related to industry, research
and development. The Brazilian Government promotes
ongoing and structured outreach in order to inform the
private sector of applicable restrictions and controls.

Brazil has followed with interest the current
comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004),
which has just been concluded, and took part in the
open consultations convened in June by the Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). As the comprehensive review's final report
recognizes, the full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) is a long-term task that will require continuing
efforts at the national, regional and international levels.
We are pleased that both the final report and resolution
2325 (2016), which was just adopted, also attribute a
key role to international cooperation and assistance to
the full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

We acknowledge the important work carried out
by the 1540 Committee and its Group of Experts,
particularly in trying to match cooperation offers and
requests. In order to address some of the shortcomings
in that process, countries in a position to do so should
help countries in formulating their assistance requests.
Brazil has taken part in cooperation and assistance
initiatives that contribute to the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), particularly in the drafting of
national legislation on chemical and biological weapons
and related materials.

Notwithstanding the importance of resolution
1540 (2004), confining international efforts only to
the countering of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction is ineffective. Disarmament measures
are indistinguishable from any reasonable strategy to
prevent those weapons from falling in the hands of
non-State actors.

Over the past 50 years, the international community
has succeeded in adopting multilateral legally binding
instruments that ban biological and chemical weapons.
In the light of the unimaginable suffering that such
weapons are capable of inflicting, it is perplexing that
the same approach has not been applied in the case of
nuclear weapons, as clearly mandated by article VI of
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

In October, the General Assembly's First
Committee took a decisive step in filling that gap.
General Assembly First Committee draft resolution
A/C.1/7l/L.4l, adopted by more than two thirds of the
delegations present and voting in the Committee, calls
for the convening of a conference in 2017, open to all
States, international organizations and civil society, to
negotiate a legally binding instrument to prohibit nuclear
weapons, leading towards their total elimination.

Time and again the international community
has been confronted with the argument that security
concerns hamper the objective of disarmament. That
is a false dichotomy. Relying on nuclear-deterrence
doctrines and strategies undermines the medium-
and long-term security of all States. The risk that
non-State actors may wish to acquire nuclear weapons
is only one among many examples of such long-term
security challenges. As the Secretary-General himself
once said, and the Deputy Secretary-General repeated
earlier today, "there are no right hands for the wrong
weapons". It is imperative that the international
community take concrete steps to achieve long-overdue
nuclear disarmament.

