Mr. Ahamed (India): Let me begin by thanking the
Guatemalan delegation for organizing today's briefing
on the Special Court for Sierra Leone. Having started
my career as an advocate, the topic under discussion is
of special interest to me. I would also like to thank the
President of the Special Court, The Honourable Justice
Shireen Avis Fisher, for presenting the report on the
activities and achievements of the Court since the last
briefing to the Security Council on 16 July 2009 (see S/PV.6163).

The Special Court was established in 2000 by
resolution 1315 (2000) at the request of the Government
of Sierra Leone. Since its establishment, the Court
has successfully carried out its mandate set out in the
Statute of the Court. Three of the four main cases have
been completed, and the last case is in the final stages of
judgement in the Appeals Chamber.

Keeping in view its track record, we hope that the
Special Court will successfully accomplish its mandate
by 30 December 2013, when the Appeals Chamber
is expected to give its verdict in the Charles Taylor
case. We appreciate the efforts of the United Nations
and the international community to assist States, upon
their request, in restoring peace and stability, including
through the fight against impunity.

The enforcement of sentences with the assistance
of the Government of Rwanda is a good example of
international cooperation in furthering the cause of
justice. We have also taken note of the Special Court's
outreach activities, witness protection efforts and
archive development programme, including through
capacity-building initiatives that will strengthen
national judicial institutions in Sierra Leone. We also
appreciate the creation of a Peace Museum, which will
contribute to the efforts aimed at national reconciliation
in the country.
As the Special Court prepares for closure, focusing on
residual issues such as the enforcement of sentences, the
protection of witnesses and the preservation of archives of
the Special Court assume great importance. In that regard,
there is a need for continued support to the Special Court
as well as to the Residual Special Court.

India has a long history of a cordial relationship
with Sierra Leone. India played a major role in the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone until 2001.
Since then, India has continued to partner with the
Government of Sierra Leone in its reconstruction
efforts. India has extended loans and credit lines
worth $94.45 million over the past few years to enable
Sierra Leone to procure agricultural equipment and to
modernize and expand its national telecommunications
network, SierraTel. Our partnership has included the
restoration and rehabilitation of six potable water and
solar street lighting projects. As part of our bilateral
cooperation programme, India is providing 45 training
slots to Sierra Leone this year. India has also offered to
set up an India-Africa information and communication
technology centre in Sierra Leone.

Before I conclude, I would like to convey our
best wishes to the Government and people of Sierra
Leone as they prepare for national elections next
month. The successful conduct of the elections will
be a major milestone in post-conflict peacebuilding
in Sierra Leone, which should help in the process of
national reconciliation and the further consolidation
of democracy in the country. India remains committed
to continuing its partnership with the Government of
Sierra Leone, particularly in capacity-building and
human resources development.

