Mr. Ybafiez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to begin by thanking Angola and in particular you,
Foreign Minister Chikoti, for the organizing today's
open debate, which is of the utmost importance and
topicality. I also extend my thanks to the Secretary-
General, the Commissioner for Peace and Security of
the African Union, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General and the representative of the World Bank for
their valuable contributions.

A well-known African proverb affirms that when
two elephants fight the grass gets hurt. The Great
Lakes region continues to experience some of the worst
conflicts currently ravaging the African continent.
The region has not completed its search for the path of
peace, stability and prosperity, and it is the population
that is suffering the consequences.

In recent decades, the structural transformation of
the Great Lakes has been spectacular. In the 1990s, we
witnessed a brutal genocide in Rwanda, followed by a
cruel war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
2013, we witnessed the signing of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region. The distance
between those two events is enormous.

But this transformation is not enough. Or put another
way, it has not been completed. The region continues
to fail to turn the page on conflict. The constant
threat of conflict forces us to look further - to try to
understand the deeper forces that persist in a region
still suffering from instability and violence despite the
still-remarkable progress in stabilization and growth in
countries such as Rwanda and various regions of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In that context, I
want to discuss three challenges that we consider to be
priorities, namely, democratic governance, inclusive
development and regional cooperation.

The first factor is democratic governance. Every
peaceful, stable and prosperous society is built upon
a social contract that requires leaders to fulfil their
responsibilities and provide services to everyone in
the civilian population. The democratic mandate is the
best instrument we know to fulfil these objectives and
is the expression of a fundamental right, namely, the
right to political participation, which makes citizens
the architects of their own destiny. The absence of
governance leads to a vacuum of responsibility and the
inability to provide adequate services to the population.
The lack of democracy implies the denial of the rights
of individuals.

In the Great Lakes there is a serious problem of
lack of democratic governance. Some countries have
made progress in the provision of services to its
population, but in several of them elections do not end
up becoming an instrument of democratic development
and social inclusion. Political participation is an
essential instrument for empowering citizens. Today
it is essential to ensure that this includes women, who
have been traditionally excluded in many societies and
who are possibly the greatest force for change in the
world. Inclusion and respect for legal procedures are
conditions to ensure that electoral processes contribute
to peace, stability and prosperity.

Constitutions and the legal order as a whole are
frameworks for coexistence that no one can overturn,
because all citizens are equal before the law. And the
leaders must lead by example. It is essential to respect
the provisions and limitations of presidential mandates,
since the rotation in power is one of the best safeguards
of peace and stability. The most worrisome case at
the moment is that of Burundi, which I would like to
address in greater detail.

Over a year ago, Burundi was poised to be honoured
as an example of success in the Great Lakes. It seemed
to be a country able to turn the page on violence and
instability and begin writing a history of development
and prosperity. In April 2015, that illusion began
to unravel. Since then, the number of dead has not
stopped growing. And there are approximately 240,000
Burundian refugees who have been forced to leave
the country. This situation can and must end without
any further delay. Spain respects the role of African
countries as primarily responsible and interested in the
prosperity and stability of their continent and believes
that, as emphasized by the Presidents of Africa at the
African Union Summit in January, it is urgent to have an
inclusive and unconditional political dialogue that fully
respects the Arusha Agreement and the Constitution of
Burundi and enables the parties to reach a broad and
generous agreement on the future they want for the
Burundian people.

The second fundamental challenge is to achieve
inclusive economic and social development that
benefits all citizens of the countries of the region. This
challenge is also a non-negotiable obligation, for we
cannot go on justifying the tens of millions of people
living in poverty, the millions of suffering young people
whose outlook on the future is marked by hopelessness
and the lack of opportunity, and the millions of women
suffering from attacks on their lives and integrity and
living excluded from economic and social participation
in a region that is extraordinarily rich.

Let us take the case of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The country has enormous resources of
all kinds, valuable deposits of minerals, fertile soil and
plentiful water resources - in a world where water and
energy are two of the most precious assets. With the
support of the international community, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo can and should move forward
in combating the illegal exploitation of its resources,
especially in the eastern part of the country. We
must move from armed groups to the generating of
tax revenues and from violence and corruption to the
construction of schools and hospitals and the creation
of decentjobs for young people.

The question now is how to unlock the energies
that still prevent the achievement of the future that
the people deserve. In part, this question has been
answered - through democratic governance. It is
crucial for the institutional strength of the State to reach
those areas that today remain outside the control of the
law. In those places where the State is not present, where
the law is not respected, violations of human rights and
illegal exploitation of natural resources go hand in hand.
The State must return to those regions or newly appear
in areas where it could not be found previously. In other
words, it is necessary that there be a fair and inclusive
electoral process and that constitutional parameters be
adjusted. We look forward to the country's upcoming
elections. They will be the best way to measure the
maturity of the people and institutions of Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We have confidence in them.

The third major challenge for the Great Lakes
region is developing effective regional cooperation that
is able to ensure that the countries of the region come
together to achieve a better future and that they share
the benefits of prosperity. The Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region is the key reference point
for all efforts, and its provisions must be fully respected
by all its signatories. In particular, it is crucial that no
country tolerate or assist any armed group in any way.
I would to mention in that regard the recent agreement
on the resumption of military cooperation between the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and the (Forces armees de la Republique democratique du Congo, which is an excellent development and
which, we trust, will soon begin to bear fruit. We
must recognize the crucial role played by MONUSCO
in helping Congolese society achieve the goals I
mentioned earlier. With respect to the repatriation of
the former combatants of the Mouvement du 23 mars,
we agree with the Secretary-General's encouragement
that the countries of the region decisively move forward
pursuant to the Nairobi Declarations.

Finally, I would like to express my concern about
reports of the recruitment, training and infiltration of
a group of Burundian rebels in neighbouring countries
for the purposes of carrying out attacks against
Burundi. As I said earlier, the situation in Burundi is
extremely serious, and the work of the countries of
the region is essential to finding a peaceful solution to
the crisis. In the past, episodes of mass violence in the
Great Lakes region have been closely interconnected,
and there is no reason to think that the dynamics have
changed today. For humanitarian reasons, but also for
self-interest, all countries in the region must make
every possible effort to bring an end to this conflict,
which casts a dark shadow over the present and the
future of the region. The voice of the African Union
and its capacity to maintain peace on the continent are
extremely important in that respect and must be heard
clearly and firmly.

I began my statement by citing an African proverb,
and wish to conclude it by quoting another: "In order
to cross a bridge you must first reach it." After a few
decades of uncertainty, the Great Lakes region has now
reached its bridge and has all the capacities it needs to
cross it, leaving a past ofviolence and instability behind
it once and for all. The international community's
could be of great assistance, but in the final analysis
the countries of the region are masters of their own
destinies. The challenge is so huge that there is no room
for doubt or hesitation, and requires all their energy and
commitment. The present moment is highly complex,
but the future of peace and stability that we seek for the
region is within our reach. Let us move forward.

