Mr. Cardi (Italy): Let me at the outset say that
we very much look forward to cooperating with
you, Sir, and your delegation, of course, during your
presidency this month. We already had the occasion
to do so in Colombia, which was a very, very
successful undertaking.

I would like to thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, for her briefing to the Security Council.

As Vice-President ofthe Assembly of States Parties
to the Rome Statute of the ICC, I am particularly
conscious of her delicate task. Under her guidance, the
Office of the Prosecutor has made progress in many
different areas, and I would like to extend to her our
appreciation and our full support.

The situation in Libya was unanimously referred
to the Court by the Council through resolution 1970
(2011). We believe that the activities of the ICC can
bring positive developments, particularly if the Council
remains united and committed to supporting Libya,
its institutions and its people and helps to ensure that
justice is done in a fair and impartial manner.

We therefore appreciate and join in the
encouragement to the international community to
continue assisting the Libyan authorities to promote
justice and accountability. It is essential that justice be
part of the equation for stability and the consolidation
of institutions in the country. In this regard, the
cooperation extended by many countries to the Court,
including in the region, is a very positive sign.

However, we note with concern the financial
constraints mentioned by the Prosecutor and stand
ready to encourage voluntary contributions and any
appropriate discussions to consider the requirements
for justice to be rendered in this context.

I am grateful for the updated information provided
by the Prosecutor in her report and briefing. On the
case concerning Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, we note
with concern that the request for transfer to the Court
is still pending, and we encourage compliance with the
Court's request.

On the case regarding Al-Senussi, we note that
appeal proceedings are still ongoing at the domestic
level and that the Court is continuing to closely monitor
the case.

As far as the recently disclosed case that
Ms. Bensouda has mentioned is concerned, we take
note of the information contained in the report and of
the request for the arrest and surrender of the fugitive.
Italy supports the request for information made by the
Prosecutor to all States.

We also would like to thank Ms. Bensouda for the
information about the investigation into allegations
of torture in Al-Hadba prison. We note that there has
been some progress since the last report, in November
2016, and we encourage the Office to continue to
monitor domestic proceedings to ensure that existing
international obligations regarding respect for the
human rights of detainees, including the relevant
Security Council resolutions, are upheld.

I would like also to touch briefly on two other
specific aspects mentioned in the report. First, it is
important that dialogue between the Court and national
authorities continue, as well as their cooperation.
Secondly, with respect to human trafficking,
my delegation has consistently highlighted the
comprehensive approach that Italy is taking address
this scourge by tackling its root causes, dismantling the
business model of traffickers and saving lives at sea.
The activities of the networks of traffickers identified
by the Prosecutor in her report require urgent attention.
Not only must trafficking be stopped, but traffickers
must also be brought to justice and punished. The
slavers of the twenty-first century, as then Foreign
Minister Gentiloni put it in November 2015, must be
brought to justice, including at the international level
where appropriate. We are supportive of all efforts in
that vein and stand ready to cooperate with the Court.

We deplore the fact that the instability in Libya
has been hampering Court efforts to carry out its
investigations in the field. However, we are confident
that improvement can create conditions conducive to
allowing the Prosecutor to visit Libyan territory. In that
respect, let me stress once again the main message of
the Italian Minister for Foreign Minister, Mr. Alfano,
during his visit to Tripoli two days ago: there is a need
for a sustainable political solution to the crisis in Libya,
one based on the Libyan Political Agreement. That is the
sole framework in which solutions to the most pressing
issues can be found, and the Presidency Council and
the Government of National Accord, headed by Prime
Minister Serraj, are the sole legitimate executive
authorities of Libya, in line with resolution 2259 (2015).

In conclusion, I would add that the Council could
adopt a more structured approach in dealing with
international criminal justice issues, and with the
ICC in particular. In that regard, we favour a broader
discussion on the role that international criminal justice
can play in the activities of the Council - for instance,
by reinforcing the role of the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals. The Council needs to engage
in a strategic reflection on the role ofjustice, including
the International Criminal Court, in the prevention,
restoration and maintenance of international peace.

