Mr. Moragas sanchez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by thanking the United Kingdom
for convening this open debate, which is especially
important for Spain.

Over the past several years, we have devoted
time, effort and resources to promoting preventive
diplomacy and the peaceful settlement of disputes,
including mediation. The Charter of the United Nations
obligates States Members to settle their international
disputes by peaceful means so as to avoidjeopardizing
international peace and security and justice. Among
the various methods for the resolution of disputes,
mediation is perhaps the oldest and undoubtedly one
of the most effective with regard to resolving conflicts.
The United Nations has carried out important work
in that area, and it would be unfair to forget the many
crises that it has successfully defused quietly through
complex and often long-term efforts. Nevertheless,
conflicts continue. Moreover, the situation today
differs substantially from the one in 1945 when the San
Francisco Charter was drafted.

We are faced with inter-State conflicts of a
territorial nature and internal armed conflicts, as
well as those concerning political transitions and
ethnic-territorial and religious issues. There is also an
increasing number of conflicts and risk factors, known
as the new threats, which are regional in dimension,
such as terrorism and organized crime, including the
illicit trafficking in human beings, drugs and weapons,
environmental crimes and breaches in cybersecurity.
Lastly, we face conflicts resulting from the struggle for
natural resources, in general involving water and fossil
fuels. That reality reflects the need to adapt mediation
and other dispute resolution mechanisms to the
changing nature of conflicts and revise the guidelines
developed by the United Nations for mediators, States
and other actors that support mediation work in order
for the process to be viable and its outcome lasting.
The main prerequisite for mediation to be successful
is the consent of all parties to a conflict, without which
good-faith negotiations or commitment to the process
is impossible. It is also essential that the process be
inclusive, thereby lending heightened legitimacy to any
agreement and decreasing the possibility of it being
undermined by excluded parties.

For his or her part, the mediator must also meet
a series of requirements. The work of the mediator
must be agreed by the parties in conflict, impartial
and carried out in respect of national sovereignty and
with a comprehensive knowledge of the conflict, while
enjoying the material and human resources allowing
him or her to travel, meet with the parties in conflict,
organize meetings, write reports and conduct other
activities the process may require. At the same time,
however, it is also essential that mediators know that
mediation is not always necessarily the best response
to a given conflict. They must be able to determine
whether the time is right to mediate it, whether the
type of conflict at hand actually requires mediation or
whether the mechanism could ultimately cause more
harm than good.

Practically since its founding, the United Nations
has participated in mediation processes either through
the direct involvement of the Secretary-General
or through his Special Representatives, gradually
establishing the structures needed to develop that
function. However, considerable room for improvement
remains in this area, which does not necessarily require
developing new structures or adopting new resolutions,
but rather involves certain aspects that can increase
the effectiveness of mediation processes. It is also
imperative that the United Nations provide a joint,
rather than a fragmented, response and that all efforts
be aligned to achieve a resolution to the conflict.

It is also important that the United Nations carry
out joint mediation activities with other regional or
subregional organizations. Another key element is the
creation of national and local mechanisms to redress
grievances and reduce tensions through mediation,
facilitation and dialogue. That means devoting
resources and efforts to the training of mediators at the
regional and local levels, who can play an important
role in preventing conflicts in their initial stages.

It is also essential to continue to encourage the
participation of women in mediation processes, not
because they have are more skilled at those tasks but
because although conflicts affect the whole community,
they are harder on women and girls, who have higher
dropout rates and are victims of gender-based violence.
For that reason, their contributions, needs and solutions
are particularly important.

Religious leaders may also have a critical role to
play in mediation for conflict prevention and resolution
in contexts. Spain supports the creation of platforms
of religious leaders for peace, especially in the most
conflict areas where the need is most urgent, and the
establishment of networks of local religious leaders,
for which our country has already organized several
meetings since 2015.

Spain places a particular emphasis on young people
and on the need to train them in mediation, incorporate
them into negotiation processes and empower them to
act as agents to resolve disputes by peaceful and never
violent means, thereby also preventing them from
falling into radicalism.
The participation of Spain in the meetings on
mediation held at the United Nations, the sponsorship
of the various General Assembly resolutions, the
significant contributions made to the Mediation
Support Unit and the Department of Political Affairs
in general, the contributions of Spain to the creation
of the guidelines for effective mediation, its status as a
founding partner and its participation in the activities
of the Group of Friends of Mediation and, above all,
the implementation of the Spanish-Moroccan Initiative
on Mediation in the Mediterranean Region, which has
enabled, among other things, the training of dozens of
women mediators in the region, are tangible proof that
mediation is one of our foreign policy priorities.

Finally, I thank the Secretary-General for his
efforts to promote preventive diplomacy and mediation.
We agree with him that prevention is not merely a
priority but the priority, and that mediation is its
preferred vehicle.

