Mr. Munir (Pakistan): Let me also begin by
thanking you, Sir, for convening this important open
debate. We also thank the Secretary-General, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the
President of Commission of the Economic Community
of West African States for their insightful briefings.

In 1945, as the world emerged from the most
destructive war in human history, it became apparent
that, if succeeding generations were indeed to be saved
from the scourge of war, the impulse of warmongering
had to be subdued by the ideal of peacemaking. It is
therefore no coincidence that the Charter of the United
Nations places such a high premium on the pursuit of
friendly relations among States, based on the principles
of sovereign equality, non-interference and the peaceful
settlement of disputes.

The repository of measures outlined in Chapter VI
of the Charter provides a framework of action to place
the pacific settlement of disputes at the centre of the
global peace and security architecture. Chapter VIII
then expands on that by synergizing the efforts of the
United Nations and regional organizations. The reasons
for that are obvious: more often than not, countries of
a particular region are better equipped to understand
the challenges faced by that region and respond to
them. The existing cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) serves as a point
of inflection. We welcome the joint declaration on
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union today, which is being signed as we speak.

The active engagement of the international
community and the consent of the host Government
are essential throughout the peace continuum - from
containing conflict to building peaceful, sustainable
and inclusive societies. What better celebration of that
is there than the success of Cote d'Ivoire transforming
itself into a peaceful, vibrant and thriving State.
Pakistan takes pride in contributing to that endeavour
through its peacekeepers serving with professionalism,
commitment and dedication in the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire. We also pay tribute to the
12 Pakistani peacekeepers who laid down their lives for
that cause.

As theatres of conflict through the world increase
in complexity, peacekeeping remains the best tool at
the disposal of the United Nations and a testament to its
effectiveness. The success ofpeacekeeping is due to the
fact that, with national ownership, it creates space in
conflict zones for locally generated political solutions.
Let me make six specific points in that regard.

First, we support the provision of predictable,
sustainable and flexible funding for AU-led peace
operations, as agreed in the Declaration of Shared
Commitments under the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, especially those authorized by the Security
Council itself.

Secondly, sequenced, prioritized and adequately
resourced Security Council mandates are a prerequisite
for success.

Thirdly, the Secretariat needs to play its part by
highlighting the resource gaps, which the Security
Council must then resolve.
Fourthly, in the crafting of mandates, the safety and
security ofpeacekeepers should be kept in mind. Troop-
contributing countries can provide valuable input, as
they have experience in mandate implementation in the
field.

Fifthly, with regard to the performance of
peacekeepers, reviews must take a holistic view,
starting with mandate formulation, transparency in
force generation and the integration of the various
components of the mission, and not analyse performance
merely using the unifocal lens of the contributions on
the part of troop- and police-contributing countries.

Lastly, we believe that any reform should steer
clear of changing the nature of peacekeeping or diluting
its basic principles. We must not fudge the distinction
between peacekeeping and peace enforcement. That
would run the risk of causing the United Nations
to become a party to the conflict and permanently
damaging not only multilateralism, but also the very
basis on which the success of peacekeeping is built,
namely, neutrality and impartiality.

