Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I would like to
join my colleagues in thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Lamberto Zannier, for his
comprehensive briefing on the situation in Kosovo and
the activities of UNMIK. I also want to thank His
Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremie, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, for his statement
outlining his country's perspective on the situation in
Kosovo. We have also carefully listened to the
statement of Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.

The Secretary-General's report on UNMIK for
the quarter ending 15 April (S/2011/281) describes in
detail the ground situation in Kosovo. We note with
satisfaction that UNMIK continues with its endeavour
to provide transitional administration to Kosovo, as
mandated by resolution 1244 (1999), with the active
cooperation and support of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Kosovo Force
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo.

We welcome the commencement of a dialogue
process between Belgrade and Pristina, facilitated by
the European Union in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 64/298 of 9 September 2010. We
all know that from small beginnings come great things.
India has always believed that the Kosovo issue should
be resolved peacefully through consultation and
dialogue between the concerned parties. We are happy
that both sides have agreed to start discussing the
topics that most impact the daily lives of the affected
population. We hope that both sides will pursue
serious dialogue until those immediate issues are
resolved, and that they will eventually begin to
deliberate on more complex political issues. We urge
all parties to take no unilateral action that could
undermine that reconciliation process. We appreciate
UNMIK's contribution to facilitating this dialogue
process, and feel that its continued engagement would
be helpful.

We have also noted with satisfaction that UNMIK
has facilitated cooperation between Belgrade and
Pristina on the issue of missing persons through the
Working Group on Missing Persons, chaired by the
International Committee of the Red Cross.

While the overall security situation in Kosovo,
especially in the northern part, has remained relatively
calm, it is a matter of concern that underlying tension
continues. Many untoward incidents of criminal
assault, armed robbery, murder, shooting, damage of
religious places and so on continue to be reported. We
would appeal to the local authorities, especially the
Kosovo Police, to be more vigilant and watchful.

The continued voluntary return of refugees
recorded by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees is heartening. We are
concerned by reports of opposition by some receiving
communities. It is noted that a population and housing
census took place during the period covered by the
report, except in northern Kosovo, where it will be
conducted at a later date. It is hoped that the census
will appropriately reflect the plight of displaced
persons and not legalize any ethnic cleansing.

We have also noted the Secretary-General's view
that the Kosovo authorities remain fundamentally
sceptical about UNMIK facilitation of their
engagement in international and regional initiatives.
We hope that they will not seek to undermine
UNMIK's role, mandated by the Security Council, and
will instead fully cooperate with UNMIK and other
United Nations and European Union institutions.

We agree with the Secretary-General's View that
there is a need for thorough, impartial and independent
investigation into the allegations contained in the
report of Council of Europe Special Rapporteur Dick
Marty. All stakeholders should agree on the creation of
a mechanism to carry out the follow-up investigation,
which should be fully supported by national and
international entities present in Kosovo.

In conclusion, let me reiterate India's consistent
position that all issues concerning Kosovo should be
resolved peacefully through consultation and dialogue
between the concerned parties. Only thus can the
aspirations of all the people be met on an enduring
basis, and lasting peace and stability be established in
the region. We applaud the role played by UNMIK in
upholding the goals of the United Nations.

