Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the convening of this meeting and Bolivia's
initiative to raise the critical issue of natural resources
and their link to the root causes of conflict, as well
as the important briefing given by Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres.

As a country that is rich in natural resources, Peru
appreciates the fact that they play a crucial role in its
growth and development. However, we are also aware
that the exploitation of these resources and access to
their respective markets have historically been decisive
factors in the outbreak of conflicts in various parts of
the world. The potential of these resources to either
generate prosperity or have an undesirable impact leads
us to reiterate the importance of being able to rely on
inclusive and accountable institutions, as well as the rule
of law, in order to prevent conflicts by addressing their
root causes and promoting sustainable development in
line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
This also requires a rules-based order that guarantees
the predictability of international trade and the stability
of financial markets in order to avoid the boom-and-
bust cycles to which countries that export primary
materials are particularly vulnerable and that often
degenerate into conflict situations.

It is clear that such matters go beyond the Council's
remit. Nevertheless, we believe it important for this
organ to acknowledge and demonstrate its relevance in
the maintenance of international peace and security so
that these issues can be addressed from a preventive,
multidimensional approach that focuses on the root
causes, as predicated by the concept ofsustainable peace.

For example, in assessing the impacts that mining
industries may generate, it is important to maintain an
inclusive dialogue among the State, the private sector
and the communities potentially affected by such
projects. We also consider it important that mining
industries contribute to local development by creating
and strengthening capacities, transferring technology,
offering decent employment opportunities for the
population living in the areas in which they operate,
increasing the local content of the goods and services
produced, and ensuring economic inclusion while
respecting traditional ways of life.

All these aspects, which are linked to the sustainable
management of natural resources, are critical to
effectively combating poverty and human vulnerability,
and to preventing perceptions of corruption and
injustice that are then exploited by interested actors
to radicalize disgruntled sectors of the population.
In many contemporary conflicts, we have seen how
such perceptions have facilitated the development of
militias, which exercise illegal control over natural
resources. This often leads to situations of anarchy in
which serious violations of human rights and major
deterioration of the environment are usually observed.

We must especially bear in mind that such
dynamics are facilitated and even encouraged by the
links that illegal extractors of natural resources often
establish with criminal organizations in order to access
international markets, launder illicitly acquired wealth
and obtain weapons. In the light of such Vicious circles,
we believe that the sanctions committees of the Council
should pay special attention to illicit trafficking
networks dealing in natural resources emanating from
countries affected by conflict and the corresponding
illegal flows. This is in line with the presidential
statement S/PRST/2007/22 of June 2007.

We also believe that the missions deployed under
Security Council mandates to countries rich in natural
resources can help the respective national authorities
to prevent and combat the illegal exploitation of
their resources. In the same vein, we believe that in
countries in transition to post-conflict situations, the
Peacebuilding Commission and United Nations country
teams should be able to support national authorities in
strengthening the institutions required to manage their
resources sustainably. These measures are relevant
in countries such as the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which was recently visited by the Council and
is especially rich in natural resources that, far from
promoting development, have led since colonial times
to cycles of violence and conflict that must come to
an end.

