Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): Ithank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this timely open debate on such a
significant topic for the Security Council and beyond.

Today's discussion cannot be addressed merely in
a conceptual manner. International law continues to be
violated in several conflicts around the world, resulting
in immense human suffering. Unfortunately, however,
current Council dynamics do not allow for a meaningful
discussion on upholding international law. That is most
visible on critical issues such as Palestine and Syria. As
a result, the Council simply cannot adequately deliver
on its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Pursuant to Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations, the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security has been entrusted
to the Security Council by the States Members of
the United Nations "in order to ensure prompt and
effective action". The Council's failure to carry out that
responsibility on behalf of the whole membership is
therefore a serious blow to international law. Addressing
crises only when situations deteriorate is not how the
Council should uphold international law. Resorting to
the use of the veto as a tool to advance national interests
is not how the Council sets the record right in the face
of those who continuously violate their obligations.

Those examples only undermine the credibility of
the Council and the rules-based international order that
we have established together. Effectively upholding
international law requires that there be no impunity for
its violations. Unless we consistently call to account
those who violate their obligations, the credibility of
the United Nations will continue to be tarnished. The
absence of an accountability mechanism for inaction by
the Council also emboldens those who do not refrain
from breaching international law. That is in stark
contradiction with the letter and the spirit of the Charter.

We welcome initiatives aimed at limiting negative
votes by both permanent and elected members in
cases of mass atrocities. The initiatives by France
and Mexico, as well as Liechtenstein on behalf of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group,
are steps in the right direction.

It is also worth noting that the Council's failure
to act has activated the General Assembly on several
instances. The lack of action by the Council with
respect to Syria led the General Assembly to create the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
for Syria. That is another illustration of Member States'
strong commitment to accountability for the crimes
committed in Syria. Such action can be replicated on
issues where much-needed Council action is lacking.

The Council also has a special role to play in the
promotion of international law. Some of its actions,
such as resolutions adopted under Chapter VII of the
Charter or the establishment of ad hoc tribunals and
sanctions, have implications for international law. The
Council has taken decisive steps in that regard in the
past. Turkey has been a supporter of those mechanisms,
which contributed to the fight against impunity as
well as to the restoration of peace and stability. More
recently, resolution 2379 (2017), on the creation of
an Investigative Team to hold Da'esh accountable
for its actions in Iraq, is a welcome development.
Turkeywas a sponsor of the resolution and hopes to see
it fully implemented.

In the context of maintaining international peace and
security, the Charter of the United Nations underlines
the sovereign equality of States, the prohibition of the
use of force, the legitimate and inherent right to self-
defence, enshrined in Article 51, and the peaceful
settlement of disputes. In that regard, the Charter
prescribes that the Security Council shall call on the
parties to settle their disputes by peaceful means, such
as negotiation, mediation and others. We are convinced
that we should do more to prevent conflicts. For that, we
have to intervene at the early stages. Resorting to wider
and more effective use of mediation can prove helpful.
The Secretary-General has been very vocal about the
importance of the role of prevention and mediation
since he took office, and we fully support his vision.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
safeguarding international law in conformity with the
principle of pacta sunt servanda has been a key foreign
policy priority for Turkey. We have also contributed
to its development through our participation in the
International Law Commission, which will mark its
seventieth anniversary next week. Today's debate
illustrates the keen interest of the wider membership
in this matter. The Council should assume its
responsibilities accordingly. Turkey remains ready to
further engage in this discussion.

I would now like to respond to the statement made
by the speaker who preceded me. The name of my
country was mentioned several times in the context
of Security Council resolutions and international
law. First, I would like to underline that the country
in question violated the agreement that led to its
foundation by beginning ethnic cleansing on the island
between 1963 and 1974 with the aim of eliminating the
Turkish community. It was as a result of the ethnic-
cleansing campaign pursued by that country that
Turkey exercised its right to intervene under the Treaty
of Guarantee between Turkey, Greece and the United
Kingdom, and established the current status quo. Since
then, talks have been held on the settlement of the
ongoing Cyprus issue. We will continue to defend the
rights of Turkish Cypriots in that respect.

