Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
is grateful for the President's efforts in convening
today's meeting, and for the briefings and presence of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Special Envoy Prodi
and Mr. Jim Yong Kim, President of the World Bank.
We also listened with great interest to the statements
made by the representatives of the African Union and
the European Union.

At present, the situation generally in Africa is
characterized by stability, development and peace.
In most countries, the political situation remains
stable, and tensions have been mitigated in certain
flashpoint areas. The African Union and other regional
organizations and African countries are committed to
maintaining peace and stability, promoting the African
collective security mechanism and seeking African
solutions to African problems.

The African economy has maintained rapid
growth. The integration process is pressing ahead.
The international influence of the African continent
has been rising steadily. The international community
is paying more attention to Africa. The launch of
the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel
and the presidential statement adopted moments ago
(S/PRST/2013/20) fully demonstrate the priority that
has been given by the international community to peace
and security in Africa, including the Sahel region.

The security and humanitarian situation in the
Sahel has witnessed some improvement recently.
However, the region remains fragile, for which China
expresses its concern. We appreciate the recent joint
visit to the Sahel region by Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, Ms. Dlamini-Zuma, Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, President Jim Yong Kim
of the World Bank, and President Kaberuka of the
African Development Bank. We welcome and applaud
the positive results ofthe joint visit. We also appreciate
the hard work of Special Envoy Prodi in implementing
the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel. We
welcome the establishment of the coordination platform
for the strategy and of the secretariat for technical
coordination. We hope that that relevant mechanism
will play a positive role in improving the situation in
the Sahel.

The problems in the Sahel are interrelated and
mutually reinforcing. Swift and comprehensive
improvement of the situation in the region requires
integrated policies. China suggests that the international
community work concertedly in the following three
areas.

First of all, the international community must
continue to support the efforts of the countries of the
region in maintaining peace and stability. Significant
progress has been achieved in the situation in Mali,
as demonstrated by the successful legislative election,
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali is making steady headway
in deployment. However, we should be mindful that the
Sahel is still facing various threats, including the spread
of terrorism and extremism, weapons proliferation and
transnational organized crime. Mali and other countries
of the region are still facing a long and winding road
in their quest for long-term stability. The international
community should therefore give greater attention to
the situation in the region and actively assist countries
ofthe region to consolidate peace and maintain stability.

Secondly, the international community must
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
countries of the region and listen carefully to their
specific proposals and ideas concerning development
and counter-terrorism. In the process of implementing
specific projects, the international community must
fully respect the opinions of the host countries so
that the assistance can be more effective. The efforts
to counter and combat terrorism and organized
crime in the region involve many countries and are
transboundary in nature. Countries of the region must
strengthen dialogue, reinforce mutual trust and actively
cooperate with one another to address those challenges.
The international community and, in particular, the
United Nations, can play a constructive role in that
regard.

Thirdly, the root cause of the problems in the Sahel
is poverty and underdevelopment. The international
community must give priority to helping countries of
the region achieve development by increasing assistance
and investment in the Sahel so as to help those countries
build capacity and infrastructure, expand their capacity
for independent development, and ensure food security
and the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals. China welcomes the pledges of the World
Bank and the African Development Bank to provide
$1.5 billion and $4 billion, respectively, to the Sahel
region. We hope that the relevant pledges will be paid in
full as soon as possible so as to enable an early launch
of relevant projects and benefit the local population.

The Chinese Government attaches great
importance to China-Africa relations. China has
provided long-standing support to African countries
in exploring viable development paths based on their
national realities as well as assistance to the best
of its ability to those countries as they pursue unity,
strength, independent development and finding their
own solutions to regional issues, including the situation
in the Sahel.
Last week, the first Chinese contingent,
consisting of 135 peacekeepers, arrived in Mali and
reported for duty. In the future, China stands ready
to further exchange and enhance its cooperation with
international and regional organizations, including the
United Nations, so as to make a greater contribution
to achieving an early and comprehensive settlement of
problems that the Sahel is facing and to promoting the
peace, development and stability of Africa.

In closing, I would like to thank the Permanent
Mission of Morocco for its efforts in drafing the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/20). China fully
supports the text of the statement.

