Mr. Machado (Brazil): The case for protecting
media professionals in armed conflict is both
humanitarian and political. As civilians, they are
protected under the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and
its Additional Protocols. In addition, resolution 1738
(2006) urges parties to armed conflicts to do their utmost
to prevent violations of international humanitarian law
against journalists, media professionals and associated
personnel.

The political dimension of the issue derives from
the fact that unbiased media reports dispatched from
conflict zones often serve a fundamental public
interest. In many cases, reliable and independent media
coverage brings to the attention of the international
community, including the Council, the many horrors of
armed conflict, and prompts us to show the political
will needed to stop violence and restore peace.

In that regard, protecting journalists in armed
conflict is equal to protecting and promoting their
fundamental role in helping to build sustainable peace.

Brazil therefore stresses our collective
responsibility to protect media professionals in armed
conflict and firmly repudiates the killing, harassment,
intimidation and kidnapping ofjournalists, as well as
any other violence against them in such situations.

States must promote the right to freedom of
expression, not only during armed conflicts but also
in their aftermath. That right is an important tool to
empower the people to participate fully in the political
life of post-conflict countries. Its respect is key to
peacebuilding and national reconciliation.

The Brazilian Government has been actively
engaged in the protection of media professionals in
general, as shown in our participation in the ongoing
pertinent discussions in the Human Rights Council, as
a member of the core group on the safety of journalists
and on the promotion, protection and enjoyment of
human rights on the Internet, and in UNESCO.

Protecting journalists in armed conflict also
requires fully respecting their right to privacy in
their professional communications, including over the
telephone and the Internet. Arbitrary surveillance of
private exchanges and conversations by journalists may
easily put them at greater risk, since they themselves
must safeguard the privacy, security and anonymity of
their sources. In some cases, for those who report on
armed conflict from the field, inadvertently exposing
their sources may mean the difference between life and
death or may put at risk their very ability to continue
to do their work. In addition, the illegal surveillance of
journalists' communications by parties and non-parties
to conflicts runs counter to declared commitments to
democracy and the rule of law.

We therefore highlight the importance of the
promotion, protection and enjoyment of the right
to privacy on all electronic media. Democratic and
transparent multilateral governance of the Internet
is essential for the full and appropriate utilization of
that powerful tool without fears of undue and illegal
interference by both private entities and public
institutions. In that context, secret surveillance
programmes are a source of grave concern, as they
may violate the human rights of individuals. As stated
by United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Ms. Navanethem Pillay, the "alleged large-scale
violations of the right of privacy by surveillance
programmes raise a number of important international
human rights issues that need to be addressed".

Secret surveillance programmes are also a violation
of the sovereignty of States. In that regard, the members
of the Common Market of the South have decided to
take a number of measures, including at the United
Nations, with a View to raising the issue and seeking the
adoption of multilateral rules for Internet governance
that ensure the protection of communication, the
privacy of individuals and respect for State sovereignty.

As I indicated earlier, the protection ofjournalists
in armed conflict is both a humanitarian and a
political task. Such a task is permanent and, in some
quarters, urgent. Brazil fully supports all efforts by the
Council, consistent with its Charter responsibilities, to
successfully address that challenge.

