Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Director
Rajasingham for their briefings today.

After eight years of the Syrian conflict, we would
like to remind members of the Council that this war
started when the Al-Assad regime delivered the body
of 13-year-old Hamza Al-Khateeb to his family - shot,
burned and mutilated - after he had taken part in a
peaceful protest in southern Syria. Unfortunately,
Hamza's story foreshadowed the next eight years of
suffering for the Syrians. The world will never forget
the images of three-year-old Aylan Kurdi's corpse
drifting to the shore in the Mediterranean; five-year-old
Omran Daqneesh covered in dust and blood in Aleppo;
and countless children and others gassed in Khan
Shaykhun and Douma, and those starved in besieged
eastern Ghouta.

The source of that suffering and the ultimate
cause of the conflict is and has been the Al-Assad
regime's violent crackdown on its own people. The
Al-Assad regime and its allies must take concrete
steps to de-escalate military operations and end forced
disappearances, release innocent civilians held in
detention and permit rapid, safe and unhindered access
for humanitarian agencies across Syria. Meanwhile, a
future credible, legitimate and pluralistic constitutional
committee should have the opportunity to invigorate a
political transition to leadership that will protect, rather
than harm, Syria's citizens.

As the Security Council, we should demand that the
regime respect international humanitarian principles
and human rights standards. We encourage Special
Envoy Pedersen to finalize a political settlement by
and through the Syrian people, and we must see the full
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015), including
a political settlement, a nationwide ceasefire and
unhindered humanitarian access.

In 2015, the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2254 (2015), calling for the drafting of a
new constitution within six months and an election in
18 months. We fully support the efforts of Special Envoy
Pedersen to revitalize the political process without any
further delay.

A political process will be futile, however, unless
hostilities end across Syria. Shelling and airstrikes
have displaced more than 70,000 Syrians just since
February. The United States is gravely concerned by
the recent escalation and by the Russian Federation and
Syrian regime's joint strikes in the demilitarized zone.
These attacks on civilian infrastructure and innocent
Syrians, including members of the White Helmets,
must end immediately.

We have also heard from our United Nations
colleagues that the food delivered to 42,000 internally
displaced persons (IDPs) in Rukban last month has
already run out. The United States strongly supports the
United Nations request for a third convoy to Rukban,
and we call on the Russian Federation, as should the
rest of the Council, to press the Syrian regime to allow
humanitarian agencies access to vulnerable populations
throughout Syria.

We reiterate that the United States and its local
partners are not impeding departures from Rukban.
Rather, for the past year, Syria's allies have obstructed
the Council's efforts to ensure that the regime handles
the issue of Rukban humanely and in a manner
consistent with humanitarian principles. The United
States appeals directly to the Russian Federation to
work with us in finding a way to assist the Syrian
people. We welcome increased coordination to facilitate
the return of displaced persons, wherever they may be.
However, such a process must be closely coordinated
with the United Nations. IDPs should have access to
accurate information as to what awaits them, including
the availability of services, access to the civil registry,
safe passage and physical safety at their destination.
All Syrians seeking relocation must be protected from
arbitrary detention.

We are also deeply concerned about the situation
in Al-Hol camp, where 70,000 civilians currently
reside, 90 per cent of whom are women and children.
Humanitarians are working around the clock to respond
but are constrained by capacity. We encourage countries
to contribute to the response, as the United Nations
recently outlined in its emergency appeal for Al-Hol.

Efforts to release the detainees held by the Al-Assad
regime and Syrian opposition groups have stalled under
the auspices of the Astana guarantors. Meanwhile,
the regime continues to arbitrarily arrest, torture and
execute detainees. The United States supports a United
Nations-led approach to address detainee issues.

A key component of accountability is recognizing
the rights of victims and transitional justice. That is
why the United States recently announced its intention
to provide $2 million in support of the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism for Syria. We
hope that fellow Member States will continue to support
the important work of the Mechanism.

To end on a positive note, the liberation of the
territory in Syria once held by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham is now 100 per cent complete. Moreover,
in an incredible display of commitment, 60 members of
the international community came together this month
to pledge $7 billion to humanitarian aid to Syria. The
extraordinary nature of pledges this month reflects the
recognition of the fact that this conflict and its impact
on the Syrian people are far from over.

