Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting to consider ways
and means of strengthening the United Nations partnership
with Africa.

Today I wish to make the following two points,
taking into account the format and the goal of this
meeting which you have proposed.

First, I must stress the need for the Security Council
to respond to crises in Africa quickly and adequately. It
is most important that Council members, and the
permanent members in particular, conduct their work with
an awareness that failure on the part of the Council to
take necessary action in time will result in human
suffering.

In this context, I want to touch upon the issue of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is all too clear that
if the peace process there fails it could have grave
implications for the entire continent.

The Lusaka Agreement, which was concluded in
July and which established a ceasefire in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, is a truly commendable
achievement by the African States concerned. It is
therefore imperative that the international community
extend its full support for it. I hope that the Security
Council will act quickly to despatch the 500 military
observers to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
order to consolidate compliance with the Lusaka
Agreement by all the parties concerned, and that it will
become engaged in efforts to deploy a full-fledged
peacekeeping force as soon as possible. I would like to
assure you, Mr. President, that Japan, which provides 20
per cent of the cost of any peacekeeping operation, would
support any decision of the Council to that end.

Secondly, I stress the need to strengthen the capacity
of the regional and subregional organizations to maintain
stability in Africa.

The recent experiences of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the Inter-Governmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) in addressing
conflicts clearly demonstrated that there is a consensus
among African people that regional and subregional
organizations have an active role to play in the field of
conflict prevention and mediation. But it has also become
apparent that the ability of these organizations to play
such a role is hindered by a lack of administrative
infrastructure and financial resources. While I am fully
aware of the cooperation already under way in this field
between the Secretariats of the United Nations and the
OAU, I would like to propose that the Council exercise

 

more vigorous leadership in mobilizing the international
community to strengthen the ability of regional and
subregional organizations in Africa to maintain peace and
stability.

In this context, I would like to inform the Council that
Japan will organize an international symposium in Tokyo
this coming March on the roles of subregional organizations
and non-govemmental organizations in conflict prevention
and resolution in Africa, to which we are inviting
representatives of the United Nations, the OAU, ECOWAS,
SADC and IGAD, as well as various research institutions
and non-governmental organizations.

There is clearly a need for stronger leadership by the
Security Council in raising international awareness of crises
as they erupt in Africa. It is my sincere hope that, building
upon our discussion today, the Council will hereafter have
the ability to respond to crises in Africa in a more timely
and effective manner.

