Mr. Meek (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative Honore for her briefing. As she has
made clear today, the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti continues to make a welcome
contribution to stability and development in Haiti. It is
a contribution that is clearly helping what is the poorest,
least-developed country in the Western hemisphere.
So, Ijoin others in thanking everyone involved in the
Mission and in the United Nations Country Team for
their ongoing commitment and service.

Today I want to focus on three priorities for
Haiti as we see them: the elections, security and the
humanitarian situation.

First, like others, we welcome the first two rounds
of presidential elections, but it is frustrating that the
political process has not been seen through to fruition.
A democratically elected and fully functioning
Government is essential if Haiti is to address the
serious challenges facing the country and its people.
We recognize the role of former President Martelly and
the presidents of the two chambers of Parliament in
securing a way forward with the political accord last
month. The international community supports Haitian
efforts to implement this agreement. But if it is to
succeed, consensus-building within Haiti is needed.
It is imperative that the current political and electoral
uncertainty is resolved quickly.

The Secretary-General's report (8/2015/225)
welcomes the efforts made so far by the provisional
president and prime minister. We agree with this.
Now, all stakeholders need to work together in good
faith to complete the electoral process. This is not
a time for political intransigence, for brinkmanship
or posturing. Too much is at stake. To give just one
example, successful development cooperation with
the international community relies on Haiti having
a democratically elected and fully functioning
Government. Without such interlocutors, there is a risk
that we will all be frustrated in our efforts. The people
of Haiti deserve better.

Turning to my second point, we are pleased to see
the continued expansion of the Haitian National Police.
There has been a noticeable improvement in their
capabilities and their independence from MINUSTAH,
as seen by the security they provided for the elections.
But there is still much to do if we are to transition
to Haitian-led efforts countrywide. MINUSTAH's
continued focus, therefore, should be on developing the
professionalism of the Haitian police. Slow progress
in improving the rule of law threatens to undermine
this progress. In particular, reform of the justice sector
remains weak and needs nurturing. Steps must be taken
to ensure there is comprehensive justice for all. This
must include addressing serious human rights abuses,
including the concerning increase in gender-based
violence and rape. All people of Haiti have a right to
protection from such abuses.

Turning to my third point, I want to touch upon
the humanitarian situation. Despite the welcome
recovery since the earthquake and Hurricane Sandy, it
is unsettling that so many of Haiti's citizens remain in
camps and temporary shelters. These are people who
lost everything and yet, six years later, they still have
nothing. Rehousing them must be an urgent priority
for a new Government. I also want to touch upon the
ongoing outbreak of cholera. That terrible disease is a
scar on Haitian citizens. After all that they have been
through, they cannot afford to face that further assault
on their lives and livelihoods. Efforts to protect the
population and eradicate cholera from the main water
supplies have clearly been ineffective. More needs to
be done to defend the vulnerable people of Haiti against
cholera and rid Haiti of that pervasive disease.

Let me close by looking to the future. Although
challenges remain, we cannot let them distract us
from planning beyond 2016 towards a smaller and
more focused United Nations presence in Haiti.
The development of a joint transition plan by
MINUSTAH and the United Nations country team is
a good first step, and we look forward to the results
of a meaningful strategic assessment mission. But it
is becoming increasingly clear that we cannot allow
an open-ended electoral process to delay indefinitely
a real examination of what comes next. While Haitian
leaders need to complete the electoral process, we must
not let the political impasse delay the Council's own
determination of whether the current deployment is in
the best long-term interest of Haiti. We owe it to the
people of Haiti to get it right.

