Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to hail with love and pride every martyr who has made the ultimate sacrifice in order to preserve the homeland. At the outset, Iraq would like to congratulate the delegation of the Republic of Viet Nam on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council this month and to wish it every success. We also congratulate the other new members of the Security Council - Estonia, the Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Tunisia. We wish them all the best during their membership. We wish to thank also the delegations of the outgoing non-permanent members, Cote d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, the sisterly State of Kuwait, Peru and Poland for their efforts during their terms in the Security Council. Let me begin by quoting the first lines of the Preamble of the Charter of the United Nations, "We the peoples of the United Nations determined to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime has brought untold sorrow to mankind, and to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small." From this Chamber, my delegation would like to note that Iraq was one of the very first founding countries of the United Nations. We were among the 50 countries that signed the Charter on 26 June 1945. Today, I recall once again that important event as I express our strong commitment to the fundamental rules that govern international relations. We stress our strong belief in the principles and purposes of the United Nations Charter, foremost among which are respect for the independence, territorial integrity and sovereign equality of countries, as well as non-interference in internal affairs, good-neighbourliness and the peaceful settlement of conflicts. We also believe in refraining from the use or threat of use of force and in eradicating security threats through cooperation in service to the basic interests of all peoples. Iraq's struggle against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant - terrorist Da'esh - from 2014 until our victory in 2017 was one of the positive developments in the region. It reflected the practical application of an important principle of the Charter, namely, the importance of international cooperation in tackling threats to international peace and security. That victory was achieved thanks to the sacrifice and blood of all the components of our security forces, with the support of our people and the international coalition, as well as our friends, brothers and neighbours. Iraq became the focus of everyone's interest in eradicating the danger posed by Da'esh, which threatens international peace and security. All our friends and brothers agreed to commit to implementing the fundamental purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and to supporting Iraq's fight against terrorism, restoring peace and stability and rebuilding the country after the destruction wrought by the terrorist Da'esh gangs. Nevertheless, we must note the fact that some countries have not fully abided by the principles and purposes of the United Nations Charter and have chosen conflict over cooperation to fulfil their interests. They have resorted to force, thereby violating the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and leading to catastrophic consequences that threaten international peace and security. If they had abided by the United Nations Charter, things would not have escalated to such an extent or reached such dangerous levels as is the case today. The regrettable events witnessed by Iraq over the past few days and weeks represent clear provocative acts against the Iraqi State, Government and people. They endanger Iraq's security, sovereignty, territorial integrity and social security and have brought it to the verge of a great danger, not only within the country but in the region and the entire world as well. Accordingly, here in this Chamber we have stressed time and again the need to spare Iraq from involvement in external conflicts among friendly and ally States. Our territories should not be opened for such conflicts. That would undermine the victories achieved against terrorism and stability in Iraq as well as the universal campaign of solidarity to reconstruct the destruction caused by terrorism in Iraq. It would also undermine fighting the remnants of Da'esh and give the forces of evil and terrorism the chance to destabilize Iraq and the region, which would open the door once again for the terrorist group Da'esh to threaten international peace and security. Iraq is currently busy rebuilding itself and moving towards a better future. The last of those steps was taken on 1 October 2019, when Iraqis exercised their constitutional right by protesting, in line with the relevant human rights and fundamental freedoms contained in Article 1, paragraph 3, of the United Nations Charter, with a view to drawing a new, bright future for Iraq in which the people would enjoy security and prosperity and the country would disassociate itself from regional and international conflicts. Over the past three months, we have achieved that which had not been achieved in an entire decade. We have responded to the demands of the protesters, the Iraqi Parliament has enacted a new election law and the membership of the Independent High Electoral Commission has been renewed, under the supervision of the United Nations through the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). In addition, measures have been taken to achieve legislative and executive reform. The recent violations of our sovereignty and territorial integrity have strengthened the will of the Iraqi people to disassociate themselves from all conflicts, crises and tensions in the region. That would dash the dreams of the Iraqi people to live in safety and stability. We have had enough war and destruction; we cannot bear any new wars in Iraq. The only thing we want is peace and stability. We are the enemy of no one; rather, we are friends to all. We hope that all parties will use wisdom and reason in their decision-making and resort to political and diplomatic channels, for those are the primary options for confronting current problems in line with the foundational principles of the United Nations, leading to respect for the Iraqi people and their sovereignty. We condemn attacks and aggressions that violate the sovereignty of Iraq, the United Nations Charter and the relevant provisions of international law. We call on the Security Council to also condemn them and to continue shouldering its responsibilities to guarantee the stability of Iraq and ensure that it will not be involved in any regional tension or crisis. The Council should call all for calm, self-restraint, the alleviation of tension and the avoidance of any unilateral action that would weaken joint the international efforts against terrorism. Such action could be exploited by terrorists to carry out criminal acts targeting our Iraqi people, which would dangerously undermine national, regional and international security.
