Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
extending a warm welcome to you, Mr. Foreign Minister,
and by thanking you for presiding over this open debate on
protection of United Nations, associated and humanitarian
personnel.

About a year ago, in an open meeting, we expressed
our position on the issue of protection of civilians in armed
conflicts. Since then we received the report of the
Secretary-General, last September, and we thank him for
the important elements outlined therein on that issue, which
greatly facilitate our deliberations today. We welcome this
opportunity to share our views on this subject.

In her opening statement, Deputy Secretary-General
Louise Frechette articulated very effectively the areas which
require the attention of the Council. We thank her also for
identifying actions that urgently need to be taken to ensure
the security of United Nations and other humanitarian
personnel. Bangladesh welcomes her assertion that a full-
time United Nations Security Coordinator will be
appointed. Country-by-country security requirements to be
undertaken by the Secretariat are a very helpful step. The
idea of a training centre for all international staff,
irrespective of their various mandates, is practical and
should be pursued.

We thank World Food Programme Executive
Director Catherine Bertini for her graphically pertinent
statement and for highlighting the risks that humanitarian
personnel run every day throughout the world.

Internal armed conflicts are on the rise. What
concerns us most is the increasing tendency of the parties
to a conflict of targeting non-combatants - civilians,
including United Nations and associated personnel and
humanitarian personnel. These individuals put their lives
at risk pursuing a noble mission, and my delegation
wishes to take this opportunity to pay a great tribute to
those who have sacrificed their lives and security in the
service of humanity in distant parts of the world.

The existing international legal framework sets
standards for parties to an armed conflict regarding the
treatment of these protected persons. In spite of these
standards, there is increasing violence against them, which
calls for action by the international community aimed at
promoting a culture of compliance and strengthening
security arrangements to improve the safety and security
of United Nations and associated personnel. We wish to
focus on the following five issues related to this objective.

First, we have a clear responsibility to ensure the
safety and security of United Nations personnel,
associated personnel and humanitarian personnel in
accordance with the provisions of international law and
respective national laws as appropriate. While the primary
responsibility to do so rests with the States hosting a
United Nations or humanitarian mission, we urge that all
care be taken by such personnel to preserve the impartial
and international nature of these missions.

Secondly, we are convinced that these personnel
play an irreplaceable role in conflict situations, and we
feel that it is important for them to have access to
affected populations, in accordance with the relevant
principles and rules of international humanitarian law.

Thirdly, we consider the inclusion of attacks
intentionally directed against such personnel as a war
crime in the Statute of the International Criminal Court an
important step towards addressing the issue of impunity

 

on the part of the perpetrators of such violence. We fully
support the call for bringing to justice those responsible for
violence against protected personnel.

Fourthly, mandates for peacekeeping operations need
to incorporate strengthened safety and security regimes
while ensuring that those measures are in support of their
main missions. In this regard, we look forward to a general
and comprehensive review of security in peacekeeping
operations and to the elaboration of specific measures
aimed at increasing the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel.

Fifthly, we strongly support the proposal to develop
a comprehensive security plan for the personnel of every
peacekeeping and humanitarian mission. To this end, we
consider it appropriate that specific and practical measures
based on the provisions of the 1994 Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel be built
into each status-of-forces and status-of-mission agreement.
We also underline the imperative of responding in good
time to conflict situations and of not allowing the capability
to do so to be constrained in any way.

Before concluding, we want to welcome the entry
into force of the 1994 Convention, which Bangladesh has
already ratified. We encourage all States that have not done
so to become party to the Convention at the earliest
possible date. Twenty-nine States parties out of a
membership of 188 is, obviously, not a good record.

In many issues confronting the United Nations and
the international community, there is a gap between what
is desirable and what is achievable. We strongly believe
that in this case there is no other way but to take practical
measures urgently to strengthen security arrangements and
enhance their management to ensure the safety and security
of United Nations, associated and humanitarian personnel.

