Mrs. D'Achon (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to thank Mr. Danilo Tiirk for his very
comprehensive briefing. France welcomes the work
done by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in Bougainville, Ambassador Noel Sinclair.
We also thank the countries that have contributed to the
Bougainville Transitional Team.

Despite progress made in recent months, my
country remains concerned by the delays in the
disposal of weapons, the ratification of phase three of
the peace plan and the establishment of an election
date. As the Security Council noted in August, the
mandate of the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville is to end at the end of this year. However,
France is prepared to support one last - I insist on the
word "last" - extension of the mandate of the Political
Office in 2004, as requested by Papua New Guinea. We
believe, however, that the Office cannot be extended
for yet another year, because that would be a disservice
to the people concerned and appear to endorse those
who have caused the pointless and dangerous delay in
finding a political solution.

The presence of the United Nations should
therefore be limited to the first six months of 2004, as
proposed by the Secretariat. It should also be confined
to a limited number of observers, and a maximum of
two persons would seem to be a reasonable figure.
Moreover, the format and duration would seem to be
sufficient in order to complete the settlement process.
As has been recalled, the process includes the disposal
of collected weapons, the holding of a constituent
assembly, the adoption of a constitution, the
preparation of elections and the create of an
autonomous Government. In all of these areas,
however, the future lies with the people of
Bougainville themselves. It is up to them to take the
necessary steps as soon as possible to normalize the
political situation.

Finally, the final extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Political Office in Bougainville must
have a clear exit strategy, as the Ambassador of
Germany pointed out. Once the mandate has been
completed, I believe that the United Nations
Development Programme will be able to make the best
possible contribution to consolidating normalization,
and in particular to improving the functioning of the
political administration of the island.

