Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): Mr. President, I
am delighted to see you presiding here today.

The presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Morocco and of other dignitaries clearly underscores
the importance of the evolving situation in the Sahel
for peace and security in the region. At the outset, I
would like to thank the Moroccan delegation for having
arranged today's meeting. I would also like to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, his Special Envoy,
Mr. Romano Prodi, and High Commissioner Antonio
Guterres for their briefings. We hope that today's
deliberations will help the United Nations to address
the multifaceted crisis in the Sahel in an integrated and
comprehensive manner, as is mentioned in the useful
concept note prepared by the Moroccan delegation
(S/2012/906, annex).

The Sahel region has long faced several challenges
in the political, economic and humanitarian spheres.
Many countries of the region are also dealing with
governance issues, due to the absence of adequate
institutional capacity. Over the past year, the situation
has worsened, due to the crises in the neighbourhood, as
has been most acutely demonstrated by the developments
in Mali. The proliferation of weapons, the activities of
rebel and terrorist groups, and transnational organized
crime, including illicit drug trafficking, have taken a
heavy toll on the region. Apart from the political and
security problems, the humanitarian situation in the
region has also been aggravated by extreme climatic
conditions and insufficient rainfall, which have had
a negative effect on harvests. More than 18 million
people in the region are suffering from severe food and
nutrition crises this year.

Extremist and terrorist groups have taken advantage
of the adverse political, security and humanitarian
situations to consolidate their positions, particularly
in northern Mali. Such groups have weakened State
institutions, committed serious human rights violations,
and damaged or destroyed many sites of cultural,
historic and religious significance. The activities of
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, Ansar Dine and
Boko Haram in northern Mali have turned the area into
a regional hub for terrorist groups. Several countries of
the region are seriously threatened by their activities.
More than 400,000 people have been displaced by the
fighting in northern Mali.

Clearly, the time has come for the international
community to seriously address the multiple crises in
the Sahel and to support the initiatives of regional and
subregional organizations. Given the complexity of the
challenges facing the region, the response requires a
holistic approach. The United Nations should play
the leading role in the process, and we appreciate the
Secretary-General's initiatives, such as the high-level
meeting on the Sahel in September and the appointment
of the Special Envoy.

We look forward to the Secretary-General's report
on an integrated strategy for the Sahel, as requested by
the Security Council. We think the strategy should be
developed with the full involvement of the countries of
the Sahel and regional and subregional organizations,
such as the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), the Community of
Sahelo-Saharan States and the Arab Maghreb Union.

In the immediate term, the priority should be
stabilizing the security situation. That requires dealing
with the threats of secessionist, extremist and Al-Qaida-
linked terrorist groups. Political dialogue should be
pursued with those willing to renounce terrorism
and lay down their arms. A secure environment will
also facilitate the implementation of programmes for
national reconciliation and the delivery of humanitarian
assistance.

We therefore support an expeditious response from
the Security Council to the request of ECOWAS and
the African Union for the deployment of an African-
led international support mission in Mali. The mission
should be deployed in parallel with the institution
of an inclusive political process, led by the Malian
authorities, to address the legitimate grievances of the
people of northern Mali. We also urge the international
community to redouble its efforts to meet the challenges
of food insecurity in northern Mali and provide
adequate resources to humanitarian agencies working
in the region.

Given the expanding activities of terrorist
networks and armed groups in the region, the United
Nations should also assist the affected countries in
strengthening the capacities of security agencies and
enhancing cooperation at the regional level, so as to
establish more effective border controls and combat
illicit trafficking in arms and drugs and organized
crime and terrorism.

The implementation of all strategies should give
primacy to national ownership and the capacity-
building of national institutions and respect the
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of the countries concerned. Along with
the provision of resources, there should be better
integration and coordination among the United Nations
and other agencies on the ground to ensure the effective
implementation of the strategy.

In conclusion, the renewed attention to the Sahel on
the part of the international community is a welcome
development. We expect that attention to translate
into concrete action on the ground to address the
challenges. India, for its part, remains committed to
partnering with the countries in the region, the United
Nations, the African Union and other organizations in
the implementation of a United Nations-led integrated
strategy for the Sahel.

