Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
Allow me first of all, Sir, to say how delighted I am
that you are presiding today, on behalf of your country
Nigeria, over this important debate on the prevention
of conflict.

The complexity and cost of current conflicts,
especially in Africa, have substantially weakened the
chances for stability and development on the continent.
This situation in itself justifies the Council's desire
increasingly to emphasize prevention. For several
decades Gabon has been firmly committed to conflict
prevention, especially in Central Africa. That
commitment was recently reaffirmed by our President,
His Excellency Mr. Ali Bongo Ondimba, in his
statement of 9 March 2010 at the International Peace
Institute in New York, coinciding with the Gabonese
presidency of the Council.

We are convinced of the benefits of establishing a
true culture of prevention at the United Nations, and
we have consistently encouraged the Council to adopt
an operational strategy for conflict prevention. As the
debate has been framed, the question of conflict
prevention is a vast question comprising several
aspects. My statement will address only two of these,
undertaking first an updated evaluation of the work of
the Council on the basis of the Secretary-General's
2008 report on conflict prevention (S/2008/18), and
then suggesting some approaches to transforming the
challenges of preventive diplomacy in Africa into
opportunities for partnership with the United Nations.

The 2008 report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1625
(2005) confirms, inter alia, the Council's commitment
to follow a preventive approach. Indeed, since the
adoption of that resolution the Council has affirmed its
role in conflict prevention activities. Resolution 1778
(2007), authorizing deployment of the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT), already responded to the need for
preventive approach, in that the aim was to prevent
conflict spilling over from Darfur into Chad and the
Central African Republic. Since then the Security
Council has opted for a disciplinary approach in
preventing conflicts.

The mandates of the peacekeeping missions
adopted by the Council in 2010 provide appropriate
frameworks for mechanisms to prevent the recurrence
of conflict. The mandates of MINURCAT, the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire and the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, set out respectively
in resolutions 1923 (2010), 1924 (2010) and 1925
(2010), are inspired essentially by the disciplinary
approach proposed in the 2008 report of the Secretary-
General. In these cases this comprehensive and
multidisciplinary approach is based on cooperation
with the Governments of Chad, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Cote d'Ivoire, as well as numerous other Member
States and international, regional and subregional
organizations, such as the African Union (AU), the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) as well as civil society actors.

These advances should be highlighted and
welcomed. By taking this approach, the new mandates
take into account the root causes of conflict and
provide for operational activities and systemic
prevention. By working to eliminate poverty and by
working for lasting development, security sector
reform, the rule of law, respect for and protection of
human rights and greater involvement of women in
national reconciliation processes, United Nations
missions today are working more effectively towards
the complete eradication of the causes of conflict and
towards their geographical containment to prevent
them from spilling over into neighbouring countries.
My delegation is convinced, however, that the
development of a broad, visible, realistic conflict
prevention strategy based, inter alia, on an early
warning mechanism covering especially the potential

conflict zones and on a true culture of prevention
shared by all Member States would make United
Nations action more effective.

Turning to Africa, the challenges should be
viewed rather as opportunities to strengthen
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union or the continent's subregional
organizations. Convinced that the United Nations
cannot succeed in Africa on its own, the African Union
and subregional organizations such as ECOWAS and
ECCAS, to mention only two, have succeeded in
setting up their own conflict prevention mechanisms.
But it is clear that for them to fully carry out their role
and to become operational these mechanisms should be
enjoy substantial supported from the United Nations.
From that perspective it is important to ensure more
efficient implementation of the Ten-Year Capacity-
Building Programme for the African Union, adopted
jointly by the United Nations and the AU in November
2006. A closer partnership with the African Union has
two main purposes: first, to facilitate rapid reaction in
the event of crisis, as was done in Guinea and in Niger,
and secondly, to enhance the African Union's capacity
to find solutions to crises and conflicts, as is the case in
Darfur, particularly through the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, and to a lesser
extent in Somalia with the African Union Mission in
Somalia.

The operationalization of the African Union
Peace and Security Architecture is the challenge that
most urgently calls for cooperation from the United
Nations. The various mechanisms that make up the
Architecture, namely, the Continental Early Warning
System, the Panel of the Wise, the African Standby
Force and the African post-conflict reconstruction and
development policy framework are meant to play a
crucial role in conflict prevention. That role would
naturally lead to a significant reduction in the number
of United Nations interventions in Africa and
accordingly a reduction in the cost of United Nations
operations.
At the subregional level, cooperation with the
United Nations requires a greater and more visible
presence on the ground. Rather than calling for a
strengthening of its peacekeeping missions in Africa,
we would aim at encouraging the United Nations to be
more present through the action of its regional offices.
The excellent work done by the United Nations Office
for West Africa, very often in cooperation with the

African Union and ECOWAS, demonstrates the
capacity of the United Nations to excel in prevention.
Central Africa is particularly affected by cross-border
tensions, and the countries of that subregion have been
endeavouring to establish a conflict prevention
architecture organized, essentially, around the Central
African rapid response mechanism and the Council for
Peace and Security in Central Africa. Those two
mechanisms need United Nations support to be fully
operational.

My country has always favoured the
establishment of a new regional preventive mechanism,
similar to the United Nations Office for West Africa
(UNOWA), whose experience and success have been
clearly acknowledged by the Security Council.
Through good offices, mediation, information sharing
with subregional mechanisms - as UNOWA does in
West Africa - this office would support the States of
Central Africa with a view to making the subregion
another zone of lasting peace, security and stability.

More than ever before, the Security Council must
strengthen its preventive action and capacities. In terms
of advantages and costs, there are innumerable benefits
in such an approach. My delegation is convinced that
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union would encourage such a trend.
The future of Africa - which, like all other continents,
increasingly aspires to greater peace, stability and
development - depends on the commitment of those
two organizations to work together to eradicate the
causes of conflict that weaken us.

I hope that the outcome of this debate will lead
the United Nations to deepen its commitment along
these lines. It is with that in mind that my country
supported the presidential statement endorsed today.

