The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Central African Republic, in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the consideration of the item without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Poukre-
Kono (Central African Republic) took a seat at
the Council table.

The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
2

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/237, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by France.

I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2010/217, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution. Unless I
hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
France, Gabon, Japan, Lebanon, Mexico, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President (spoke in Arabic): There were
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1922 (2010).

The Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.25 am.
10-35924

