Mr. Lee See-young (Republic of Korea): I would
like to express my delegation's gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for your initiative in organizing the
Security Council's open debate today on the important
and urgent issue of protection for humanitarian assistance.
My thanks go also to the Deputy Secretary-General for
her important introductory remarks.

As conflicts persist in the post-cold-war era, the
plight of tens of millions of innocent civilians continues
with an alarming intensity. In particular, children, women
and other vulnerable groups are abused in many
deplorable ways. Moreover, as we have all witnessed in
recent months, an ever increasing number of those who
volunteer to help innocent people in conflict situations
find their lives threatened or sacrificed. It is indeed
regrettable that their safety and security are constantly
endangered by wanton attempts at abduction, detention
and killing.

The Republic of Korea believes that the time has
come for the international community to stand up and
deal seriously with these challenges. It was for this reason
that my Government, then occupying the presidency of
the Security Council, took the initiative to organize the
first open debate on this issue in May 1997. We are
grateful to the Secretary-General and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) for taking the lead in preparing the follow-up
report on this issue, as requested in the Security Council
presidential statement of June 1997. We agree with the
analysis pertaining to the sources of problems and

 

strongly endorse the recommendations contained in the
report.

Allow me to take this opportunity to highlight the
following points. The first concerns the urgent need for the
international community to translate the recommendations
contained in the report into action. Indeed, a variety of
sources of problems have been identified. Unfortunately,
however, these sources have not been addressed adequately
by the international community due to the lack of will and
resources. Now is the time to take resolute steps to tackle
them.

The Secretary-General's report contains a number of
specific recommendations. We should all look into ways
and means to implement them. Given the complex nature
of the issue at hand, the international community should
take a coordinated and comprehensive approach.

This leads to my second comment, on the role of the
Security Council.

We welcome and support the presidential statement to
be issued today at the end of this debate, which will
express the Council's intention to have a serious follow-up
to the Secretary-General's report. A number of areas
suggested in the report are directly or indirectly related to
the Council's mandate for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Although humanitarian assistance and
peacekeeping operations are distinct from each other, the
fact remains that the Security Council's involvement is now
indispensable for the protection of humanitarian assistance
in conflicts.

We must not forget that the primary responsibility of
the Council resides in promoting the political settlement of
conflict situations. Political inaction on the part of the
Council results in procrastination in the resolution of
conflicts and thus the prolongation of civilian suffering. In
such cases, humanitarian assistance cannot be a substitute
for political action and therefore is not sustainable.
Humanitarian activities should be backed by the political
initiatives of the Council as well as its willingness to take
the necessary security measures, including the deployment
of peacekeeping forces.

When peacekeeping operations are deployed by the
Council in support of humanitarian operations, the Council
should strive to appropriately match their mandates to their
resources. Clear rules of engagement are also required. The
Council has learned useful and sometimes painful lessons
from its past experiences in dealing with the situations in
Somalia, the former Yugoslavia, Rwanda and the former
Zaire. We hope that these lessons learned will help the
Council in future deployments of peacekeeping forces.

We would like to invite the special attention of the
Council to the need for the separation of armed
combatants from bona fide refugees and displaced
populations. Refugee-hosting countries are often unable or
unwilling to maintain law and order in refugee camps. In
such cases, the Council is strongly requested to ensure
that appropriate measures are taken in a timely manner to
prevent armed elements from turning refugee camps into
military bases. Militias must also be stopped from using
refugees as human shields.

The Council also possesses the useful leverage of
arms embargoes. The proliferation of arms in areas of
actual or potential conflict remains one of the most
serious sources of insecurity for refugees and their
protectors alike. The Council should explore imposing an
arms embargo targeted against a region where cross-
border movements of arms are frequent and rampant.

Serious consideration also needs to be given to better
ensuring the effective implementation of arms embargoes
by the Council. Once imposed, arms embargoes need to
be monitored and enforced through a more effective
mechanism. Failure to do so will not only aggravate
civilian suffering, but also undermine the credibility of the
Council's action.

My third point concerns the legal framework. The
culture of impunity must be prevented from further
spreading. Ensuring universal respect for international
humanitarian norms is a necessary precondition for the
restoration of a safe environment for the conduct of
humanitarian work. In achieving this objective, the
establishment of ad hoc International Tribunals for the
former Yugoslavia and Rwanda was an important step
forward. A milestone along the path in combating the
culture of impunity was set by the recent adoption of the
Statue of the International Criminal Court.

Further efforts must be made to strengthen law
enforcement against the violators of international
humanitarian norms at both the national and international
levels. Specific measures should be taken to hold
transgressing parties and their leaders physically and
financially liable to their victims under international law.

Another related issue is the scope of humanitarian
personnel covered by the relevant United Nations

 

Convention. Such a scope should be expanded to provide
adequate legal protection to the local staff of humanitarian
organizations.

Last but not the least, I would like to suggest that the
Council expand its discourse with other relevant organs and
agencies, in particular the General Assembly, on this issue.
The Secretary-General's report before us today touches
upon many areas which go beyond the mandate of the
Council. My delegation is of the View that serious thought
should be given to submitting the report to the General
Assembly for consideration under a related agenda item.

The international community has to rise to the
daunting challenge of providing adequate security to United
Nations and humanitarian workers. The time for action has
come. We welcome today's open debate as an opportunity
to increase international awareness of this issue. We
sincerely hope that all the views, suggestions and proposals
presented today will be fully reflected, examined and
agreed upon, if possible, in the Council's follow-up on this
issue. We further hope that it will be done in close
collaboration with other relevant United Nations organs and
agencies, as well as with the United Nations membership as
a whole.

I would like to conclude by reiterating that my
Government stands ready to continue to make contributions
in this regard.

