The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Azerbaijan.

At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Farid
Zarif, Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for presenting the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (S/2012/275). We welcome the participation in
today's meeting by His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremie,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and thank him
and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj for their statements.

The position of Azerbaijan with regard to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia and
non-recognition of Kosovo's unilateral declaration of
independence remains unchanged. Resolution 1244
(1999) continues to be the binding international legal
basis for resolving the Kosovo issue and providing
security in the area. The resolution outlines explicit
guidelines and steps to be taken for a comprehensive
settlement in a political process and through
negotiations.
Positive trends in dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, as well as progress towards European
integration, were registered during the reporting
period. We welcome the decision of the European
Union (EU) to grant candidacy status to Serbia, which
had been pending since 2009. We also note the
agreement reached by the parties in an EU-mediated
dialogue on Kosovo's regional representation and
cooperation, with the understanding that such
designation is without prejudice to positions on status
and is inline with resolution 1244 (1999) and the
advisory opinion (see A/64/881) of the International
Court of Justice of 22 July 2010.

At the same time, we cannot but express our deep
concern at the increase in tension and incidents on the
ground during the reporting period that continued to
pose tangible risks to peace and stability. We note the
efforts aimed at de-escalating tension and call upon all
stakeholders to resolve disagreements peacefully.

The report of the Secretary-General, the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and other international presences have
stressed that the public referendum conducted by the
northern Kosovo Serb municipalities in February had
no legal consequences. It is our strong understanding
that, without exception, the same position equally
applies to all unilateral actions taken contrary to
resolution 1244 (1999) and in contravention with the
perspective of achieving a solution based on mutual
understanding and consensus.

The situation with regard to the voluntary return
of internally displaced persons to Kosovo remains a
matter of concern and requires redoubled efforts.
Azerbaijan aligns itself with the call of the Secretary-
General for strengthened political will and focus in
order to reverse the continuously declining trend in
voluntary returns.
24
The issue of missing persons continues to be one
of the major obstacles to reconciliation efforts, and
obviously requires strengthened cooperation between
the parties, as well as the engagement of UNMIK and
other international partners.

The protection and restoration of religious and
cultural heritage should remain an UNMIK priority. We
deplore any acts of vandalism against cultural and
religious sites and recall the obligation to comply with
the commitments made by the relevant parties in that
regard.

We take note of the information that the Special
Investigative Task Force of the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo continued working to
address reports related to inhuman treatment of people
and illicit trafficking in human organs. Azerbaijan
looks forward to an objective, fair and transparent
investigation of the facts and believes that the
establishment of truth will definitely serve the
principles of justice and the rule of law. At the same
time, we still do not see any obstacles that could
prevent the process from being empowered by, and
accountable to, the Security Council.

In conclusion, I would like to commend UNMIK,
under the leadership of Special Representative Zarif,
for its efforts and important role in maintaining peace
and stability in Kosovo and the entire region.

1 now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.20 pm.
12-33797
