The President (spoke in Spanish): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
June, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Ambassador Nawaf Salam, Permanent Representative
of Lebanon, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of May 20l0. I am sure I speak
for all members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Salam and his delegation
for the great diplomatic skill with which they
conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question

Letter dated 31 May 2010 from the Permanent
Representative of Turkey to the President of the
Security Council (S/2010/266)

Letter dated 31 May 2010 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the President of
the Security Council (S/2010/267)

The President (spoke in Spanish): Pursuant to
the invitation extended pursuant to rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure at the 6325th
meeting of the Security Council, I should like to
acknowledge the presence of the representative of
Israel, who is seated at the Council table.

Pursuant to the invitation extended in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and with
previous practice at the 6325th meeting, I should like
to acknowledge the presence of the Permanent
Observer of Palestine to the United Nations, who is
seated at the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with rule 2 of its provisional
rules of procedure in response to a letter dated 31 May
2010 from the Permanent Representative of Turkey to
the United Nations and a letter of the same date from
the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United
Nations, both of which are addressed to the President
2
of the Security Council and will be issued as
documents S/2010/266 and S/20lO/267, respectively.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council,
which I shall read out in English given the lateness of
the hour and the fact that the text has not yet been
translated into all six official languages:

(spoke in English)

"The Security Council deeply regrets the
loss of life and injuries resulting from the use of
force during the Israeli military operation in
international waters against the convoy sailing to
Gaza. The Council, in this context, condemns
those acts, which resulted in the loss of at least
10 civilians and many wounded, and expresses its
condolences to their families.

"The Security Council requests the
immediate release of the ships as well as the
civilians held by Israel. The Council urges Israel
to permit full consular access, to allow the
countries concerned to retrieve their deceased and
wounded immediately, and to ensure the delivery
of humanitarian assistance from the convoy to its
destination.

"The Security Council takes note of the
statement of the United Nations Secretary-
General on the need to have a full investigation
into the matter and it calls for a prompt,
impartial, credible and transparent investigation
conforming to international standards.

"The Security Council stresses that the
situation in Gaza is not sustainable. The Council
re-emphasizes the importance of the full
implementation of resolutions 1850 (2008) and
1860 (2009). In that context, it reiterates its grave
concern at the humanitarian situation in Gaza and
stresses the need for sustained and regular flows
of goods and people to Gaza, as well as
unimpeded provision and distribution of
humanitarian assistance throughout Gaza.

"The Security Council underscores that the
only viable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict is an agreement negotiated between the
parties, and re-emphasizes that only a two-State
10-38213
solution, with an independent and viable
Palestinian State living side by side in peace and
security with Israel and its other neighbours,
could bring peace to the region.

"The Security Council expresses support for
the proximity talks and voices concern that this
incident took place while the proximity talks are
under way, and urges the parties to act with
restraint, avoiding any unilateral and provocative
actions, and all international partners to promote
an atmosphere of cooperation between the parties
and throughout the region."

(spoke in Spanish)

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2010/9.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.50 a.m.

