Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, for having organized this debate under your
presidency on the working methods of the subsidiary
organs, in particular the sanctions committees. We
attach great importance to the proper functioning of the
sanctions committees, which are now at the heart of the
activity of the Security Council. With 16 active regimes,
sanctions have become a critical tool for the Security
Council that has proven its effectiveness. The pressure
exerted by the international community through the
sanctions regime established in 1977 on South Africa
gradually led that country to end apartheid, allowing
for the lifting of sanctions in 1994.

With regard to Iran, through five resolutions
adopted by the Council the international community
expressed its deep concern about the Iranian nuclear
programme. Ten years after the Security Council was
first seized of that matter, we have turned a new page
in relations with Iran by lifting the sanctions regime
following Iran's implementation of its commitments in
accordance with the Vienna agreement. A new system
of restrictions and Vigilance is now in force and will
be presented tomorrow to Member States. It is an
indispensable guarantee that the Vienna agreement will
be fully respected. The pressure exerted by sanctions
played a central role in creating the possibility to reach
an agreement.

We must not let those success stories lead us to
underestimate the complexity of this tool. Over the
years, we have succeeded in adapting it and focusing it
on each individual situation, lessening the consequences
for civilians, inasmuch as possible, while increasingly
ensuring human rights. Sanctions are a key tool in the
process ofresolving crises. They can be a tool to support
States weakened by insecurity or the presence of armed
groups in their territory. Countries such as Somalia, the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
ofthe Congo come to mind. In the Democratic Republic

ofthe Congo, for example, the sanctions regime changed
in line with the situation. Established in 2003, the arms
embargo has been continuously modified, and since
2008 has targeted only non-governmental entities. With
regard to individual sanctions against armed groups,
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo itself has requested that the sanctions regime be
strengthened.

In C6te d'Ivoire, we were able to adapt the sanctions
regime in order to support the country on its path to
stability, which has been restored since the 2010-2011
crisis. In 2013, the rapid improvement of the situation
in all areas justified the Security Council's decision to
lift the diamond embargo and ease the arms embargo.
Subsequently, certain individuals were removed from
the sanctions list in order to promote the political
process and national reconciliation. Those adaptations
have contributed to the recovery of the Cote d'Ivoire.

The scope of sanctions is also flexible as we seek
to ensure that sanctions target the individuals, entities
or sectors that directly pose a threat to the stability of
States. Accordingly, the illegal exploitation of natural
resources has become a criterion for designation in
several sanctions regimes. Sanctions aimed at charcoal
in Somalia, diamonds in the Central African Republic
and natural resources and the trafficking of endangered
species in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
just some examples of sanctions regimes that have
evolved in order to better target the resources that
armed groups use to finance themselves. Similarly, the
sanctions regime pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999),
which originally targeted AI-Qaida, has accordingly
evolved with the terrorist threat to include Da'esh.

More flexible and more targeted, sanctions regimes
must also offer tools that protect human rights. The
establishment of the Office of the Ombudsperson in
2009 concerning the Al-Qaida regime was a major
innovation that has largely demonstrated its usefulness
and effectiveness. That mechanism, which allows
individuals and entities subject to sanctions under the
1267 regime to seek recourse if they believe that the
decision is unjustified, represents an important step
forward in terms of transparency. While we seek to
adjust sanctions regimes to ensure that they are the most
effective possible, we must pursue efforts to improve
the working methods of the sanctions committees. The
Secretariat has undertaken noteworthy work in that
regard, and we must continue to pursue and reinforce it.

As pertains to transparency, we endorse the
proposals made in the concept note introduced by the
presidency (S/2016/102, annex), as they will promote
better understanding of the functions of the sanctions
committees. We believe, for example, that the panels
of experts mandated for the various sanctions regimes
produce very valuable reports, the publication of
which should not be called into question. We are
also in favour of convening meetings with countries
subject to sanctions regimes and the countries of the
region, in particular neighbouring countries, because
we hope that such meetings will allow for a better
implementation of sanctions. The field Visits of chairs
of sanctions committees, where possible, are also useful
in promoting better understanding of sanctions regimes
by the countries concerned.

We know that chairing subsidiary organs is an
important responsibility that falls on the shoulders of
the non-permanent members of the Security Council.
As for the rest of the Council's activities, the election
of new members earlier in the year will allow for better
upstream preparation. As penholder on numerous
sanctions regimes in Africa, we have always been and
remain available to the chairs of the committees as
they take up their functions along with the Secretariat,
which plays an essential role.

We read with interest about the work of the
Like-minded Group and that of the High-level Review of
UnitedNations Sanctions. Many of the recommendations
seem useful to us, namely, that of continuing to ensure
fairness, to which we are committed nationally as well
as in our capacity as a member of the European Union.
Sanctions are primarily a political tool at the disposal
of the Council to assist it in upholding its responsibility
to safeguard international stability and security, which
means that we must be all the more demanding with
respect to the effectiveness and smooth functioning of
the regimes that we establish.

