Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I wish to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of January. I thank you and
other members of the Council for the words of
welcome. Brazil looks forward to working very closely
and constructively with all Council members in
discharging its mandate. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for being among us this morning, for
his remarks and for his latest report on Afghanistan
(S/2009/674).

Brazil joins other speakers in thanking Mr. Kai
Eide for his enlightening presentation. We take this
opportunity to express our appreciation for his work as
head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and for his invaluable
contribution under very challenging circumstances.

Recent months have brought a sobering reminder
of the daunting challenges that still lie ahead on the
path to peace, stability and prosperity in Afghanistan.
The deterioration in the security situation is cause for
deep concern. Especially disturbing is the increase in
the number of conflict-related civilian casualties. The
large majority of those deaths were caused by the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremist groups, and the
main responsibility should therefore be clearly laid at
their feet.

Obviously, that is no consolation for the civilian
casualties caused by pro-Government forces in the
Afghan conflict, such as the children reportedly killed
in Ghazi Khan village and in Lashkar Gah during the
last days of 2009. While fully acknowledging the steps
taken by the Afghan Government, the International
Security Assistance Force and the coalition, we believe
there is a need for continued efforts to better
distinguish combatants and non-combatants and
eliminate or further reduce risks to civilians. Apart
from being a moral imperative and an obligation under
international law, protecting civilians is key to
strengthening the legitimacy and effectiveness of the
international military presence in Afghanistan.

Also worrisome is the fact that extremists have
been increasingly targeting international staff and
humanitarian agents. The attacks against the United
Nations guest house in Kabul last October were
particularly shocking. We firmly condemn this
senseless and unjustifiable violence and honour its
victims. We also pay tribute to the United Nations
guards whose heroism helped to save innocent lives.
We support the efforts of the Secretary-General to
improve the safety of United Nations staff and local
personnel in Afghanistan.

The prolonged controversy about the results of
last August's polls had an impact on governance in
Afghanistan and affected the country's relations with
the international community. Electoral irregularities
such as those identified by the Electoral Complaints
Commission undermined the legitimacy of the electoral
process and are readily misused as propaganda tools
for extremist groups. They also highlighted the need
for reform.

While we ponder the challenges and setbacks in
building a safer, more democratic and prosperous
Afghanistan and try to learn from past experience, we
must also focus on the future. We should all welcome
the commitments made by President Karzai in his
inauguration speech to enhance efforts towards
national unity and reconciliation, increase the
responsibility of Afghan forces in providing security to
their own people, promote economic development and
administrative reforms and take firm measures to fight
corruption. We should also ensure that our collective
support for President Karzai effectively helps him turn
words into deeds.

The appointment of a competent and inclusive
Cabinet is a key element in fulfilling those
commitments. We encourage the Afghan Government
and the Wolesi Jirga to continue working on the
formation of the new Government. My delegation also
supports President Karzai's initiative to promote
national reconciliation, including through talks with
the armed opposition.

Another crucial area on which the new
Government will certainly want to focus is electoral
reform, so as to prevent the recurrence of the problems
identified during the 2009 elections. The 2010
elections must contribute to the consolidation of
democracy in Afghanistan. We note UNAMA's calls for
reform and more transparency in the Independent
Electoral Commission ahead of the parliamentary and
local elections scheduled for next May and call for
increased dialogue between the Afghan Government
and the Mission. We encourage further dialogue and
cooperation in that regard by all stakeholders.

Continued progress on the promotion and
protection of the rights of women is also needed. It
would be important for the Afghan parliament to
consider in a timely manner the draft law on the
elimination of violence against women and the
amended Shia personal status law. Matching progress
in the legislative area with the strengthening of
institutions charged with its implementation is key. A
long-term solution for the security situation in
Afghanistan requires steady transfer of responsibility
to the Afghan Government. That will make possible a
gradual withdrawal of the international military
presence on the ground and the normalization of life in
the country.

The conflict in Afghanistan will not be solved
purely on the military front. The convincing argument
made by Mr. Eide on the need for a politically driven
strategy rather than a militarily driven one should
guide our work. Refocusing the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy on long-term projects also
seems to be the correct approach to follow and may
require a stronger role for UNAMA, which we would
support.

Improved coordination of the civilian
international action in Afghanistan is crucial if both the
Government and donors are to achieve greater
effectiveness in their actions. In so doing, adequate
attention must be given to national ownership so as to
ensure the long-term sustainability of international
action in the country. We therefore support the
initiative of establishing a dedicated civilian
coordination structure in Afghanistan under the United
Nations umbrella, able to gradually transfer to the
Afghan Government the coordination of donor support
for its programmes and priorities. To that end, donor
countries must find the political readiness indicated in
the Secretary-General's report to shift their focus in
Afghanistan from capacity-substitution to capacity-
building.

We agree with Mr. Eide's observation that the
best contribution the international community can
make to assist the Afghan Government and Afghan
society is to help them to strengthen institutions. Such
a task is complex by definition, but it is the only real
option in the long run. In that context, the international
conferences to be held on 28 January in London and
later this year in Kabul will be important opportunities
to advance in that direction.

