At the outset, I would like to welcome the holding of this briefing devoted to the examination of the thirty-second, semi-annual report on the activities of the International Criminal Court (ICC) in Darfur and congratulate the Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, on her briefing to the Council. Since the last briefing of the Office of the Prosecutor to the Council on 10 June (see S/2020/538), the Sudan has made efforts and encouraging progress in its quest for justice for the victims of atrocities committed in Darfur. We therefore welcome the adoption in July by the Sudan's Sovereign Council of several legislative amendments, including the repeal of criminal law provisions that prevented cooperation with the ICC. The signing of the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan in October by representatives of the Government of the Sudan, the Sudanese Revolutionary Front and other movements in the country, in which the parties agreed to cooperate fully with the ICC in relation to individuals subject to arrest warrants, is an important development that we welcome. My delegation therefore notes the adoption by the parties of several measures relating to the appearance of wanted suspects before the ICC, the facilitation of investigations in which they do not intend to interfere and the guarantee of security for victims and witnesses. We also note that the decision to establish a Darfur truth and reconciliation commission, as well as a special court for the crimes committed there, can only serve to complement the objectives of the ICC. My delegation encourages continued dialogue between the Sudanese authorities and the ICC, within the framework of the principle of complementarity with national judicial institutions. It is indeed important that the Court continue its activities with complete independence and impartiality in order to ensure that the persons prosecuted and the suspects can exercise their fundamental rights, including the right to a fair trial. We regret the violations of children's rights, in particular those involving killing, mutilation and sexual violence, especially against girls, as noted in the special report of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the Secretary-General of the United Nations on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and a follow-on presence (S/2020/1115), dated 13 November. In conclusion, my delegation encourages the establishment of a regular and constructive dialogue between the Government of the Sudan and the ICC with regard to the drafting of a memorandum of understanding on facilitating the operations of the Office of the Prosecutor in the Sudan and reiterates its congratulations to Prosecutor Bensouda and her Office on their efforts and dedication to the fight against impunity.
