Mr. Powell (United States of America): It is a
great pleasure to be here again to consider this very
important matter. I am very pleased to be here as the
Secretary of State of a relatively new country on the
face of the Earth. But I think I can take some credit
sitting here as the representative of the oldest
democracy represented here around this table. I am
proud of that. It is a democracy that believes in peace,
a nation that has tried in the course of its history to
show how people can live in peace with one another.
But it is a democracy that has not been afraid to meet
its responsibilities on the world stage when it has been
challenged and, more importantly, when others in the
world have been challenged, when the international
order has been challenged or when the international
institutions of which we are a part have been
challenged.

That is why we joined, and have been an active
member of, institutions such as the United Nations and
a number of others that have come together for the
purpose of peace, the purpose of mutual security and
the purpose of letting other nations that pursue a path
of destruction, that pursue a path of developing
weapons of mass destruction and that threaten their
neighbours know that we will stand tall, that we will
stand together to meet these kinds of challenges.

I want to express my appreciation to Mr. Blix and
Mr. ElBaradei for their statements this morning. They
took up a difficult challenge when they went back into
Iraq last fall in pursuit of disarmament, as required by
resolution 1441 (2002). I listened very attentively to all
they said this morning, and I am pleased that there
have been improvements with respect to process. I am
pleased that there have been improvements with
respect to not having five minders with each
inspectors, but fewer than five minders with each
inspector. But I think they are still being minded; they
are still being watched; they are still being bugged.
They still do not have the freedom of access around
Iraq that they need in order to do their job well.

I am pleased that a few people have come
forward for interviews. But not all the people who
should be coming forward for interviews are doing so,
or have the freedom to interview in such a way that
their safety and the safety of their families can be
protected, as required by resolution 1441 (2002). I am
glad that access has been relatively good.

But that is all process - it is not substance. I am
pleased to hear that decrees have now been issued that
should have been issued years and years ago. But does
anyone really think that a decree from Saddam
Hussain - directed to whom? - is going to
fundamentally change the situation? And it comes out
on a morning when we are moving forward down the
path laid out by resolution 1441 (2002). These are all
process issues. These are all tricks that are being
played on us.

They say that new commissions are being formed
that will go and find materials that they claim are not
there in the first place. Can anybody honestly believe
that either one of those two new commissions will
actively seek out information that they have been
actively trying to deny to the world community, to the
inspectors, for the past ll-plus years?

I commend the inspectors. I thank them for what
they are doing. But at the same time I have to keep
coming back to the point that the inspectors have
repeatedly made. They have made it again here this
morning; they have been making it for the past 11-plus
years. What we need is not more inspections, not more
immediate access; what we need is immediate, active,
unconditional, full cooperation on the part of Iraq.
What we need is for Iraq to disarm.

Resolution 1441 (2002) was not about
inspections. Let me say that again: resolution 1441
(2002) was not about inspections. Resolution 1441
(2002) was about the disarmament of Iraq. We worked
on that resolution for seven weeks, from the time of
President Bush's powerful speech here in the General
Assembly on 12 September until the resolution was
adopted on 8 November. We had intense discussions.
All of you are familiar with that; you participated in
those discussions. That was about disarmament.

The resolution began with the clear statement that
Iraq had been in material breach of its obligations for
the previous 11 years, and remained to that day - the
day the resolution was adopted - in material breach.
The resolution said that Iraq must now come into
compliance; it must disarm. The resolution went on to
say that we wanted to see a declaration from Iraq,
within 30 days, of all of its activities. "Put it all on the
table; let us see what you have been doing. Give us a
declaration that we can believe in that is full, complete
and accurate" - that is what we said to Iraq on 8
November. And some 29 days later we got 12,000
pages. Nobody in this Council can say that that was a
full, complete or accurate declaration.

Now it is several months after that declaration
was submitted, and I have heard nothing to suggest that
they have filled in the gaps that were in that
declaration, or that they have added new evidence that
should give us any comfort that we have a full,
complete and accurate declaration. You will recall that
we put that declaration requirement into the resolution
as an early test of Iraq's seriousness. Are they serious?
Are they going to disarm? Are they going to comply?
Are they going to cooperate? The answer, with that
declaration, was, "No - we are going to see what we
can get away with. We will see how much we can slip
under your nose. And everybody will clap, and say

'Isn't that wonderful; they provided a declaration'" -
a declaration that was not of any particular use.

We then had some level of acceptance of the fact
that inspectors were going back in. Recall that Iraq
tried to use that gambit right after the President's
speech in September to try to keep resolution 1441
(2002) from ever coming down the pipe. Suddenly, on
the Monday after the President's speech, they said,
"Oh! We'll let inspectors back in". Why? Because
when the President spoke, and when Iraq saw that the
international community was now coming together
with seriousness and with determination, it knew it had
better do something. It did not do it out of the goodness
of its heart, or because it suddenly discovered that it
had been in violation for all those years. They did it
because of pressure. They did it because this Council
stood firm. They did it because the international
community said, "Enough! We will not tolerate Iraq
continuing to have weapons of mass destruction to be
used against its own people, to be used against its
neighbours - or worse, if we find a post-11 September
nexus between Iraq and terrorist organizations that are
looking for just such weapons." And I would submit -
and will provide more evidence - that such
connections are now emerging. We can establish that
they exist.

We cannot wait for one of these terrible weapons
to show up in one of our cities and wonder where it
came from after it has been detonated by Al-Qaeda or
somebody else. This is the time to go after this source
of this kind of weaponry.

And that is what resolution 1441 (2002) was all
about. To this day we have not seen the level of
cooperation that was expected, anticipated and hoped
for - I hoped for it. No one worked harder than the
United States. And I submit that no one worked
harder - if I may humbly say so - than I did to try to
put forward a resolution that would show the
determination of the international community to the
leadership in Iraq so that they would now meet their
obligations and come clean and comply. And they did
not. Notwithstanding all of the discussion that we have
heard so far this morning about, "Give inspections
more time; let's have more airplanes flying over; let's
have more inspectors added to the inspection
process" - Mr. Blix noted earlier this week that it is
not more inspectors that are needed. What is needed is
what both Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei have said, what
has been needed since 1991: immediate, active,
unconditional compliance and cooperation.

I am pleased that Iraq is now discussing this
matter with South Africa. But it is not brain surgery.
South Africa knows how to do it. Anybody knows how
to do it. If we were getting the kind of cooperation that
we expected when resolution 1441 (2002) was passed
and that we hoped for when resolution 1441 (2002)
was passed, these documents would be flooding out of
homes, flooding out of factories. There would be no
question about access. There would be no question
about interviews. If Iraq were serious in this matter,
interviewees would be standing up outside the offices
of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), in
Baghdad and elsewhere, waiting to be interviewed
because they would be determined to prove to the
world, to give the world all the evidence needed that
these weapons of mass destruction are gone.

Notwithstanding all of the lovely rhetoric, the
questions remain. Some of my colleagues have talked
about them. We have not accounted for the anthrax. We
have not accounted for the botulinum, the VX, bulk
biological agents, growth media, 30,000 chemical and
biological munitions. These are not trivial matters one
can just ignore and walk away from and say "Well,
maybe the inspectors will find them, maybe they
won't". We have not had a complete, accurate
declaration. We have seen the reconstitution of casting
chambers for missiles. Why? Because they are still
trying to develop these weapons. We have not seen the
kind of cooperation that was anticipated, expected and
demanded by this body. And we must continue to
demand it; we must continue to put pressure on Iraq
and to put force upon Iraq to make sure that the threat
of force is not removed, because resolution 1441
(2002) was all about compliance, not inspections. The
inspections were put in as a way, of course, to assist
Iraq in coming forward and complying: in order to
verify; in order to monitor, as the chief inspector noted.

But we still have an incomplete answer from Iraq.
We are facing a difficult situation. More inspectors?
Sorry, that is not the answer. What we need is
immediate cooperation. Time? How much time does it
take to say, "I understand the will of the international
community, and I and my regime are laying it all out
for you" and not playing "guess", not forming
commissions, not issuing decrees, not getting laws that
should have been passed years ago suddenly passed on
the day when we are meeting. These are not
responsible actions on the part of Iraq. These are
continued efforts to deceive, to deny, to divert, to throw
us off the trail, to throw us off the path.

The resolution anticipated this kind of response
from Iraq. That is why in all of our discussions about
that resolution we said, "They are in material breach. If
they come into a new material breach with a false
declaration or are not willing to cooperate and comply,
as operative paragraph 4 says, then the matter has to be
referred to the Council for serious consequences." I
submit that notwithstanding the improvements in
process that we have noted - and I welcome this, and
thank the inspectors for their hard work - these
improvements in process do not move us away from
the central problem that we continue to have. And more
inspections and a longer inspection period will not
move us away from the central issue, the central
problem we are facing. And that central problem is that
Iraq has failed to comply with resolution 1441 (2002).

The threat of force must remain. Force should
always be a last resort. I have preached this for most of
my professional life as a soldier and as a diplomat. But
it must be a resort. We cannot allow this process to be
endlessly strung out, as Iraq is trying to do right now:
"String it out long enough and the world will start
looking in other directions. The Security Council will
move on. We will get away with it again."

My friends, they cannot be allowed to get away
with it again. We are now in a situation where Iraq's
continued non-compliance and failure to cooperate, it
seems to me in the clearest terms, require this Council
to begin to think through the consequences of walking
away from this problem or the reality that we have to
face this problem and that in the very near future we
will have to consider whether or not we have reached
that point where this Council must face this issue - as
distasteful as it may be and as reluctant as we may be.
So many of you would rather not have to face this
issue, but it is an issue that must be faced. And that
issue is whether or not it is time to consider serious
consequences of the kind intended by resolution 1441
(2002). The reason we must not look away from it is
because these are terrible weapons. We are talking
about weapons that will kill not a few people, not 100
people, not 1,000 people, but could kill tens of
thousands of people if these weapons got into the
wrong hands.

The security of the region, the hopes for the
people of Iraq themselves, and our security rest upon
us meeting our responsibilities and, if it comes to it,
invoking the serious consequences called for in
resolution 1441 (2002). Resolution 1441 (2002) is
about disarmament and compliance and not merely a
process of inspections that goes on forever without
ever resolving the basic problem.

