Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I join others in thanking
Under-Secretary-General Pascoe and Ambassador
Khalilzad for their very clear, informative and focused
briefings. We welcome Ambassador Al Bayati. I think
his presence is very important to all of us. I wish to
express our equally strong appreciation for the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/266) as well as
warm and sincere thanks to Special Representative
Staffan de Mistura and to the staff of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for the
way in which they have been performing and for what
they have been achieving in a very difficult, delicate
and politically sensitive environment. Indeed, as
Under-Secretary-General Pascoe said, we are proud of
what they are doing and of how they are upholding the
United Nations flag. As Mr. Pascoe said, the United
Nations reputation is growing, and I think it is very
important to see that the United Nations credibility is
growing. It is important in Iraq and, of course,
elsewhere.

The Organization's reputation and credibility are
growing also because, as Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe said, we have seen and are seeing an increased
and enhanced role for the United Nations. That is what
we wanted - an increased presence on the ground; an
increased involvement of UNAMI in a number of
issues that Mr. Pascoe mentioned; and facilitating,
giving direction and consolidating the political and
electoral processes.

Italy shares the analysis of the Secretary-General
in his most recent report to the effect that a sustainable
stabilization of the security situation in Iraq can be
successfully achieved only in the framework of a new
social pact based on the inclusion in the political
process of the broadest possible spectrum of
representative parties and on the extension of rights
and benefits without ethnic or religious discrimination.

There are many challenges Iraq has to face on
that path, as has been recalled by previous speakers,
including such issues as the fair distribution of State
revenues and the management of natural resources, the
balance between central and provincial authorities, the
disbanding of all militias, and the development of a
reliable national police. We agree in that regard with
the emphasis that the Secretary-General's report places
on a rapid approval of a hydrocarbon law that defines
the framework for the proper use of natural resources
on a national basis.

We would like to commend the Government of
Iraq on the progress it has made in the political sector
and on the steps it has taken towards national
reconciliation. It is working in the right direction. Over
the past year, the Government of Iraq has been making
progress in its efforts to confront terrorism and
militias. We appreciate the growing autonomy
demonstrated by the Iraqi security forces and we
encourage them to make further progress in that field.
Those efforts must be encouraged and actively
supported by the whole of the international community,
and foremost by the countries of the region, whose
positive engagement through the expanded
neighbouring States process plays an essential role.

We welcome, in that regard, the recent ministerial
meeting that took place in Kuwait City on 22 April. I
should like to reiterate here, as we did in Kuwait,
Italy's strong commitment to its support for Iraq and its
people in their aspiration to build a better future. The
role of neighbouring countries in supporting the
stabilization of Iraq could also be further enhanced by
providing debt relief, in accordance with the Paris Club
terms, and by contributing to the implementation of the
International Compact with Iraq, also through the
multilateral channel of the International Reconstruction
Fund Facility for Iraq.

08-3196]
As I have said before, we appreciate the activities
and progress of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq. We continue to believe that the United Nations
has a fundamental and central role to play in Iraq in
supporting Iraqi ownership, and we welcome the high
number of high-level visits paid by United Nations
officials to Iraq in the past month, one of the most
recent of which was that of Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe just a few days ago, on which he briefed us.
Such visits prove the commitment of the Organization
to the Iraqi people. It is our hope that the Mission can
further develop a broader mandate, focusing also on
technical support for the Iraqi authorities, particularly
regarding budget execution. Helping Iraq unlock its
own considerable resources remains a top priority for
all of us.

I would like to conclude by stressing that point,
and I commend Special Representative De Mistura for
what he is doing.

