Ms. Adamson: The former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro, Albania and Liechtenstein
align themselves with this statement.

The situation in the Middle East continues to
deteriorate. The Gaza Strip has been like a pressure
cooker for some time and is on the verge of explosion.
Two million people have limited access to basic services
and shrinking hopes that their own lives and the lives of
their children can be improved. That is the backdrop to
tensions, which have escalated in past months.

Since the end of March, we have seen protests
and violence at the Gaza border fence. Continued
provocation and unacceptable violent actions by Hamas
and the Palestinian Islamic Jihad represent a real and
concerning threat, with communities in southern Israel
paying the consequences. In past weeks, we have
seen multiple rockets fired from Gaza towards Israel,
followed by Israeli air strikes on targets in Gaza. The
incendiary kites and balloons that have been launched
from Gaza for over a hundred days must stop.

The response by Israeli security forces, often
using live ammunition, resulted in over 135 Palestinian
fatalities, including minors, journalists and a health
worker. More than 14,000 were injured, which put
a massive strain on the Gaza health sector. The
European Union (EU) urged Israel to refrain from the
excessive use of force against unarmed civilians when
protecting its legitimate security interests. The use
of force must be proportionate at all times. Equally,
Israel should reverse its punitive measures and work
with the international community to ease conditions in
Gaza, including opening movement and access for all
humanitarian actors.

In order to prevent further escalation of violence, we
strongly urge all relevant parties to respect international
law, de-escalate tensions, exercise restraint and prevent
incidents that couldjeopardize the lives of Palestinians
and Israelis.

We welcome the truce and the planned reopening
of the Kerem Shalom crossing. The EU fully supports
the efforts by Special Coordinator Mladenov, in close
relation with the Palestinian Authority, to enhance
United Nations capacity in Gaza to alleviate the
humanitarian crisis and reduce tensions.

But to prevent the crisis from worsening, further
action is needed. Five steps are urgent and necessary.
While addressing Israel's legitimate security concerns,
the EU calls for an end of the closure and a full opening
of the crossing points in order to reinvigorate the
Gazan economy. The international community should
continue to support the Special Coordinator's proposals
to alleviate the humanitarian crisis in Gaza. Current
efforts under Egyptian auspices to reunite Gaza and the
West Bank under one single and legitimate Palestinian
Authority through progress in the intra-Palestinian
reconciliation must also be supported by the

international community.

The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East must remain able
to carry out its important function and services with
the international community stepping up its support
and its financial commitment to plug the funding
gap. Finally, serious efforts must be made towards a
resumption of meaningful negotiations aimed at a two-
State solution, based on the 1967 borders, that meets
Israeli and Palestinian security needs and Palestinian
aspirations for statehood and sovereignty, ends the
occupation and resolves all final status issues in order
to end the conflict.

The EU stands ready to contribute to those efforts.
Our intention is to continue to work with our partners,
the Israelis and the Palestinians; with regional actors,
such as Jordan and Egypt; and with our partners within
the Middle East Quartet to that end.

The EU is committed to ensuring that all its
instruments continue to best serve its policies. That is
why it has launched a review of the modalities for the
EU engagement on the ground, to make sure that all the
financial support and other policy activities of the EU
have an impact in the achievement of the political goal
of the two States without reducing the level of funding.

Beyond Gaza, we cannot ignore the continued
demolition of Palestinian property by the Israeli
authorities. As High Representative Mogherini made
clear last week, those issues have our full attention,
in particular the pending demolition of the Palestinian
village othan Al-Ahmar located in a sensitive location
in Area C. Its demolition and displacement would
severely threaten the viability of the two-State solution
and undermine prospects for peace. The EU expects the
Israeli authorities to reconsider their decision.

More generally, the EU reiterates its strong
opposition to Israel's settlement policy and actions.
Settlements are illegal under international law. They
constitute an obstacle to peace and threaten to make a
two-State solution impossible. The status of Jerusalem
is a final status issue. The aspirations ofboth parties for
Jerusalem must be fulfilled, and a way must be found
through negotiations to resolve the status of Jerusalem
as the future capital of both States.

There is pressing need for a political horizon to be
restored. This is why the EU and its members States in
past months have been so vocal in reconfirming their
united, consolidated position in support for the two-
State solution, with Jerusalem as the future capital
of both States. We simply do not see any other viable
option. Any alternative would play into the hands of
extremists and potentially cause unrest and instability
throughout the region.

The EU reiterates that there can be no military
solution to the Syrian conflict. We repeat that Syria
needs a political solution and a political transition in
line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex). Yet the Syrian
regime, supported by its allies Russia and Iran, has
intensified its military operations without regard for
civilian casualties and has continued its violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law.

The EU deplores the repeated violations of
de-escalation agreements and urges the Astana
guarantors - Russia, Iran and Turkey - to ensure
the cessation of hostilities and unhindered, safe and
sustainable humanitarian access throughout all of
Syria. The EU also deplores the Russian-backed regime
offensive in south-west Syria, which has again led to
widespread displacement. The EU calls upon all parties
to the conflict, especially the regime and its allies, to
implement a cessation of hostilities to enable the safe,
unimpeded and sustained delivery of aid consistent with
applicable international law, as demanded in Security
Council resolution 2401 (2018).

The EU calls on all parties to respect the terms of
the 1974 Disengagement of Forces Agreement between
Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as to allow
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force to
properly fulfil its mandate and ensure the safety and
security of its peacekeeping personnel.

Accountability for war crimes will remain a high
priority for the EU, and we will continue to support the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic since March 2011, as well as other
organizations contributing to its efforts. In that context,
the EU welcomes the adoption, at the Special Session
of the Conference of States Parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention held on 27 June, of a decision
condemning the use of chemical weapons by the Syrian
regime and by Da'esh, and mandating the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons to identify
those responsible for chemical weapons attacks in Syria.

The EU is concerned about the potential
consequences that Law No. 10, adopted by the Syrian
regime, may have for the future return of Syrian
internationally displaced persons and refugees. That
law may also contribute to a change in the social,
political, economic and sectarian landscape of Syria.

The EU intends to host a high-level event on Syria
at the seventy-third session of the General Assembly to
reaffirm its strong commitment to a political solution
to the Syria conflict and to sustaining international
engagement to address the humanitarian and resilience
needs of people inside Syria and in the region through
the pledges made at the two Brussels conferences.
Finally, I would like to comment on Iraq. The
EU has been following closely the popular protests
in Iraq. The right of citizens to assemble freely and
protest is fundamental. Citizens' unhindered access
to information must be guaranteed. Protests should
remain peaceful, and Iraqi security forces must
exercise maximum restraint. We would like to signal
our offer to hold a side event on Iraq at the Assembly's
seventy-third session as a follow-up to the International
Conference for Reconstruction of Iraq, held in February
in Kuwait. Iraq has the potential to become a success
story in the region for its post-Da'esh transition,
ongoing stabilization and democratic consolidation.
However, as we are currently seeing, Iraq still faces
major challenges entailing important risks.

