Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti (Brazil): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting and for
inviting me to briefthe Security Council in my capacity
as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). I would also like
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS),
Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, for his briefing today, for his
leadership and commitment in facilitating a resolution
of the current situation in Guinea-Bissau and for his
inspirational work as Head of UNIOGBIS. I welcome
the Permanent Representative of Mozambique and
Chair of the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries (CPLP), Ambassador Antonio Gumende;
the Permanent Representative of C6te d'Ivoire and
Chair of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), Ambassador Youssoufou Bamba;
and the Permanent Representative of Guinea-Bissau,
Ambassador Joao Soares Da Gama.

Since I last spoke in the Council (see S/PV.6915),
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission met on 1 March to hear briefings from
the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Mr. Yury Fedotov, and the
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Gana Fofang. Mr. Fedotov
expressed deep concern about the continued increase
in drug trafficking, in particular in the aftermath of
the April 2012 coup d'etat, which, in turn, was closely
linked to other forms of transnational organized crime.
He also urged Member States and the United Nations to
provide UNODC with additional resources as a matter
of urgency, to avoid a shutdown of its already minimal
presence in the country.

Despite that appeal and my ensuing plea to the
members of the configuration, funds could not be
identified, and, as the Secretary-General states in his
most recent report on the situation in Guinea-Bissau
(S/2013/262), UNODC had to end its presence there
last month. That development is not consistent with the
concerns we all share and with the need to continue
to address drug trafficking in Guinea-Bissau as a
matter of priority. It is important that we translate our
expressions of concern into concrete actions.

The recent arrest of several nationals of Guinea-
Bissau, including the former Navy Chief of Staff, Rear
Admiral Bubo Na Tchuto, on allegations of involvement
in drug trafficking, and the indictment by United States
authorities of the Chief of General Staff of the armed
forces of Guinea-Bissau, General Antonio Indjai, for,
among other charges, conspiring to import narcotics
into the United States, are clear indications of the
need for the international community to maintain
a permanent capacity on the ground to monitor the
situation and continue to provide capacity-building
support to national authorities.
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Fofang, for his part, pleaded for a shift from
the usual quick-fix solution approach to a more long-
term perspective in the case of Guinea-Bissau, in order
to halt the vicious winner-takes-all dynamics that have
poisoned the country since independence. He also
pleaded for continued United Nations engagement with
all the relevant national and international parties in
order to facilitate dialogue. I am glad to report that,
as a follow-up to that discussion, the PBC will meet
again tomorrow, with the participation of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ramos-Horta.

In the past few weeks, we have noticed some
promising developments in Guinea-Bissau. As
Mr. Ramos-Horta just stated, the draft ofa new regime
pact to replace the current transitional arrangements
is being discussed in the National Assembly, with the
active participation of the main national stakeholders,
and an agreement on principles for the return to
constitutional normalcy was signed on 30 April.

Such efforts need to be supported. At the same
time, the international community needs to maintain
pressure on the transitional authorities and on political
and military leaders to achieve the swift adoption
and implementation of a more inclusive transitional
arrangement. The holding of free, fair and transparent
presidential and legislative elections by the end of
this year, thus enabling the full re-engagement of
international partners with Guinea-Bissau, is also
essential. A prolonged period oftransition is in nobody's
interest and raises questions about the political will of
the transitional authorities to find a sustainable solution
to the current crisis.

During the most recent meeting of the configuration,
several members supported re-engagement with
Guinea-Bissau, once key movements on the ground
took place towards the restoration of constitutional
order. There was general acknowledgment that when
the Commission re-engaged with Guinea-Bissau, it
should do so on the basis of a revised instrument that
would reflect the key peacebuilding priorities in the
current national context.

The PBC also believes that resumed Peacebuilding
Fund funding should be aligned with such priorities. In
that regard, both the report of the Secretary-General,
including the findings of the recently deployed
technical assessment mission, and the conclusions and
recommendations of the joint assessment mission by
the United Nations, the African Union, ECOWAS, the
CPLP and the European Union will be duly taken into
account.
As an intergovernmental body with an advisory role to
the Security Council, the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the PBC renews its determination to work with
the legitimate authorities representing the people of
Guinea-Bissau as a whole, in close coordination with
other national and international partners, especially
with Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ramos-Horta and his team at UNIOGBIS, to promote
the necessary reforms to consolidate peace, sustain
stability and promote development in Guinea-Bissau.

