Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): Let me start by first of all
recognizing the presence of the Foreign Minister of
Timor-Leste, Mr. Ramos-Horta. The delegation of
Indonesia has always attached great importance to any
debate relating to Timor-Leste, particularly because of
its historical, socio-economic and cultural ties with
Indonesia. My country also recognizes the role played
by the international community in helping the process
of the development of Timor-Leste, including
UNMISET, whose mandate will end in May this year.
We hope that Indonesia's contributions to the
implementation of UNMISET's mandate will be
recognized by the international community as well.
Indonesia is of the view that whatever mechanism
is to replace UNMISET, the Security Council must take
into consideration the positive relationship between
Indonesia and Timor-Leste. As we also learned from
the Secretary-General's report, the situation in Timor-
Leste has been growing progressively more stable and
its relationship with Indonesia more cordial.

From the very beginning, Indonesia has
demonstrated its unwavering interest in developing
friendly ties with Timor- Leste. As a result, the
Government-to-Government relationship between both
nations has increasingly been strengthened. That
relationship is characterized by a strong commitment at
the highest political level, reflected in the State visits
made by both Presidents, the regular visits by the two
Foreign Ministers, and the establishment of the Joint
Ministerial Commission, the Joint Border Committee
and other bilateral mechanisms.

The Ministerial Commission has established
several working groups to deal with border issues,
trade and finance, legal matters, educational and
cultural affairs, and transport and telecommunications.

At the regional level, in October 2002,
Indonesia's Southwest Pacific Dialogue initiative, of
which Timor-Leste is also a member, was realized. The
second ministerial dialogue was held in New York in
2003. Indonesia was also quick to encourage Timor-
Leste to get involved in meetings of the Association of
South-East Asian Nations.

On the question of refugees, it is important to
remember that, through close cooperation between the
two Governments and with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
more than 250,000 refugees have returned voluntarily
to Timor-Leste. As of December 2002, Indonesia had
declared that there were no more refugees from Timor-
Leste. The remaining 28,000 East Timorese who opted
to stay in Indonesia are now being processed as
Indonesian citizens and will be given the opportunity to
be relocated within Indonesia. The Government of
Indonesia is prepared, however, to assist any of them
who voluntarily want to return to Timor-Leste.

Let me now turn to the issue of the separated
Timorese children. Since UNHCR will no longer be
directly involved in this matter, the Government of
Indonesia, in cooperation with the Government of
Timor-Leste, will fully take care of the children
through reunification and local integration. As of
December 2003, over 2,000 cases had been resolved
through reunification. In addition, there are many East
Timorese children who live in Timor-Leste and are
separated from their parents who are now in Indonesia,
and should not be forgotten. This matter is one of the
issues on the agenda of the Joint Ministerial
Commission between Indonesia and Timor-Leste.

Indonesia and Timor-Leste have worked hard to
build a strong relationship on the basis of forward-
looking policies. It is our hope that UNMISET will
support that strong relationship.

Having stated the positive realities and underlined
the good relationship between Indonesia and Timor-
Leste, I must stress that it is unfortunate and a matter
of regret that the report contains unnecessary notions
that do not accurately reflect the facts of the matter.
The report suggests, for instance, that

"tensions arose following the conduct of military
exercises by the Indonesian armed forces, without
the prior knowledge of their Timorese
counterparts, on an uninhabited island near
Oecussi whose ownership has not been formally
agreed by the two countries" (S/2004/117, para. 10).

In our view, this is capable of creating the wrong
picture of Indonesia, which is unjustifiable and would
be counterproductive. First, no tension arose in
connection with this matter in December 2003.
Secondly, existing legal national and international
documents show that the uninhabited location in
reference, Batek Island, belongs to Indonesia. As a
result of this situation, therefore, no need has arisen for
a formal agreement concerning the ownership of the
island, as the report suggests. While the Indonesian
navy did conduct a small and routine naval exercise on
the island, it did so squarely within Indonesian
territory.

Finally, Indonesia has continued to work in the
best interests of all Indonesians, their neighbours and
the international community. Its commitment and
determination to ensure improvements in Timor-Leste
have been demonstrated in various ways. I can assure
the Security Council that my Government will continue
those endeavours. It is within that spirit that the
international community should render its support.

