Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the People's Republic of China
for having convened this open debate of the Security
Council on such an important topic.

The Security Council must remain committed to
protecting civilians in armed conflict by promoting full
respect for international law, in particular international
humanitarian and human rights law, as well as to the
fight against impunity.

Argentina thanks the Secretary-General for
presenting his report (S/2012/376) and for the
recommendations contained therein. The report is clear
in its recognition that, regrettably, following the 2010
report (S/2010/579), the protection of civilians remains
weak. Every time the Security Council considers
the issue, it should be recalled that the parties to an
armed conflict are duty-bound by the basic standards
of international humanitarian law, which provides
that civilians must be protected from the effects of a
conflict. That obligation, enshrined in article 3 of the
1949 Fourth Geneva Convention, is also applicable to
non-international armed conflicts, that is to say, to
disputing non-State parties.

Argentina agrees that the first basic challenge is to
promote compliance with international humanitarian
law. The principles of distinction and proportionality
are fundamental. It should also be recalled that
non-compliance by one party to a conflict does not
justify non-compliance by the other.

Action by the United Nations is key to protecting
civilians in armed conflict, as well as to avoiding the
emergence of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity and, in the case of
such situations, to preventing them from continuing.
Argentina agrees with the Secretary-General's
observations on the distinction between the protection
of civilians in armed conflict and the responsibility
to protect. However, it should be borne in mind
that prevention is key to preventing violations of
humanitarian law in armed conflict and the four crimes
under the responsibility to protect from occurring. To
that end, respect for international law and human rights
and humanitarian law is crucial.

With regard to action by the Security Council, my
delegation would like to underscore two points raised in
the report of the Secretary-General.

The first element is the need for peacekeeping
operations to comply with international humanitarian
law. My country is convinced of the need to continue to
include the responsibility to protect in the mandates of
United Nations missions. It is crucial to strengthen the
training of the staff of such operations in international
humanitarian law and to have the appropriate structure
to address the need to protect women and children from
violence, in particular gender-based violence.

Secondly, strict compliance with the mandates
issued by the Security Council is crucial. The report
refers to the concerns raised by resolution 1973 (2011)
with regard to the perception that its application went
beyond civilian protection. Above and beyond the fact
that Argentina believes that the use of force for the
protection of civilians must be the ultima ratio, we agree
that when the Security Council adopts authorizations or
mandates, their implementation must not only comply
with international humanitarian law, in particular with
the principles of distinction and proportionality, and
with international human rights law, but must also be
strictly limited to ensuring the protection of civilians.

With regard to humanitarian assistance, parties
to a conflict must make every effort to ensure that
humanitarian assistance reaches the affected civilians.
We are concerned by the fact that there are not only
attacks and actions that block or place obstacles in
the way of humanitarian assistance but also deliberate
attacks on hospitals and other means of assistance.

A further element in the report with which my
delegation agrees as to its importance is fact-finding.
In addition to the ad hoc commissions of inquiry that
can be established, including those by the Human
Rights Council - there is the recent example following
the adoption of a resolution on Syria - there are also
ways to carry out investigation by an impartial entity
into acts that could be serious violations of the Geneva
Conventions, such as the International Fact-finding
Commission, established under Protocol I to the 1949
Geneva Convention. Furthermore, in resolution 1894
(2009), the Security Council recognized the option of
turning to the Commission for that purpose. We call on
the Council to take that fact into account.

Likewise, with regard to justice, we must note
that individuals who commit crimes - war crimes,
genocide or crimes against humanity - are responsible
for the most serious crimes and must therefore be held
fully accountable before criminaljustice. Currently, we
are heading towards an international criminal justice
system for the most serious crimes, including war
crimes, centred in a permanent court, the International
Criminal Court. In March 2012, the Court issued its
firstjudgement, finding Thomas Lubanga guilty of war
crimes for recruiting children under 15 years of ago to
engage in hostilities in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. However, several International Criminal Court
indictees are still at large. We call on all States parties
and non-parties to the Rome Statute to cooperate with
the Court, in particular in relation to the execution of
arrest warrants.

I would not like to end without reiterating that
attacks of any kind targeting civilians or other
protected persons in armed conflict and the recruitment
of children and in any way impeding the provision
of humanitarian assistance constitute violations of
international law. Therefore, I conclude by calling once
again for full compliance with the obligations arising
under The Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907, the
four 1949 Geneva Conventions and their 1977 Protocol,
general international law and the decisions of the
Security Council.

