Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I wish to thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq, for
his detailed briefing today on the situation in Iraq and
the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI). My delegation thanks Mr. De Mistura
for his work and for his contribution and commitment
to the development of political dialogue and national
reconciliation in Iraq.

We also thank Ambassador Hamid Al Bayati,
Permanent Representative of Iraq, for his
comprehensive presentation on the recent progress
made by his country.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/102)
before the Security Council today is of special
importance, for two fundamental reasons.

First, it represents the first time that the Council
has been informed on the situation in Iraq since the
expiration of the mandate of the multinational force
and since the bilateral security agreement between the
United States and Iraq entered into force. Pursuant to
that agreement, the United States forces will be placed
under the authority of the Iraqi Government for the
remainder of their presence in the country. That
concrete fact is deeply symbolic for my country,
particularly given the conditions in which the war in
Iraq unfolded and the subsequent establishment of the
multinational force. The facts behind those
developments are well known, and Mexico has
expressed its views thereon on previous occasions. The
bilateral security agreement also represents a
tremendous achievement for the Government and
people of Iraq because, through it and with the help of
the provisions of resolution 1859 (2008), adopted in
December, Iraq will gradually recover its international
position as a sovereign and independent State.

Secondly, the Secretary-General's report has been
submitted in the context of the provincial elections
held on 31 January. We thank the Independent High
Electoral Commission and the staff of UNAMI for
playing key roles in ensuring that the elections were
carried out in the optimal conditions. We were
particularly pleased to note that the electoral process
unfolded calmly and without major incident, as noted
by several national and international observers. Their
success demonstrates the commitment of the people of
Iraq to democracy.

The results of the elections, announced in early
February, represented a triumph for the people of Iraq
and for democracy as a whole. Iraqis have turned once
again to the ballot box to settle their political disputes,
thereby contributing to the process of national
reconciliation essential to the establishment of normal
living conditions for the majority of the people.

The successful implementation of the national
security plan for the elections undoubtedly favoured
voter participation, in particular among the Sunni
population, which refrained from participating in the
2005 provincial elections. This time, they were part of
the process. We hope that the results of the electoral
process will promote political dialogue between the
various players in Iraq and consolidate the national
reconciliation process. We also hope that this exercise
will lay the foundations for the preparation of national
elections in December 2009.

Despite the great and important progress to which
we have been witness in recent months, significant
challenges remain in Iraq that must be faced with the
support of the international community and the United
Nations. In the area of security, the situation on the
ground is fundamentally different to that of previous
years. However, we continue to receive numerous
reports of indiscriminate attacks against civilians, Iraqi
armed forces, foreign forces and United Nations
personnel. We are confident in the ability of the
Government and the armed forces of Iraq to continue
to deal with this major serious problem, with consistent
respect for human rights.

The continuing situation of insecurity has led in
recent years to continuous flows of internally displaced
persons and refugees, which undermines Iraq's long-
term development. We therefore welcome the report
that some 40,000 families repatriated to Iraq have been
registered to date. We invite the Iraqi authorities to
continue to work with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees to pursue this
process, ensuring that the dignity of individuals is
respected at all times. We also welcome the adoption of
the law establishing an Independent High Commission
for Human Rights. We hope that the establishment of
the Commission, along with the commitments arising
from Iraq's recent ratification of the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, will lead to progress on
human rights, in particular with respect to the situation
of detainees, the administration of justice and women's
rights.

Likewise, we are closely following the work on a
comprehensive rule of law strategy, under United
Nations auspices. We consider that only through
institution-building can long-term political and
economic success be guaranteed in Iraq.

I recognize the work of UNAMI in Iraq and the
important role it has played in establishing the
situation we now see on the ground. As international

financing for reconstruction and development
diminishes, the work of UNAMI becomes even more
relevant, in particular its strategies to support the fight
against poverty and initiatives towards the attainment
of the Millennium Development Goals, its work to
protect ethnic and religious minorities and its efforts to
strengthen the education and health sectors. In
addition, UNAMI will have an invaluable opportunity
to continue to help the people and the Government of
Iraq through key initiatives such as the International
Compact for Iraq, the holding of local and national
elections, the national assistance strategy and the
establishment of the Independent High Commission for
Human Rights.

For Mexico, it is important that UNAMI, together
with other relevant actors, continue to give priority to
supporting the approximately 2.8 million internally
displaced persons. We therefore welcome the
establishment of the cooperation mechanism of the
2009 consolidated appeal, which the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has promoted
with a view to helping the most vulnerable people
within the country, to supporting refugees in conditions
of security and dignity, and to promoting a regional
approach to guarantee the security of Iraqis. Likewise,
it is important that UNAMI continue its work in the
constitutional review process under way in Iraq. That
will help Iraq to consolidate the rule of law and
provide guarantees for Iraqis in the sphere of civil and
political rights.

In our view, we should continue to pay close
attention to UNAMI's role as an intermediary in
resolving controversies on internal borders and the
status of Kirkuk, which are indispensable elements for
lasting peace in Iraq.

The meeting of the objectives I have just
described and the significant progress we have seen in
recent months in the light of a new international
situation indicate that 2009 holds a promising future
for Iraq. This should be consolidated with the support
of the United Nations and the international community.
