Mr. Nsobeya Efuman (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): May I first of all congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your presiding over this meeting of
the Security Council, and for being a worthy son and
representative of the Republic of Cameroon, a
neighbouring country with which Equatorial Guinea
has a fine relationship of good neighbourliness and
friendship. Your presence on the Security Council does
honour to Equatorial Guinea and, of course, to the
entire Central African subregion.

In addition, I associate myself with the statement
made by Minister Rodolphe Adada, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of the Congo, in his
capacity as the current president of the Economic
Community of Central African States. This being said,
I want to associate Equatorial Guinea with the words of
appreciation and well-deserved congratulations
addressed to you on your presiding over the work of
the Security Council during this month. We also extend
our appreciation to each of the members of the Security
Council.

Our gratitude goes in particular to the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, Mr. Kofi Annan, and
through him to each and every one of the bodies of the
United Nations system, that directly or indirectly make
an invaluable contribution to the attainment of the
objective of this meeting of the Security Council.

Together with the preceding speakers, Equatorial
Guinea highly values this fine and unprecedented
initiative of devoting a meeting of the Security Council
to a thorough consideration of the study of the difficult
issue related to the increasingly urgent need to
strengthen cooperation between the United Nations and
the subregion of Central Africa in the maintenance of
peace and security.

Consequently, I would stress that, for the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea, whose Government is
making every effort for the maintenance of peace and
stability in our country, this meeting reaffirms and
clearly attests to the great responsibility and primary
role that the United Nations Charter assigns to the
Security Council as the body in charge of ensuring and
preserving international peace and security wherever
they may be threatened. This meeting is focused on and
recalls that task and concerns over the alarming
situation in the Central African subregion, which is
suffering from the proliferation and persistence of
crisis and conflict situations and hotbeds of tension
that, declared and not, undoubtedly represent a genuine
collective threat to peace and a serious obstacle to the
enormous and tireless efforts of the States of the
subregion to confront the challenges facing our
countries in the achievement of political, economic and
social development for our respective peoples.

More significant yet is the fact that this meeting
of the Security Council is taking place at a particularly
complex time in the international situation,
characterized by the threats to the peace and hotbeds of
tension in the Central African subregion to which I
have just referred and which are known to all. I will not
name all the fraternal Central African countries that are
stricken with crises, because there is no pleasure in
constantly seeing these names on a list of crisis
victims. We hope that the names of those Central
African countries in crisis and conflict will soon be
moved to the list of those enjoying peace, stability and
progress for their peoples after so many years of
suffering.

Central Africa, endowed with immense and
significant natural resources and a population of over
100 million inhabitants, cannot remain indefinitely
immersed in instability. That is why Equatorial Guinea,
without dwelling on each and every one of the
elements of the untenable situation prevailing in
Central Africa - whose political, economic and social
implications have already been described to the
Council - wishes to express its appreciation for the
important work done over the past 10 years by the
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa, in accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly.

Out of its sense of responsibility and conviction,
Equatorial Guinea has been fully involved in this
dynamic in order to make its modest contribution to the
search for and consolidation of peace and stability in
Central Africa. In this context, Equatorial Guinea
welcomed the convening in the city of Bata, from 18 to
21 May 1998, of the Subregional Conference on
Democratic Institutions and Peace in Central Africa,
where the subregional parliament of Central Africa was
created at the initiative of President Obiang Nguema
Mbasago. That institution is responsible for involving
peoples in addressing questions of interest with a view
to strengthening mutual confidence and to promoting
peace and harmony among the States of subregion. It
was also established as a primary mechanism for
cooperation and dialogue in the promotion of
democratic values in the Central African subregion.

Among the activities of the Standing Advisory
Committee, Equatorial Guinea also welcomed the
convening of several important ministerial meetings, as
well as of a high-level seminar on the implementation
of the report of the Secretary-General on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa, held in Yaounde
from 19 to 21 July 1999. The seminar was devoted to
the promotion of participatory democracy, the peaceful
settlement of disputes, good-neighbourliness, the
struggle against the illicit trafficking and proliferation
of small arms and light weapons, cooperation in the
field of defence and security, the promotion of
international humanitarian law, the establishment of a
mechanism for the maintenance and restoration of
peace, the promotion of good governance, sustainable
development and the strengthening of subregional
cooperation. Equatorial Guinea also welcomed the
convening of the Subregional Conference on the
Proliferation and Illicit Circulation of Small Arms in
Central Africa, held in N'Djamena from 25 to 27
October 1999.

Fully aware of the challenges confronting Central
Africa, and ever since the summit of the heads of State
and Government of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS), held in Libreville,
Gabonese Republic, my country, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea, has spared no effort over the past
three years in making its modest contribution to the
process of relaunching ECCAS in order to create
mechanisms within the Community in the framework
of the collective effort of all members countries in the
maintenance of peace and security.

Those efforts include the signing of a non-
aggression pact among the States of ECCAS and the
establishment of the Council for Peace and Security in
Central Africa; the Multinational Force for Central
Africa; the early-warning mechanism for Central
Africa; and a subregional centre for human rights and
democracy in Central Africa.

To make these mechanisms operational, ECCAS
has turned to the United Nations to establish the
foundations of cooperation that is more consistent with
current and future challenges. ECCAS obtained
observer status in the United Nations two years ago and
has established an important framework of cooperation
that gives new impetus to improved cooperation at the
subregional level and with the United Nations system.
At the same time, ECCAS has been building bridges of
cooperation with the European Union and the entire
international community.

In this regard, Equatorial Guinea reiterates its
desire to see such cooperation flourish, especially since
we see encouraging prospects on the horizon for the
peaceful settlement of the conflicts and hotbeds of
tension now being experienced by a number of States
of Central Africa.

Certain that democracy is not an event, but rather
a process, Equatorial Guinea is fully convinced that
peace, security and stability are prerequisites to the
restoration and consolidation of democracies, to a
strengthened culture and promotion of respect for
human dignity, and to the achievement of the progress
and prosperity to which the peoples of our respective
countries are entitled.

The Government of Equatorial Guinea is also
fully convinced that peace, dialogue and tolerance are
essential elements in promoting coexistence and
harmony among peoples and nations. That is the basis
of Equatorial Guinea's unflagging resolve to make the
Central African subregion a zone of peace, stability
and cooperation. With that in mind, we insist, as we
always have and always will, on recourse to dialogue
and peaceful negotiation.

In conclusion, I solemnly reaffirm before this
important meeting of the Security Council the
determination of the Government of Equatorial Guinea
to make further progress in consolidating the rule of
law, democracy and the promotion and protection of
human rights. I wish to inform the Council that, on 12
October, on the occasion of the thirty-fourth
anniversary of our national independence, President
Obiang Nguema Mbasago of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea offered a presidential pardon and
reprieve to the majority of those who had been found
guilty and deprived of their freedom by our country's
justice system for various crimes and offences. This act
of magnanimity attests to his policy in favour of the
social reintegration of all the children of Equatorial
Guinea, based on the conviction of the President of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea that such measures
contribute concretely to the maintenance of peace and
stability in our country.

