Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
First of all, allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this debate. I would also like to thank
the Permanent Representatives of India, Germany and
South Africa for their briefings on the work of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004).
We commend the outstanding work they have done and
assure them of Morocco's ongoing support as they
carry out the important tasks of three Committees they
preside over. Morocco has been able to cooperate in an
exemplary fashion with the three Committees and their
groups of experts and, as a Council member, shall
spare no effort in the collective efforts to strengthen
their role and fine-tune their actions.

The very useful discussion that the Council held
on 4 May (S/PV.6765), at the commendable initiative
of the Republic of Azerbaijan, provided an ideal
opportunity to reaffirm our determination to pursue our
joint efforts to strengthen and adapt the actions of the
Security Council, including those of the three
Committees, to counter terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations.

We welcome the fact that the Security Council is
continuing to take important measures to consolidate
the work of the counter-terrorism Committees and to
adapt their mandates and work to the evolution of the
threat and the needs of Member States. In that regard,
we support the endeavours of the three Committees and
the groups of experts that help them to achieve greater
coordination, consistency and synergy as they
implement their respective mandates. We also support
greater transparency and increased dialogue with
Member States in order to identify their needs and
respond appropriately to their requests for assistance.

After more than a decade, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) is still indispensable to our
collective fight against terrorism. The revision of its
mandate after the adoption of resolution 1963 (2010)
made it possible to place greater emphasis on specific
areas requiring more attention and action. We
commend the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate for completing the global survey of the
implementation by Member States of resolution 1624
(2005) (see S/2012/16). The useful conclusions of that
survey are an important contribution to Member States
efforts to counter new forms of radicalization and
incitement to terrorism.

Morocco supports the general approach of the
CTC, aiming, on the one hand, to consolidate a
strategic and transparent approach and, on the other, to
enhance the Committee's role of facilitating and
coordinating the supply of technical assistance in
building Member States' capacities to combat terrorism.
The organization by the Executive Directorate of
thematic workshops in a regional and transregional
approach to technical aspects in combating terrorism
remains a useful tool in building the capacities of
Member States and improving the coordination of their
counter-terrorism services. We encourage the
Executive Directorate to explore, together with all of
its partners, intensifying activities to foster dialogue,
cooperation and coordination among Member States, in
particular at the regional and subregional levels.

With regard to the concerns voiced by Council
members in the course of the high-level meeting on
4May, in particular on the critical situation in the
Sahel, we believe that the CTC, as well as the 1267 and
1540 Committees, should pay particular attention to
that region, which has recently witnessed a growth in
terrorist attacks and in the degree of sophistication of
such attacks carried out by groups operating in zones
beset by political, economic and social problems.
Morocco is ready to support all specific actions of the
Council aimed at countering the risk of terrorism in the
Sahel region.

The sanctions regime established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) is one of the
most effective tools of the United Nations to combat
terrorism and remains a symbol of our collective
resolve to counter the threat of Al-Qaida and associated
groups. We commend the regular review process for
the consolidated list, which has improved its quality
and consequently made the sanctions regime more
effective. It is imperative that this exercise be
continued with the same perseverance and discipline in
order to maintain the credibility of the regime and keep
it aligned with the evolution of the threat and the
important changes in the modus operandi of terrorist
groups. In that regard, we note with interest the
recommendations made to the Committee by the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team in
its twelfth report, particularly with regard to the means
to adapt the sanctions regime to the regional spread of
the Al-Qaida threat.
By and large, we remain in favour of greater
coordination with Member States, aimed at supporting
them as they carry out their obligations under the
sanctions regime. It is important to take into account,
as far as possible, the specific context of each region
and the particular challenges each country faces. The
continuous reform of the Committee's procedures in
order to make them more equitable and transparent is
an important goal that still captures the attention of all
Committee members and encourages them to action.
Here, we would like to pay tribute to the
Ombudsperson, Ms. Kimberley Prost, for her
commitment and the remarkable job she has done.

Regarding the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), Morocco, which has presented
an initial report and additional information, welcomes
the work of the Committee and its role and that of its
Chair in combating the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and preventing their being acquired
by non-State actors. The first report (S/2012/79)
prepared pursuant to resolution 1977 (2011) and
submitted to the Council in February 2012, reflects the
efforts of the Committee in that regard and contains the
Committee's proposals to make its work more effective
in the future and to improve its interaction with
Member States. In that connection, we would like to
emphasize how important it is to bolster activities
involving assistance and international cooperation to
meet the needs of Member States. The guidelines laid
out by the Committee should provide a basis for
dialogue with Member States in order to identify
shortcomings and difficulties in implementing the
resolutions.

Lastly, if it is to be able to fulfil its role of
supporting national implementation efforts, the
Committee must have the expertise of a highly
qualified panel of experts at its disposal. In that respect,
it is urgent for the Committee to complete the
appointment of the new members of the group of
experts, taking into account the type of expertise
needed and the principle of geographical representation.

