Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I want
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Mulet for his
briefing and Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Zarif for participating today. I also welcome
Foreign Minister Hoxhaj and Foreign Minister Jeremic'
back to the Council, and I thank them for sharing their
perspectives with us.

I would like to make four points. First, although
the situation in northern Kosovo remains tense, the
United States is encouraged by the progress Kosovo
and Serbia have made in the dialogue facilitated by the
European Union (EU). Both countries aspire to EU
membership, and it is appropriate that this EU
initiative be the forum for the parties to resolve their
differences. Through practical arrangements, Kosovo
and Serbia are expanding possibilities for their citizens
to travel, work, study and trade. We continue to support
EU efforts to encourage both countries to be flexible in
reaching agreements on such issues as implementation
of integrated management of their border crossings and
Kosovo's participation in regional forums. We look
forward to the full implementation of all previously
negotiated agreements.

Secondly, we renew our call for unconditional
and unfettered freedom of movement throughout
Kosovo. The current so-called conditional freedom of
movement afforded the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) in northern Kosovo is simply unacceptable.
While we are pleased that some barricades and
checkpoints have been relaxed, obstructions to freedom
of movement remain and are attributable to the actions
of Serb hardliners, with the support of illegal Serb
parallel institutions. The northern Kosovo Serb
population and the Serbian Government should
cooperate fully with KFOR and EULEX in the
immediate removal of all roadblocks and in supporting
the rule of law through actions such as cooperating in
the arrests of key criminal suspects.

As noted in the report on EULEX (S/2012/72, annex I), Serb hardliners man barricades that block
lawyers and EULEX judges and prosecutors from
accessing the Mitrovica District Court, paralysing the
only legitimate institution in northern Kosovo.
Similarly, illegal roadblocks along the border continue
to impede commerce and movement. We welcome
President Tadie's public call on Serbs in northern
Kosovo to dismantle such barricades, and we hope that
his words will lead to actions on the ground to achieve
freedom of movement for all. We reject all actions that
seek to undermine Kosovo's independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity. That includes the parallel
structures and Serbian security forces still present in
northern Kosovo, nearly 13 years after the Council
mandated the withdrawal of such forces enacted under
resolution 1244 (1999), to supersede Serbia's legal
order in Kosovo.

Thirdly, we commend the efforts of the
government of Kosovo to reach out to Kosovo Serbs by
establishing a trust fund dedicated to support for the
north. Kosovo's Constitution affords Serbs and other
minorities extensive rights and protections, including
enhanced local self-governance through the creation of
new Serb-majority municipalities, special emphasis on
returns of minorities displaced during the 1999
conflict, special ties to Serbia in education, health and
social services, and protection of religious and cultural
heritage.

However, the efforts of the government of
Kosovo are made vastly more difficult by the presence
in northern Kosovo of illegal Serb parallel institutions,
including local government structures, police and
courts financed by Belgrade, which exercise a
campaign of intimidation against anyone willing to
engage constructively with Pristina institutions. Serbia
must cease its support for those parallel structures.

Finally, the United States takes very seriously any
allegations of serious crimes committed in connection
with the 1999 conflict. Such allegations must be
thoroughly investigated. EULEX is the appropriate
body to conduct an investigation into allegations of
serious criminal activity, including organ trafficking.

EULEX assumed rule-of-law responsibilities in
Kosovo in 2008. That was a key point in the Secretary-
General's November 2008 report on UNMIK
(S/2008/692), which the Council welcomed in its
presidential statement of 26 November 2008
(S/PRST/2008/44). EULEX has the full support of all
stakeholders in the region. We note that President
Jahjaga of Kosovo and other Kosovo authorities have
pledged full support and cooperation with the
investigation, as have Prime Minister Berisha of
Albania and President Tadie of Serbia. Given that all
three countries aspire to be members of the European
Union, we expect that they will fully cooperate with
the EU investigation.

Also, the assertion that all investigations into war
crimes in the former Yugoslavia have taken place under
Security Council auspices is not correct. Cases outside
the United Nations mandate have been developed by
national prosecutors and are being handled by domestic
courts in the region. Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,

and Croatia all have active war crimes prosecutors
offices and war crimes chambers in their court systems
that deal with not only cases referred to them by the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, but other cases as well. The Cuska case,
which concerns the massacre of Kosovo Albanian
citizens by Serbian forces, is currently before courts in
Serbia.

The United States has full confidence in the
leadership of the Special Investigative Task Force led
by Ambassador Clint Williamson. We categorically
reject attempts to cast aspersions on the impartiality of
Ambassador Wiliamson and the Task Force, such as
those we heard in the Chamber today. Such assertions
are irresponsible and baseless. Attempts to politicize
the investigation, to duplicate its efforts or to conflate
it with other investigations - including the ongoing
Medicus case, which involves criminal activity during
the 2006-2008 period - do a disservice to the alleged
victims and their families. They also risk calling into
question the impartiality of any decisions reached.

The international community is committed to
long-term peace and stability for Kosovo and for the
entire Balkan region. Many multilateral institutions,
including the United Nations, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, NATO and the
EU, have worked to promote peace, stability and
reconciliation in the region. Now is the time for Serbia
and Kosovo to put the past behind them and work
towards their future in European and Euro-Atlantic
institutions.

