The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Senegal.

The Senegalese delegation, like those that spoke
before it, expresses its profound thanks to Mr. Stephen
O'Brien and Ms. Elizabeth Hoff for their briefings.

Unfortunately, the Security Council is once again
responding to the heartfelt appeals by Mr. O'Brien and
Ms. Hoff to our humanity with a public showing of
its lack of unity, its divisiveness, its lack of political
will and, in short, its powerlessness to take concrete
action on any one dimension of the tragedy in Syria,
including the political, humanitarian and security
dimensions. As we saw last Thursday (see S/PV.7815),
the Council cannot even agree on the non-proliferation
dimension. At the same time, the downward spiral
into the depths of suffering and horror in that country
continues. At the same time, the risk of that large
and beautiful country's fragmentation is increasing.
Terrorists from everywhere continue to take root and
exert their influence. Syria's rich cultural heritage is in
the process of being destroyed and trafficked. In order
to prevent all of that, the Senegalese delegation calls on
the Council to leap to action and help the Syrian people
undergoing a national crisis.

We welcome the courageous initiative undertaken
by the penholders - Malaysia, Spain and New
Zealand - in calling for the adoption of a new draft
resolution to end the violence in Syria, in particular in
Aleppo. We must support that initiative, because we owe
it to the suffering population of Syria and the valiant
humanitarian workers from all over whose calling it
is to tirelessly offer relief to civilians in Syria. In that
spirit, I call on the members of the Council, during
our meeting in the closed consultations following this
meeting, to find reason for a glimmer of hope. We must
do that, because we are all in agreement that there can
be no military solution to the conflict. Let us therefore
work towards finding a political solution. And in
doing so, we will send a message of hope to the talks
in Lausanne and Geneva, and renew our support for
the International Syria Support Group, in particular to
the co-Chairs, so as to give a new breath of life to the
cessation of hostilities regime.

I now resume my functions as President.

The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.

