Mr. Burian (Slovakia): At the outset, allow me to
join previous speakers in thanking Mr. Rucker for his
briefing. We wish him every success in his responsible
mission. On behalf of my delegation, I would also like
to welcome the participation of Ms. Raskovic-Ivic,
President of the Coordination Centre of the Republic of
Serbia for Kosovo and Metohija, and the presence of
the Prime Minister of the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government of Kosovo, Mr. Ceku, at this meeting.
The process of determining future status,
launched in October last year, is moving ahead. In this
context, we look forward to the upcoming
consultations with Mr. Ahtisaari, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Future Status Process, which
Slovakia fully supports. In that connection, we
continue to believe that the role of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is
still vital and instrumental to peace and the stable
future of the region.

Slovakia fully aligns itself with the statement that
will be delivered later at this meeting by the
Representative of Finland on behalf of the European
Union. That is why I will limit myself to the following
points.

First of all, we thank the Secretary-General for
his evaluation of the situation in Kosovo, contained in
his latest report. We note with satisfaction the high-
level participation of both sides in the political process
to determine the future status of Kosovo, but we also
share the disappointment of the Secretary-General that
little common ground has been identified in that
regard. We support the Secretary-General's appeal to
the parties to demonstrate much more flexibility and
generosity and to engage in the talks in the spirit of
compromise, as it is their responsibility to do.

Secondly, we note with satisfaction the
commitment with which Prime Minister Ceku and the
Government of Kosovo have addressed the crucial
issue of standards implementation. We share the
Secretary-General's call upon Pristina to ensure that
those efforts are maintained and that they are
sustainable, and we hope soon to see the tangible
results of the implementation of legislative measures
adopted by the Kosovo Assembly. We wish to
emphasize here that standards implementation is
equally essential to the European perspective of the
province. In that regard, we must make sure that there
is no semblance of double standards. That is a
fundamental precondition for national reconciliation
and a determining factor in the period after the
identification of the future status of Kosovo. Therefore,
we also continue to believe that standards
implementation still deserve a thorough-paced
overview and attention from UNMIK and the Council,
with special attention to the 13 priorities identified by
the Contact Group in June.

Thirdly, we share the concerns mentioned in the
report regarding the situation in the northern part of
Kosovo province, and especially the increasing number
of incidents of violence targeting people and religious
sites. We align ourselves with the strong condemnation
by the Secretary-General, especially of violence of an
inter-ethnic nature, and we appeal to the Kosovo
institutions to address the security issue as a matter of
the highest priority. No impunity should be tolerated,
and we reiterate here the need for a thorough
investigation and the bringing to justice of all
perpetrators. That is an important element for peaceful
coexistence and confidence-building between all
communities living in Kosovo. We also believe that the
international community must retain its presence in the
north of Kosovo after the status determination as a
vital aspect of the issue of the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons, especially those
belonging to the Serbian national minority.

We welcome the signing of the Protocol on
Voluntary and Sustainable Returns by both sides, and
we note with appreciation its immediate positive
impact resulting in the return of more than 70 Serbian
families. Nevertheless, we share the report's
observation that the number of minority returnees is
not satisfactory, although it is the number by which the
project of creating the desired multi-ethnic Kosovo will
be measured in real life.

Fourthly, we would like to join other speakers in
calling on Belgrade to encourage the participation of
Kosovo Serbs in the future status process, as well as
the engagement of Kosovo Serbs in the political life of
Kosovo, in order to influence the processes that will be
decisive for their own future. We also call on Belgrade
and Pristina to allow Kosovo Serbs to exercise their
rights in a way that will contribute to the positive
atmosphere of the negotiating process, as well as to the
stabilization of the region.

In that regard, we would like to encourage the
Government of Kosovo to continue its efforts and to
undertake all necessary measures for building the trust
of Serbs in Government institutions. The situation of
the Kosovo Serbs and their trust in Kosovo's
institutions will be an important factor for success in
building a multi-ethnic Kosovo. We agree in that
regard with Mr. Rficker that Serbs and Albanians will
have to live together regardless of the final status of
Kosovo and that they must learn to live together in an
atmosphere of tolerance and peace in order to support
the stability of the whole region.

Last but not least, I would like to repeat here that
we support the need to find a lasting and sustainable
settlement for the future status of Kosovo. We continue
to believe that it is still important to seek a balanced
settlement and compromise from both Belgrade and
Pristina through direct talks and dialogue that reflect
the objective concerns of all parties involved and
contribute to the lasting security and stability of the
region.

In conclusion, we would like to commend the
excellent cooperation between UNMIK and KFOR. In
that context, I would like to reassure you, Sir, that
Slovakia, as a troop-contributing country to KFOR, is
ready to continue in its dedication to peace,
stabilization and integration processes in the Balkans.

