Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on a successful presidency of the Security Council, and to thank Germany and the Dominican Republic for convening this meeting today during these challenging times. I would also like to thank the briefers for their insight and views. Jordan also aligns itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women and Peace and Security (see annex 20), chaired by Canada. This year marks the milestone seventy-fifth anniversary of the establishment of the United Nations, which we celebrate in unusual circumstances, with a pandemic that has disrupted our daily lives, halted the growth of our economies and further intensified the suffering of many - mainly women and girls in conflict zones. Despite efforts to end sexual violence in conflict, including by implementing resolution 2106 (2013), it continues to be a common feature of armed conflicts around the globe. Sexual violence can constitute war crimes or crimes against humanity. Such atrocities demand accountability under international law, and we must effectively utilize every tool available to prevent these grave violations and protect the victims, regardless of gender, in times of peace and war. In that regard, Jordan welcomes the Secretary-General most recent report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2020/487) and strongly supports his numerous initiatives to end sexual violence, the most recent of which was his call for an immediate global ceasefire. Jordan is not a country in conflict, it is a country that provides a great deal of humanitarian support as a host country for refugees fleeing conflict in the region. It has provided safe shelter and humanitarian assistance to those in need, and is actively participating in international efforts to combat terrorism, violent extremism and dark ideologies that perpetrators and extremist groups like Da'esh use as a pretext to commit heinous crimes against humanity, including sexual violence. My country ranks among the police-contributing countries to peacekeeping missions. It has incorporated the participation of more women into the police force, the enhancement of internal and external accountability mechanisms and human rights as a key to successful peacekeeping operations - into its national action plan for 2018 to 2021. It is through gender equality, women's participation and a gender-sensitive approach to humanitarian responses, as well as a focus on women's agency in the prevention of violent extremism and radicalization, that we can arrive at stable and peaceful communities. A survivor-centred approach, tending to the needs of survivors of such atrocities and holding perpetrators accountable before the law are vital to delivering justice to those victims. It also helps deter future crimes, thus protecting societies, promoting a culture of peace and sustaining security. It is not enough to listen to the victims; it is not enough to shoulder their suffering and voice their pain; we need to collectively make every effort to ensure that we do not re-victimize them and must protect them by reinforcing the rule of law and the pillars of equality and peace.
