Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Special Envoy for Syria De Mistura and his
whole team for their tireless work and determination
to move forward in spite of all the difficulties faced.
We are also very happy to hear that he will continue
moving forward in the face of such difficulties. We
fully trust Mr. De Mistura and the efforts of Secretary-
General Guterres to continue the search for a political
solution to the crisis in Syria.

Neither Mr. De Mistura nor Secretary-General
Guterres is the main actor in this tragedy. The primary
responsibility in this situation falls on Syrians - the
Government, the opposition, civil society and religious
leaders. It is up to them to assume responsibility for
determining their own futures. There is only one way
to do that - sitting down and engaging in discussions.
Mr. De Mistura has been working specifically on that
task, but he is not a person who can make decisions on
behalf of the Syrian people. They have to make those
decisions themselves.

Another subsidiary responsibility falls on third-
party States. They ought to stop interfering in the
Syrian conflict in order to advance their own interests.
Another responsibility that is no less important falls on

the Security Council. The Security Council must exert
pressure and seek to persuade the parties to continue
negotiating. We should take advantage of the current
momentum, which started in December 2016 with the
most recent cessation of hostilities and continued with
the Astana process and the ceasefire mechanism.

The events of last week strengthen our conviction
that there is no possibility of a military solution to the
conflict. Only through a political process mediated by
the United Nations and agreed to by the Syrians can we
find a solution. We would like to reiterate our strongest
condemnation of the continued use of chemical weapons
in Syria. That applies to last week's attack and all others.
An impartial, independent investigation is required to
identify who is responsible for this crime and to hold
them accountable. We reiterate our appeal to stay calm
and refrain from any unilateral action that might lead
to an escalation of tensions. The Syrian conflict should
be dealt with in a multilateral framework.

We are aware that the absence of a negotiated
settlementhas only one victim: the Syrian people -those
in the street, men, women, children and the elderly. Our
collective responsibility is to them.

