Mr. Williamson (United States of America):
Mr. President, we, too, look forward to a productive
month under your leadership. We join others in
thanking our Guinean colleague for his leadership as
Council President in March.

Eighteen months after the establishment of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), the United
States joins others in paying tribute to the work of the
CTC Chairman, Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock, as he
passes the baton to Ambassador Arias. Ambassador
Greenstock's Vision and vigorous and committed
leadership has helped put the CTC at the centre of the
international community's efforts to combat terrorism.
His chairmanship was an outstanding success. I also
take this opportunity to thank the United Kingdom
delegation for all of the hard work and creative work
that was necessary to keep up with such an energetic
ambassador, and translating his vision into reality. In
particular, I mention Anna Clunes, who was
Ambassador Greenstock's indispensable right-hand
person throughout his chairmanship, and his legal
counsel, Iain MacLeod, They have done exceptional
work. I also want to join in thanking the Vice-
Chairman of the CTC and the CTC experts.

Unfortunately, terrorism remains a clear and
present danger, an ongoing threat to international peace
and security. It is a violent outrage that must be dealt
with. In the last year, there have been major terrorist
attacks in Bali and Kenya. Earlier this year, there was a
terrorist attack against the United States consulate in
Karachi, killing 2 Pakistani guards. Recently, there was
an attack in the Philippines. Unfortunately, there
continue to be frequent terrorist attacks in the Middle
East and elsewhere.

It is not acceptable to intentionally target
innocent civilians for violent attacks. The United
Nations Security Council must continue our work to
fight terrorism. This threat must be met. The United
Nations has made a valuable contribution in setting
norms against terrorism. The United Nations is doing
important work through the 1267 Committee to
interrupt the financial flow to terrorists, to force them
out of their comfort zone, to diminish the capacity of
terrorists to do their evil acts. And the United Nations
is in a unique position to help build the capacity of the
international community to fight terrorism. And
through the Counter-Terrorism Committee, under the
leadership of Ambassador Greenstock, the United
Nations has begun to make this important contribution
to the fight against terrorism.

As President Bush has said, the world is
threatened by the risk of the world's most destructive
weapons getting into the hands of the world's most
vicious predators: terrorists of the world. Fighting
terrorism and stopping the spread of weapons of mass
destruction are critical to a safer, more secure world.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee's task is to
increase the capability of every Member State to deal
with terrorism. All Governments must take effective
steps to ensure that there is no support, active or
passive, for terrorism anywhere. Chairman Greenstock
saw early on that the Counter-Terrorism Committee
could not accomplish this task alone. It needs the help
of others. These include donors of assistance in the
different substantive areas covered by resolution 1373
(2001) and international, regional and subregional
organizations, enhancing the effectiveness of action
against terrorism by their member States.
The special meeting of 6 March, which brought
more than 65 other organizations together, will not
only help solidify these relationships and raise the
counter-terrorism profile in these organizations, but it
will also reinforce the central role that the CTC plays
in the international effort to increase capacity.

The United States is pleased that the Organization
of American States (OAS) has agreed to hold a follow-
up conference in Washington for regional and
subregional organizations, and we look forward to
providing support to the OAS on this initiative.

In its review of more than 300 reports from
Member States to date, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee is focused on identifying legislative gaps in
States' capacity to fight terrorism and working with
States and assistance providers to ensure that those
gaps can be filled. This approach is paying dividends,
but in order for the CTC to be effective, to remain
credible, this work must translate into on-the-ground
results.

As Ambassador Greenstock said at the Security
Council in January, it is time for the Counter-Terrorism
Committee to move up a notch. The CTC will soon be
focusing on whether States are actually implementing
the legal and political measures necessary to prevent
terrorism, so that we can name and shame those States
that fail to meet their responsibilities. Effective
monitoring of Member States' actual on-the-ground
efforts to implement resolution 1373 (2001) is
necessary for the full global implementation of the
resolution and for the continuing efficacy of the CTC.
The CTC enjoys a strong mandate to monitor
implementation, and this effort should be given high
priority.

As the CTC begins to focus on effectiveness, it
will need to go beyond the review of written reports.
For example, we will have to determine whether
States' police, intelligence, judicial, customs and
immigration institutions are operating effectively. The
United States believes that the Committee must expand
its tool kit in order to conduct a credible review of
these issues. For example, each CTC member should
direct its overseas missions to analyse the written
reports against the reality of implementation and share
this analysis with the CTC and its experts. Moreover,
the Counter-Terrorism Committee should request
international, regional and subregional organizations to
undertake such assessments, which can complement the
work of the CTC without duplicating it. Organizations
such as the World Bank, the World Customs
Organization and the International Civil Aviation
Organization are well placed to conduct these
assessments. Such an approach would be an
appropriate result of the 6 March Counter-Terrorism
Committee special meeting.

In addition, we believe that some form of site
visits might be necessary to ascertain the truth on the
ground in certain instances. We look forward to
discussing these and other ideas for enhancing the
effectiveness of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
during the early period of Ambassador Arias's
chairmanship.

The work of the Committee established under
resolution 1267 (1999) under the able leadership of
Ambassador Valdes should also be noted. It, too,
constituted a key part of the United Nations counter-
terrorism effort. Security Council resolution 1455
(2003) rightly focuses on improved Member State
implementation of the Al Qaeda Taliban sanctions
regime.

The United States believes strongly that the
counter-terrorism expectations for Member States
should be set high. We all can and should do more to
meet the challenged posed by terrorists, who continue
to seek to destroy the very fabric that binds us together.
We must remain ever vigilant in our effort to end the
plague of terrorism and to protect our freedom. The
United States strongly encourages willing and able
States to do more, my own Government included. The
United States can do better. We are still learning how
to deal better with our ongoing threats at our own
borders, in our skies and across our land.

The United States remains strongly committed to
helping unable but willing States to achieve greater
counter-terrorism successes. Increased assistance and
capacity are key in this shared effort. The Counter-
Terrorism Committee has made important strides that
will require follow-up, both multilaterally and
bilaterally.

Finally, the United States emphasizes that
unwilling States, whatever the reason, must be
encouraged and, indeed, pressured, as necessary, to do
more. We cannot tolerate unwilling States to be the
weak link that undermines the international
community's shared counter-terrorism effort. These
States must accept their obligation to the world at
large. Ultimately, each Member State bears a special
responsibility to fight terrorism. Those that harbour
and support terrorists must be held accountable. They
must be exposed, named and shamed. Shared vigilance
must remain our watchword. Increased expectations,
we believe, will result in increased accountability.

Although important progress has been achieved,
the international community's counter-terrorism efforts
remain incomplete. Shared attention and commitment
will be needed for years to come. We cannot become
complacent, nor afford to fail in our long-term counter-
terrorism efforts. Too much is at stake, not just for
America, but for all of us.

Before closing, allow me once again to thank
Ambassador Greenstock for all of his efforts. We are
confident that he has left the chairmanship in good
hands, and pledge our full support to Ambassador
Arias and his delegation during the coming period.

