Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation is grateful to Assistant
Secretary-General Angela Kane for her briefing.

The recent firing by Israeli tanks on the Gaza
Strip has resulted in numerous civilian casualties,
including many women and children. China is deeply
concerned and disturbed by this. We would like to take
this opportunity to express our sincere condolences and
sympathies to the bereaved families of the victims. We
hope that Israel will carry out an earnest and serious
investigation of the incident, and publish their findings
at an early date to accord justice to the victims.

China continues to believe that the Palestinian-
Israeli dispute should be resolved through peaceful
negotiations. We are against any practices that may
exacerbate tensions in the region, or any military
actions that may harm innocent civilians. The
excessive use of force by the Israeli army can only lead
to the worsening of Israeli-Palestinian relations. On the
other hand, rocket launches by the Palestinians into
Israeli territory are also unwise. We hope that both
Israel and Palestine will exercise maximum restraint,
resort to reason and put an end to the vicious cycle of
violence, thus avoiding the further deterioration of the
situation.

Recently, the major parties in Palestine - Fatah
of the Palestine Liberation Organization and the
Islamic Resistance Movement, Hamas - have been
discussing the formation of a Government of national
unity, as well as an improvement of Palestinian-Israeli
relations, which is an encouraging sign. However, this
hope is again dashed as a result of the escalation of
violence.

We call upon both Israel and Palestine, in the
long-term interests of both countries, to stop the
bloody conflict and create an environment conducive
to the restoration of political negotiations. The Middle
East problem has lasted for over half a century. It not
only has brought great suffering to the countries in the
region, but also has repercussions for world peace and
development.

Since the beginning of the year, the situation in
the occupied Palestinian territories has continued to
worsen. The conflict between Palestine and Israel has
continued to escalate and the Middle East peace
process has been deeply mired in stagnation. China has
always believed that a comprehensive and just solution
to the Middle East question should be worked out on
the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions and
the principle of land for peace through political
negotiations.

Political realities over the years demonstrate that
a State of Palestine, in peaceful coexistence with Israel,
is in the fundamental interests of both Palestine and
Israel and the peoples in the Middle East. This will also
contribute to the early realization of peace and stability
in the region. We hope that the day will soon come
when Palestine and Israel will demonstrate political
will and take a courageous step forward.

China will, as always, join forces with advocates
of peace and continue to play a constructive role for
the realization of Middle East peace.

