Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you, Mr. President, for your initiative to convene
this open Security Council debate to consider the work
of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-
Leste (UNMIT). There is no doubt that the progress
made in Timor-Leste constitutes a positive example
that serves to encourage the Security Council and the
entire Organization in their efforts.

My delegation is pleased to welcome President
Jose Ramos-Horta and to congratulate him on the
important strides made in his country towards building
a democratic system, and on having ensured security
and institutional capacity following the February 2008
attacks against him and Prime Minister Gusmao.

We also welcome the support provided by
neighbouring States and the international community
as a whole.

Further, we welcome the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative, Mr. Atul Khare, and we
thank them for the report before the Council in
document S/2009/72, which offers a clear overview of
the work of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste and of the challenges and priorities that
still lie ahead.

While the Government of Timor-Leste has made
progress in strengthening post-conflict stability,
UNMIT is playing a crucial role in maintaining
security, fostering development and strengthening
institutions, and it must continue to provide support to
the country in its endeavours in those areas. Here, we
note with interest the Secretary-General's comments in
his report with respect to the country's urgent needs,
such as security sector reform, strengthening the justice
system, respect for human rights and improved
machinery for transparency and accountability in the
government sector.

That is why we support UNMIT's efforts to
address outstanding tasks such as security sector
reform, strengthening the rule of law, ensuring
economic and social development, promoting a culture
of democratic governance and bringing about the
successful return and resettlement of internally
displaced persons.

Pending issues requiring renewed efforts include
the training of police officers, lawyers and judges, and
the establishment of legal mechanisms to resolve civil
disputes, including those related to property rights,
with a view to strengthening the rule of law and
making the system more efficient. That is why Mexico
welcomes the current process of transferring command
to enable the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste to
assume responsibility for police work that until now
has been undertaken by UNMIT. We also welcome the
signing of the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework for 2009-2013 by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Timor-
Leste and the Prime Minister, in order to promote
democratization and social cohesion, poverty reduction
and basic social services. We hope that the programme
will make it possible to tackle the major challenge
posed by unemployment and to fight poverty in Timor-
Leste.

My delegation is concerned about the trafficking
in persons for purposes of sexual exploitation, forced
labour and agricultural work. While we acknowledge
the progress the Government has made in establishing
offices for the protection of minors, we call upon it to
ratify the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime.
We also urge the Government to cooperate closely with
the Independent Special Commission of Inquiry in
order to address the continuing impunity for crimes
committed during the 2006 crisis, in conformity with
resolution 1802 (2008).

We also welcome efforts made to facilitate the
return of the country's remaining internally displaced
persons, and we express our hope that the Government
will put in place the mechanisms necessary to ensure
that those persons are socially and economically
integrated into their communities in an atmosphere of
calm and reconciliation.

Mexico hails the level of coordination achieved
between the Government of Timor-Leste and the
various United Nations bodies and agencies, in
particular the joint activities of the United Nations
Development Programme and UNMIT and the
establishment of a support team to strengthen the
institutional capacity of the National Electoral
Commission with a view to the municipal and mayoral
elections to be held this year.

Mexico's Federal Electoral Institute will work
with the Timor-Leste authorities in that electoral
process through a capacity-building programme in the
areas of training for municipal officers, electoral
training, electoral information campaigns for civil
society and the media, and the voter registry.

Finally, I reaffirm my country's commitment to
maintaining security, strengthening institutions and
protecting human rights in Timor-Leste, as has been
the case from the outset of the process of self-
determination and independence.

