Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I have listened to many opinions and political
and humanitarian assessments today in the Council's
review of the situation in my country, Syria, on the
issuance of the fifty-second report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/619). I have also heard two briefings,
from the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria and the Director of the Coordination and
Response Division of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). I noticed a political
maturity and sense of responsibility and objectivity
in some delegations' statements, while others have
presented a false View by reading the situation in Syria
in a mistaken and distorted way. I will not go into detail
by responding to all the points that have been made,
but I will touch on some of the most important things I
have heard.

First, at the beginning of Special Envoy de Mistura's
briefing, he described three priorities - de-escalation,
reviving the political process and bridging the gaps
between the various stakeholders through high-level
diplomacy. Of course we have no objection to this.
However, we do have some pertinent comments that the
Special Envoy and the Council should hear. After seven
years ofa terrible terrorist war imposed on my country,
and four years of cooperation with the Special Envoy,
he has failed to include combating terrorism in his
list of priorities, despite the fact that we are all aware
that Da'esh is still present in Syria under American
protection, as is the Al-Nusra Front, under the protection
of the Americans, the Israelis and others. There are
also many terrorist armed factions that have refused
to accede to Astana 4, a meeting that was attended by
the Special Envoy, who was there in Astana, and which
created the concept of de-escalation zones. The reason
I bring this up is because one of the provisions of the
Astana 4 agreement includes an exception for armed
groups that refuse to accede to the agreement. This is
not just about Da'esh and the Al-Nusra Front, but about
any group that refuses to join the agreement.

Over the past seven years, we have moved from
fighting terrorist proxies to directly combating the
original terrorists themselves. The terrorism situation
is clear now. Two days ago, armed terrorist groups out
of Al-Tanf and the Rukban camp attacked the cities of
Suwayda and Dar'a, as well as other areas where the
Syrian army is stationed. This has been referred to
as southern Syria. Terrorists came from Al-Tanf and
the Rukban camp, which are areas under the control
of United States forces, as we all know. Is it not the
Syrian army's duty to respond to an attack by terrorists
on two southern towns in order to protect hundreds
of thousands of civilians? I raise this question since it
relates to the priority of combating terrorism, which the
Special Envoy failed to include. I bring it up because we
have agreed that the Geneva agenda has four defined
baskets, one of which is combating terrorism. We
should remind ourselves that the priority of combating
terrorism is on the agenda in Geneva.
Secondly, the Special Envoy made one statement
this morning that is dangerous and extremely worrying
both for us and some others. He said,

"I want to believe that the Security Council will not
allow this [situation in the south-west of Syria] to
become another eastern Ghouta or Aleppo".

Does that fall within the mandate of the Special
Envoy? Is he mandated to tell the Syrian Government
and military how to combat terrorism on the Syrian
territories? This is not about combating terrorism on
the territories of the United States, France, Britain,
Sweden, Poland or Holland. We are talking only about
combating terrorism on our territory. That is part
of our sovereignty, which the Security Council has
underscored in more than 27 resolutions adopted by it.
All those resolutions start with the words: the Council
reaffirms the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Syria. If the Council reaffirms our sovereignty, how
can it consider, as was mentioned by one colleague,
the Ambassador of Sweden, that what is happening
in southern Syria is military aggression? When the
Syrian army itself combats terrorism in the south of the
country, can we call that an aggression?

My colleague the Permanent Representative of
France said that we must protect the White Helmets in
the Golan. It is strange to hear such as statement from
a Permanent Representative in the Security Council.
The White Helmets are a terrorist group affiliated
with the Al-Qaida and the Al-Nusra Front. It is spread
over the Golan and other parts and is supported by
Israel. It is part of the problem that we always talk
about. The Permanent Representative of France says
that we must protect the White Helmets in the Golan.
Does the mandate of the Security Council provide for
the protection of the White Helmets or of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF),
which is under the Security Council, located along the
separation line in the Golan? What is the priority of the
Council, to provide protection for the White Helmets
or the UNDOF force? As the members of the Council
know, some elements from the Fiji and Philippines units
were abducted by the White Helmets and the Al-Nusra
Front few years ago, as a result of which many UNDOF
posts were abandoned three years ago.

The Permanent Representative of France also
briefly made a comment - but I think that it caught
the Council's attention - calling for a Syrian Dayton
Agreement. I hope that I was mistaken when I heard
that. He said that we could perhaps reach a Syrian
Dayton. Fortunately, we started today's meetings by
talking about Serbia (see S/PV.8295) and the situation
of Mr. Mladie and others at the International Criminal
Court. Less than 25 years since the Dayton Agreement
on implementing the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina was signed, in 1995, the Security Council
is still looking into minute details of importance related
to the consequences of a Dayton Agreement. Does the
Ambassador of France mean that the internationalization
of the situation in Syria by some must come about, just
like the Dayton Agreement? Of course, my Government
fully rejects that statement.

Mr. Ging talked in detail about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Tell Rifaat and Afrin area.
He is right. However, he did not mention the reason
behind the deterioration of the humanitarian situation
there, as if the Turkish monster did not exist and he had
never come across the Turkish occupation and Turkey's
military invasion to Afrin and Tell Rifaat. Worse than
that, Mr. Ging praised the role of Turkey for its support
and provision of humanitarian assistance to those two
cities. Is not that shameful? Instead of accusing the
Turkish side of invading part of Syrian territory, leading
to the humanitarian tragedy in the north, we hear the
representative of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs praising the Turks for having
delivered humanitarian assistance to the part of Syria
that was invaded by them.

Today we are considering the fifty-second report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 2139 (2014). The United States of America,
the United Kingdom and France, as well as some
influential parties in the Secretariat, have worked hard
to promote the resolution since the issuance of the first
report on its implementation, in order to harness it to
become a political tool and bring pressure to bear on
the Government of Syria to implement the agendas of
those States. Those agendas consist ofinterfering in the
internal affairs of Syria and destabilizing its security
and stability. Instead, the objective of the resolution
should have been to assist Syrians to overcome their
suffering due to the unprecedented terrorist war
imposed upon them.

Apart from the propaganda that some strive to
promote, claiming that the Syrian Government is
hindering access to humanitarian assistance, the facts
show once again that my Government cooperates with
the United Nations and other international organizations
in Syria to deliver humanitarian assistance to those who
need it. That was demonstrated by paragraph 25 of the
report under consideration. That paragraph states that
last May the Government of Syria approved all requests
submitted by the World Food Programme - and I
repeat all requests, that is, 2,180 such requests. The
Government has also approved all requests submitted
by the Office ofthe United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR). I do not know why the World
Food Programme and UNHCR are content to cooperate
with the Government of Syria, while OCHA is not.
That is strange.

What is deplorable is the fact that the drafters of
all 52 reports have turned a blind eye to the details
of the crimes of occupation, aggression and invasion
against Syria and its people - crimes represented by
support for terrorism and the imposition of unilateral
and coercive economic measures against the people of
Syria, which the United Nations time and again annually
stresses that they are unlawful and violate international
law, the Charter of the United Nations and human rights
principles. However, we heard biased testimony about
medicines in Syria, as if those who spoke did not know
that the Turks have in fact dismantled more than 1,441
facilities and factories in Aleppo. They have moved
their components to Turkey and sold them as scrap
metal. Most of the laboratories that were dismantled
in Syria were in fact used to manufacture medicines.
In addition, there are the sanctions, which exacerbate
the situation. However, that is not recognized by the
Secretary-General or by OCHA or anybody else.

It is truly deplorable that the drafters of the report
have ignoredthe war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed by the United States of America and its
allies in Raqqa. That was mentioned by the President of
the Security Council. Those crimes happened in other
Syrian cities under the pretext of combating terrorism,
ignoring the role of the Governments that sponsor and
finance terrorism, such as Saudi Arabia, Qatar and
Turkey, which strive to incite Violence and terrorism and
spread radical ideologies and hatred while supporting
distorted religious ideas. The lack of professionalism
and credibility is truly deplorable. They have reached
unacceptable levels. That was demonstrated by those
who wrote the report, who have doubted the findings of
the United Nations assessment mission in Raqqa. They
made only selective and general references to the report
of that mission. They presented it in a distorted way,
ignoring the tragic situation in Raqqa and the suffering
of its people due to the grave crimes committed by the
international coalition and its affiliated militias.

There are hundreds of thousands of mines in Raqqa.
Every month between 50 and 70 returnees die as a result
of mine explosions, an issue that some representatives
here at this international Organization have refused
to address until now. We spent more than six months
trying to reach an agreement with the United Nations
Mine Action Service (UNMAS) to demine Raqqa. Six
months have now passed. The operation was recently
halted for two months because UNMAS management
insisted on bringing in a French person who is located in
Gaziantep. That is how the United Nations programme
perceived the situation - without that French person
we could not demine hundreds of thousands of mines
in Raqqa. Six months have passed and neither the Mine
Action Service nor the Secretariat has visited Raqqa to
demine it.

It is deplorable that the authors of the report turned
a blind eye, for the fifty-second time, to the details ofthe
crimes committed by Israel and its repeated aggression
against the territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab
Republic, including its continued support to terrorist
armed groups in the separation zone, first and foremost
Da'esh and the Al-Nusra Front. We must condemn the
entire situation because of its repercussions on the
humanitarian situation in Syria. However, that did not
attract the attention of the authors of the report, despite
their professionalism in drafting 52 reports so far. My
Government has submitted an official letter setting its
response to the report under consideration. I would like
to briefly highlight three points.

First, the authors of the report must be held
accountable for their violations of the provisions of
resolutions on combating terrorism. They referred to
Jabhat Al-Nusra, Hay'at Tahrir Al-Sham and other
affiliated groups as armed opposition in Idlib. Such
groups have been designated as terrorist entities on the
Security Council's list of terrorist organizations.

Secondly, the clear politicization by the authors
of the report is no longer acceptable. They make the
Syrian Government fully responsible for violations of
humanitarian law. They turn a blind eye to the real
hurdles to the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
those in need, in particular the lax conduct of OCHA
officials stationed in Damascus, who do not shoulder
their responsibilities or carry out their duties. They
refuse to visit areas that have been liberated or those
where reconciliation has occurred. They are extremely
selective in conducting their work and providing
assistance, which is supposed to be humanitarian
and non-discriminatory. There is also the lack of
funding, and some donors link their funds to political
preconditions that run counter to the principles of
humanitarian work.
Thirdly, since they disregarded the fact that
Turkish aggression on Afrin is the primary reason for
the displacement and suffering of civilians, what is the
objective of the authors of the report?

The supporters and sponsors in the Council of
the terrorist group Jabhat Al-Nusra have used today's
meeting to spread unfounded and false accusations
against the Government of my country every time the
Syrian Arab Army makes progress against that terrorist
organization in an attempt to boost the morale of the
elements in that criminal organization.

In conclusion, my Government reiterates that it will
continue to be relentless in its fight against terrorism
in the Syrian Arab Republic. We stress our principled
position that the solution to the Syrian crisis is a
political one, based on intra-Syrian dialogue led by the
Syrians, without foreign interference or preconditions.

