Mr. Passy (Bulgaria): Let me first of all thank the
British Presidency for organizing an open meeting on
the important issue of justice and the rule of law. I am
convinced that this discussion will contribute to finding
answers to a number of fundamental problems in our
work.

Let me begin by recalling the words of a man
who has made an exceptional contribution to the cause
of the rule of law and respect for human rights, Sergio
Vieira de Mello. The late United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights was the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo
and for East Timor, where the United Nations missions
had, for the first time, broad powers in the
administration of justice.

Just seven months ago, he made the following
statement:

"We live in a time when many around the world
have profound feelings of insecurity and fear It
may sometimes feel as if we no longer have any
stable points of reference to chart our way
through the uncertainties of the world. But I am
firmly convinced that a comprehensive strategy
for security can and must be guided by upholding
the rule of law and respecting human rights."

The endorsement of the principle of the rule of
law is a key factor for both conflict prevention and
settlements between States and for successful post-
conflict rehabilitation. Democratic government, the
rule of law and respect for human rights play essential
roles in preventing internal and international conflicts.
Social and political tensions that accumulate in a
society where the rule of law does not prevail usually
grow into open confrontation and violence. We
therefore need to guarantee that the rule of law be
considered a priority of the preventive activities within
the United Nations system, and that the Security
Council treat the violation of this principle as a
potential threat to international peace and security.

The effective administration of justice and the
rule of law should be taken into account in determining
the mandates of the various United Nations operations.
In view of the specifics of each mission, the United
Nations Security Council could include clear
provisions, in its resolutions aimed at coordinating
United Nations efforts, that would help restore the rule
of law.

The mandate for future operations should include
and provide for the rapid setting-up of local civilian
administration, law enforcement institutions and
effective judiciary institutions. Attaining lasting peace
depends largely on building an effective system for the
administration of justice in line with international
standards.

In post conflict situations, the establishment or
reestablishment of the rule of law is a key prerequisite
for the success of the entire reconstruction process.
This process requires not only the adoption of adequate
legislation, but also the setting up of effective
institutions for its enforcement. In building or
supporting the work of the judiciary of the affected
State, United Nations activities should be well
coordinated with those of local partners, non-
governmental organizations and communities, taking
into account special circumstances and local traditions
within the sphere of the law.

The lessons we learned through our participation
in Afghanistan and Iraq showed that, in order to
preserve the trust of the Organization, it is essential to
avoid the impression that a foreign order is being
imposed. Therefore, Bulgaria will support a new
Security Council resolution expanding the United
Nations role in Iraq. Our experience in Kosovo and
Bosnia and Herzegovina has shown that there are
multiple challenges to international efforts to
strengthen the rule of law. Those challenges are often
political, for example, how best to achieve post-
conflict reconciliation while bringing to justice the
perpetrators of grave war crimes. Should we look for
an agreement on ending hostilities by offering amnesty
to those responsible for war crimes and crimes against
humanity? Our clear answer is "No, we should not".

Insufficient resources represent another
challenge. We need experts with legal and international
experience to share that experience with others and
provide training of magistrates. It would be wise to
consider ways for the United Nations to put together a
pool of experts who can provide legal assistance within
the framework of the peacekeeping operations.

We welcome the establishment of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) as an important step
towards countering impunity and guaranteeing respect
for the rule of law and justice. We hope that it will
become an effective tool in the fight against the worst
violations of international criminal and humanitarian
law.

May I conclude by proposing that the Security
Council strengthen interaction with regional
organizations such as the European Union, the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and
the Council of Europe in supporting justice and the rule
of law internationally. Bulgaria will certainly do its
part in such an endeavour.

