Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): The Republic
of Korea thanks and supports the Secretary-General
in his efforts to mediate the ongoing confrontation.
We appreciate his video-linked briefing today, taking
the time from his hectic trip crisscrossing the Middle
East region. We also welcome the participation of the
Foreign Minister of Luxembourg.

As we gather in the Council today, the Middle
East continues to be marked by expanding conflict
and intensifying violence. We are concerned that the
ongoing clashes in Israel and Gaza have the potential
to further jeopardize regional dynamics, with other
non-State actors joining the fray. In that context, we
note with concern that rockets have been fired into
Israel from Lebanon and Syria.

More than 500 Palestinians and 20 Israelis have
now died, and yet there is no sign of a ceasefire to
be agreed upon. Hamas has not so far accepted any
ceasefire proposals, consequently aggravating the pain
and sorrow of the hundreds of thousands of Palestinian
people under its influence. We are also alarmed that
the ground operation of the Israeli forces is resulting in
an unprecedented level of casualties and displacement
throughout the Gaza Strip. Such results do not match
Israel's stated goal ofa limited operation.

While acknowledging Israel's legitimate
security concerns, we emphasize that the current
situation illustrates the urgent need for a more
fundamental solution of the situation related to
Gaza. We are particularly concerned about the
devastating humanitarian conditions in the Gaza Strip.
Unfortunately, Israel's warnings before its attacks
do not seem to provide much help to the population,
because most of them have nowhere else to go. With
more than 84,000 people seeking shelter, the facilities
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East are already beyond
capacity. Many homes in the safer areas are already
full.

The current situation is not sustainable and an
immediate ceasefire should enter into force. We urge all
parties to exercise restraint and heed the international
community's call for peace. We sincerely hope that
the unremitting diplomatic efforts of the Secretary-
General will soon bear fruit. We support the role of the
mediators in the region, including Egypt, in brokering
a ceasefire deal.

Turning to the situation in Syria, we are deeply
concerned about the unprecedented scale of death and
destruction as the conflict, which is now in its fourth
year, shows no signs of abating. With nearly 11 million
Syrians in urgent need of assistance, resolution 2165
(2014) must be immediately and fully implemented so
as to enable long overdue cross-border aid deliveries to
those in desperate need of food and medicine.

The Republic of Korea welcomes the appointments
of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and Deputy
Special Envoy Ramzy Ezzeldin Ramzy. We hope that
the Special Envoy will soon start working closely with
the key stakeholders and will cooperate with the League
of Arab States. We look forward to his sustained efforts
to revive the stalled peace negotiations, which is the
only way to resolve the crisis.

The Republic of Korea is deeply alarmed about
the increase in terrorism and regional instability
arising from the situation in Syria. The Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIS) now controls broad
areas of territory in both Syria and Iraq and poses a
threat to Lebanon and Turkey, as well as Jordan. We
strongly condemn the egregious war crimes, including
the mass executions committed by ISIS. We also note
the destructive humanitarian dimensions inherent
in such developments. The Security Council must
remain vigilant with regard to that issue. We call on
Iraq's leaders to swiftly form a new Government that
can govern in an inclusive manner and promote the
participation of all religious and ethnic minorities.

Despite the seemingly unsurmountable regional
situation facing us, we must not lose hope or remain
deadlocked in our collective international actions. The
Security Council must continue to actively work to
ensure peace and security for the people in the region
and in the whole world.
