Ms. Morrison Gonzalez (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Lacroix for the
information he provided and acknowledge the presence
of the Permanent Representative of the Sudan in the
Chamber with us today.

We would first like to acknowledge the efforts
of the transitional Government of the Sudan and the
Forces for Freedom and Change for the commitment
they have obtained to addressing the challenges facing
the country. In that regard, we welcome the peace
talks between the Sudanese Government and various
armed movements in Juba, as well as the agreement
among five factions of the armed movements to form
a Sudanese alliance for change and the signing of the
Juba Declaration for Confidence-building Procedures
and the Preparation for Negotiation. Those initiatives
for continued dialogue among the parties on core
issues are crucial to building trust and developing
strategies to address the root causes of the conflict.
We urge the parties to negotiate in good faith, maintain
momentum and make the necessary compromises in
order to restore the confidence of the Sudanese people
in their authorities.

However, those political achievements should not
detract from the reality ofthe crisis in the Sudan. Darfur
continues to be plagued by unresolved intercommunal
conflict and a serious humanitarian situation, with
nearly 2 million people facing food insecurity and
approximately 55 per cent of its arable land affected
by drought. We are also concerned about the ongoing
violations of human rights, mainly against children
and women. Above all, we are alarmed by the acts of
conflict-related sexual violence. It is imperative that the
judicial system be strengthened and perpetrators held
accountable. In that regard, we welcome the opening
of human rights offices in six cities in the Sudan and
the appointment of Ms. Nemat Abdallah Khair as the
first woman Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. These
developments are vital elements in the promotion of
the rule of law, the administration of justice and the
empowerment of women. Women's voices must be heard,
and women deserve to play an active role in the peace
process. In a sign of what the future could look like,
Sudan's new Cabinet also includes the country's first
female Foreign Minister, Ms. Asma Mohamed Abdalla.
Similarly, the achievement of 40 per cent representation
of women in the legislature and the establishment of
national advisory committees on women and youth at
all levels give us hope.

The situation in Darfur is linked to the political
process currently under way in the country. For that
reason, it is vital that the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur exit process be considered
in the context of those developments and that any post-
exit presence be equipped with the capacity to monitor
the ceasefire as well as disarmament and demobilization.

Finally, we would like to express our gratitude
to the UNAMID personnel, through the Special
Representative, and to all international stakeholders
and humanitarian personnel for their continued efforts
for the benefit of the Sudanese people.

