Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): I have the honour
to speak on behalf Latvia, Lithuania and my own
country, Estonia.

We fully align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

We would like to thank Sweden for convening this
open debate and all the briefers for their presentations.

Armed conflicts continue to have a horrific
impact on children and, as stated in the Secretary-
General's latest report on children and armed conflict
(S/2018/465), last year the situation was one of the
worst in recent memory. Children are being killed or
maimed, recruited as child soldiers and used as human
shields. Their schools are being attacked, they are
sexually abused, detained, abducted, separated from
their families and denied humanitarian access.

On the other hand, there are a few optimistic
developments. Intensive United Nations engagement
with armed groups in the Central African Republic and
Nigeria resulted in the signing of action plans to release
children and prevent their future recruitment. Sudan
made progress in the implementation of the action plan.
Mali endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration. Those
positive steps, however, are not sufficient.

States and the international community bear a
responsibility to prevent violations and to protect
children and others who are most vulnerable to the
detrimental impact of conflict. It is clear that the way
we treat children affected by armed conflict has a strong
impact on their future well-being, their development as
individuals and, ultimately, on communities as a whole.
We as the international community need to do more
to bridge the gap between protection of children and
conflict prevention. These prevention efforts should be
guided by the necessity to ensure full compliance with
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
In that regard, we first and foremost call on all States
who have not yet done so to accede to the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict.

In line with the Secretary-General's agenda on
prevention, we also acknowledge the need to receive
early warning signs from the ground. Here, civil
society can play a vital role. For prevention to be
truly efficient, however, States and ultimately the
international community need to take sufficient and
timely action. Children's involvement in peacemaking,
peacebuilding and transitional justice processes should
also not be overlooked.

Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia are also among
the Member States that have endorsed the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers in furtherance
of their commitment to taking further steps to
protect children.

In order to create sustainable and resilient societies,
it is important to offer all children affected by conflict
long-term support for reintegration into society. Also,
in line with the motto of the Sustainable Development
Goals of leaving no one behind, we need to make sure
that children recruited as soldiers or otherwise involved
in armed forces or groups receive the necessary
support, including psychological support to facilitate
their reintegration into a normal life. An important and
indispensable element here is the provision of education
to all children, including all girls, without exception. We
need to build community and family-support capacities
and skill-development opportunities, without which
those children will not be able to rebuild their lives.
We must remember to treat children as victims first,
not as perpetrators, and to avoid at any cost the double
victimization of children by detaining them for their
former association with armed forces or groups.

Finally, allow me to stress that conflict resolution
and sustainable peacebuilding involves the vital
element of accountability. That includes fighting
against impunity for violations and abuses that have
been perpetrated towards children. That obligation
lies primarily with States, whose capacity to enact
appropriate national legislation to criminalize grave
violations against children should be assisted. As a last
resort, upon the inability or unwillingness to prosecute
crimes, we continue to support the important role of the
International Criminal Court.

It is important for us as the international community
as a whole and as individual States to do our utmost
to not let down the children that are being affected by
conflict. By protecting them, we are protecting our
common future.

