Mr. Blanchard (Canada) (spoke in French): Iwould
like to thank the Egyptian delegation for convening
today's debate on this important and relevant topic.
The concept note (S/2016/416, annex) was helpful and
raised several important issues. At the outset, I would
emphasize that in the experience and approach of
Canada violent extremism cannot be associated with
any particular religion, nationality, civilization, or
ethnic group.

My statement today will focus on three specific
topics in the fight against terrorism: the role of public-
private partnerships, positive alternative narratives
rooted in action, and multilateral coordination.

(spoke in English)

First, effective counter-narrative strategies require
meaningful partnerships with the private sector and
civil society and have to include innovative approaches
that tap into the growing body of knowledge about
countering terrorist narratives. We have seen that some
terrorist groups are effective in using the Internet to
advance their aims. The content they produce appeals
to the generation that grew up with YouTube and has
contributed to radicalization towards violence.

Yet our efforts to counter terrorist narratives online
must not legitimize controls that hinder peaceful use of
the Internet. Governments must forge partnerships with
Internet-based companies and online communities.
They must also help create open, safe spaces for debate
that appeal to regional audiences, taking into account
cultural realities and sensitivities.

Furthermore, the process of radicalization to
violence is complex and highly individualized. In fact,
Government efforts to counter radical messages can be
ineffective or even counter-productive, partly due to
real or perceived credibility gaps with target audiences.
Therefore, partnerships with credible local parties must
also be part of our strategy.

Secondly, we understand the importance of having
a positive alternative narrative that stands on its
own. Governments have an important role to play in
this endeavour. Despite some stumbles, the Canadian
Government has been actively enabling the building
of a peaceful, pluralistic society throughout Canada's
history. It is our belief that diversity and inclusion are
crucial to healthy and prosperous societies that are
resilient against extremism - not just as aspirational
values, but as a proven path to peace and prosperity.
The recent resettlement of 25,000 Syrian refugees in
Canada, with more still to follow, is a part of that story.

We are not perfect, but we believe that Canada
has a lot to contribute to the international community
in terms of our experience building a peaceful and
resilient society, particularly at a time when there is a
pressing need to prevent violent extremism. Against
that overarching story line, Governments should
encourage social and political dialogue that undermines
narratives spun by terrorists, spearhead research and
knowledge sharing, engage young people and empower
those who are marginalized. To help us focus our
efforts, Canada is establishing an office dedicated to
community outreach and counter-radicalization. The
office will advance research, coordinate local, national
and international initiatives, work with civil society
and support community engagement.

(spoke in French)

In the short term, multilateral efforts related to
communications and counter-messaging are relatively
new and more needs to be done to develop them. Canada
stands ready to share its experience and expertise
with the international community. Canada is actively
engaged in the communications and counter-messaging
efforts of the Global Coalition to Counter the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant. Canada strongly supports
the Secretary-General's Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism (A/70/674), which emphasizes the
need to address underlying conditions to prevent the
development of violent extremism. We also support
the efforts undertaken by a range of multilateral
organizations and forums, including the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations and the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum.
