Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): We commend
Singapore for its initiative to hold this open debate
today on the important subject of strengthening
cooperation with troop-contributing countries (TCCs).
Mr. Minister, we deeply appreciate your presence in the
Council and the fact that you are presiding over the
discussions on this important subject.

Allow me also to thank all of the delegations that
have addressed kind words of felicitations to us
following our recent election to the Security Council to
serve a two-year term as a non-permanent member. I
would like to assure all delegations that Mauritius is
determined to contribute effectively to the work of the
Council and to bring its perspective to the
deliberations, keeping in mind the common concerns
and aspirations of the general membership of the
United Nations.

We also thank the outgoing members of the
Council, namely Argentina, Canada, Malaysia,
Namibia and the Netherlands, for their contribution to
the work of the Council during their tenure.

I wish to take this opportunity to first of all
express the appreciation of my delegation to all of the
troop-contributing countries for making their troops
available so that the United Nations can fulfil its
fundamental task of maintaining peace and security
throughout the world. We are conscious of the great
sacrifice the TCCs make in deploying their men and
women in conflict situations in unfamiliar territories on
behalf of the United Nations. We believe that there can
be no doubt whatsoever that TCCs, which risk the lives
of their personnel, must be fully involved in the
decision-making process at every stage of a mandate
that concerns them.

During the morning session, we listened to
statements by a number of important TCCs, which not
only expressed their concerns about the numerous
problems peacekeeping operations entail, but also
made many valuable suggestions to improve the
situation.

The traumatic experience of the United Nations in
failing to prevent genocide in Rwanda in 1994 and to
protect the inhabitants of Srebrenica ultimately
triggered the setting up of the independent high-level
Panel to undertake a thorough review of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Today we have the
Brahimi report, which is an important road map that
will enable our Organization to achieve better results
from more effective peacekeeping operations in the
coming years.

It goes without saying that greater cooperation
between TCCs, the Secretariat and the Security Council
should yield better results for our peacekeeping
operations. The success and increased efficiency of any
peacekeeping operation can be ensured through
effective coordination and management involving all
concerned parties. The Brahimi report has clearly
recommended greater cooperation between the Security
Council and the TCCs. The Security Council affirmed
in resolution 1318 (2000) its determination, at the level
of heads of State and Government, to adopt clearly
defined, credible, achievable and appropriate mandates.
Through resolution 1327 (2000), the Security Council
confirmed its commitment to holding private meetings
with TCCs at various stages of the establishment and
implementation of peacekeeping operations.

The holding of these private meetings is
undoubtedly marked progress towards greater
cooperation between the Council and the TCCs.
However, we Security Council members need to
address seriously the calls and concerns we heard from
TCCs earlier in this meeting, particularly with regard
to the legitimate request regarding the
institutionalization of Security Council and TCC
cooperation.

We fully subscribe to the view that the Security
Council should consult with TCCs during the
formulation of mandates. Today the majority of troops
come from developing countries because developed
countries are more and more reluctant to risk their
military personnel abroad. We in the Security Council
cannot afford to see a dwindling of troops from
developing countries as well in the years ahead,
especially when everyone knows that more and more
peacekeeping operations are being undertaken by the
United Nations. The concerns of TCCs should be taken
very seriously.

My delegation wishes to join with other
delegations which have, over the years and today also,
advocated the institutionalization of consultations
between TCCs and the Security Council through the
establishment of an ad hoc subsidiary organ of the
Council, as provided for in Article 29 of the Charter.
This matter should be fully discussed within the
Council at an early date.

TCCs have an important role to play since their
military contingents are called upon to discharge
responsibilities professionally, in accordance with the
mission's mandate. Although the Security Council is
largely responsible for designing peacekeeping
operations, the implementation of the mandate of
operations rests mainly with the troops deployed on the
ground. In the Security Council, we should ensure that
TCCs are thoroughly consulted whenever a change in
the mandate of an operation is contemplated. This can
best be achieved within the ambit of the proposed
subsidiary organ. It is true that if TCCs are not
consulted in the evolution of a mandate, it will be
difficult for the TCCs to have a clear assessment of
possible developments on the ground.

The success of any project lies largely in the
degree of genuine cooperation and consultation
between the project designers and the executants of the
project. We believe it is essential to involve TCCs in
consultations at the earliest stage possible. During
these early consultations, potential TCCs should be
provided with the information that would enable them
to decide on their eventual participation on the ground.

The Secretariat needs to thoroughly and
continually brief TCCs on all aspects, including the
situation on the ground, risk assessment of the
operation and the security threats involved. At an early
stage of consultation, it is also very useful to take on
board inputs from the Lessons Learned Unit of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. These steps
would create a better understanding between the
Secretariat and TCCs. Only if there is enhanced
confidence between all stakeholders will the TCCs be
able to convince their national legislatures and public
to commit troops.

Peace operations should be well manned and well
equipped in order to minimize risks and failures. In this
regard, the Secretariat has the prime responsibility of
identifying the best trained and most experienced
troops for a ground operation. While the Secretariat
should carefully assess the overall preparedness of
potential troops prior to deployment, TCCs should also
understand that one of the ways to ensure the success
of an operation is through the commitment of well-
trained contingents, with appropriate equipment and
supplies needed to sustain their personnel on the
ground. The TCCs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations should work closely within a
framework of military cooperation to ensure that the
troops deployed have the optimum capacity to
discharge their duties efficiently. Here we agree with
the suggestion of India that the Military Staff
Committee should be revived.

In conclusion, today's open debate has given us
deep insight into the need for greater cooperation
between the Security Council, the Secretariat and the
TCCs. My delegation has no doubt that the Security
Council must seriously address the issues raised by the
TCCs and take appropriate measures to accommodate
the concerns expressed in this open debate.

