Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): I thank members for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
ongoing work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and its Executive Directorate (CTED).

CTED is mandated until 31 December 2017 to
assist Member States, on behalf of the CTC, to achieve
the full implementation of Security Council resolutions
on terrorism. Since the Committee's previous briefing
to the Council (see S/PV.7686), the CTC and CTED
have continued to engage in a wide range of activities
within the framework of those resolutions, specifically,
to increase the number and pace of assessments and
to follow up promptly on facilitation of technical
assistance; to identify important issues, trends,
developments; and to work with partners on innovative
responses.

Assessment visits to Member States and follow-up
on the facilitation oftechnical assistance are at the heart
of CTED's work on behalf of the Committee and the
Council and remain a critical part of the Committee's
dialogue with Member States. Since March 2016,
the Committee has conducted 17 Visits to Member
States - more than in any other equivalent period since
its establishment, in 2001. The Visited States included
Afghanistan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kazakhstan, the
Lake Chad basin States, Paraguay, Senegal, Sri Lanka
and Tajikistan.

In post-visit follow-up, CTED has worked
intensively with Member States and implementing
agencies to facilitate technical assistance based on
the Committee's recommendations. Engagement with
Iraq, including further follow-up in Baghdad, is a
good example in that regard. Facilitation work sped
up markedly in the past 12 months. Argentina and Sri
Lanka agreed on commitments with the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime on technical assistance
pursuant to the Visits' recommendations while the visits
were still ongoing.

Terrorism continues to pose a serious global
security threat, and the CTC and CTED have been
working to identify threats, emerging trends and
potential responses. Counter-terrorism financing was
a priority in the Committee's work in the past year.
CTED has noted that terrorists continue to devise new
fundraising methods, and there is increasing concern
about the transnational organized crimes that fund
terrorism. CTED is working with the Financial Action
Task Force (FATF) and similar regional bodies. CTED
helped finalize revisions of the international standards
and provided inputs for a typology report on terrorist
financing in West and Central Africa, adopted in
October 2016. In the framework of the FATF, CTED
initiated specific work on the misuse of social media
for terrorism-financing purposes, having organized a
side event on the topic in December.

An awareness of the increased use of the Internet
and other information and communication technologies
(ICT) in terrorism led the CTC to organize a special
meeting in December 2016 on terrorists' use of ICT.
ICT industry leaders also briefed the CTC in February
about the joint CTED/ICT4 initiative - Tech Against
Terrorism - which promotes self-regulation of the
industry globally. Concern about the role of women in
terrorism, and in line with resolution 2242 (2017), led
CTED to incorporate a gender dimension in its work,
where relevant, including assessment visits, threat and
trend analysis and technical assistance.

With respect to the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2016/) of the Council on 11 May 2016 on the
challenges of countering terrorism narratives, the CTC,
in consultation with CTED, the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF), other United
Nations bodies and interested Member States, prepared
a proposal for a comprehensive international framework
to address this threat. The proposal was submitted to
the Council last month for its consideration.

CTED continues to take advice from practitioners
with real-world experience of the challenges of tackling
terrorism. South Asian judges, prosecutors and police
officers convened regularly by CTED since 2009 to
promote regional cooperation, to provide advice and
guidance on trends and developments and to inform
the Committee's formulation of strategic regional
and thematic approaches, most recently in Sri Lanka
in October.

The Committee and CTED have held formal and
informal briefings to keep Member States and other
partners aware of emerging threats and responses.
Most recently, on 5 April, the Committee held an
open briefing, on denying safe haven to terrorists, at
which the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and INTERPOL encouraged States to strengthen their
cooperation, including by adopting legislation and
sharing information through INTERPOL tools and
databases. CTED, INTERPOL and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees agreed
to continue to assist States to ensure more systematic
screening of asylum seekers. This information will
inform CTED's preparation, pursuant resolution 2322
(2016), of a report on international judicial and law
enforcement cooperation.

CTED also advised Member States on the need
to develop comprehensive and integrated counter-
terrorism strategies that engage multiple stakeholders
in Iraq, Mali and Tunisia.

The CTC and CTED continued to pay close attention
to relevant human rights and rule-of-law issues, in
accordance with the Committee's policy guidance.
They take account of relevant human rights concerns
in their dialogue with States, in special meetings and
open briefings, in the context of country visits and in
the facilitation of technical assistance.

CTED is actively engaged with CTITF and its
working groups, being a member of eight of the groups,
five of which it chairs. CTED has worked closely with
CTITF on issues including the coordination of efforts,
pursuant to resolutions 2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015),
to prevent the looting of antiquities in the territory
controlled by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.

Mindful of the ongoing gravity of the global
terrorist threat and its evolving trends and challenges,
the Council has stressed and continues to stress, the
need to ensure that counter-terrorism remains a priority
on the international agenda and has underlined the
critical role of CTED in supporting the Committee in
its work. It is expected that the forthcoming review of
CTED's mandate will provide an opportunity to further
enhance the impact of CTED's efforts, together with its
partners, to fulfil the tasks conferred by the relevant
Council resolutions and decisions.

