Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Stephen O'Brien for
his briefing.

At our most recent open debate (see S/PV.7740), my
delegation spoke about working methods. We said that
it was positive if Security Council members were to
begin to express themselves in this open forum, rather
than doing so only in closed consultations when the
format of the meetings involved briefings followed by
consultations. For that reason, we would like to make
just a brief statement at this stage.

We are concerned about the lack of a solution to
the grave humanitarian situation in Syria, which affects
millions of people who are suffering from destruction,
hunger and extreme violence. Cruel practices, which
represent war crimes, such as the use ofhunger as a war
tactic, are taking place in Syria. This deplorable tactic
is being used by parties to the conflict to inflict hunger
on the millions of besieged people, including children.

The besieging of towns as a tactic of war continues
to be one of the situations that should most urgently
draw the attention of the Security Council, as it does
not affect just the lives of people living under extreme
conditions because of the lack of food, but also because
it results in a lack of access to medicines and all the
basic supplies necessary to meet their most basic needs.

Uruguay is concerned about the recent events
that have taken place in the east of Aleppo city and
the closing of the Castello road, which was the last
remaining access route to that area, the closing of
which prevents the circulation of civilians, trade and
humanitarian aid. Recently, Council members heard
about improvements in the delivery of humanitarian aid
in certain besieged cities, including some that had not
received aid in years. However, at the same time, we
learned with shock and horror the news of the bombings
that occurred in those same cities immediately after the
arrival of aid, as was the case in Daraya. The ongoing
deliberate attacks perpetrated against hospitals where
health-care personnel have been the victims is worrying;
this situation calls for compliance with resolution
2286 (2016) adopted by the Council last May. Today,
we have received information about new bombings in
Aleppo that have caused civilian deaths as well as the
destruction of hospitals, including a blood bank.

The humanitarian crisis in Syria can also be
seen through the displacement of millions of people
trying to escape the horror. The extreme seriousness
of their situation is causing these people's extreme
vulnerability, whether they be internally displaced by
lack of access to a minimum standard of living or those
who manage to flee the country only to become easy
prey for organized crime.

The situation of children in Syria is extremely
worrying. The effects of conflict on children is
compromising the future of an entire generation.
According to recent data from UNICEF, more than 8
out of 10 Syrian children - more than 8 million - have
been affected by war and are in need of humanitarian
assistance, including those within Syria and those
who are refugees in neighbouring countries, namely,
Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq, Turkey and Egypt.

In addition, one in three children in the
country - approximately 3.7 million in total - has
been born since the conflict began, with the result that
they know only violence, fear and displacement. In
this context of despair and chaos, Uruguay considers
it necessary to redouble international efforts to prevent
Syrian children from becoming a lost generation as a
result, inter alia, of the lack of educational opportunities,
child-soldier recruitment and forced marriages at an
early age.

Accordingly, the recent and terrible case of
beheading of a Palestinian boy by the Nour Al-Din
Al-Zenki group is a barbaric and cowardly act. How
far have we come? Is it no longer enough to recruit
children? Do they also have to cut their heads off
with knives? Uruguay rejects and expresses its strong
condemnation of this savage act. We would add, further,
that there is no God or religion that accepts an atrocity
of this nature.

We support Mr. Stephen O'Brien's request for a
weekly 48-hour truce in Aleppo.

Finally, Uruguay wishes to reiterate once again
the importance of making greater progress towards a
political solution that facilitates moving forward in the
peace talks under way and which supports a process of
transition. We are convinced that this is the only way to
achieve lasting solutions to the current conflict, taking
into account the provisions of resolutions 2254 (2015)
and 2268 (2016) of this Council.

