Mrs. Viotti (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I am
pleased to welcome you to the Council, Mr. President.
It is a great pleasure to see you presiding over our
meeting today, and I take this opportunity to
congratulate the Mexican delegation on its initiative of
organizing this open debate on a topic of great
importance in the daily work of the Security.

(spoke in English)

I would like to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Asha-Rose Migiro for her statement and for her
leadership on this issue. I also thank Under-Secretary-
General Patricia O'Brien for her very interesting
remarks, which reminded us of the many important
dimensions of the rule of law and the implications of
the increasing trend towards the international rule of
law.

An international system based on legal principles
and norms is simply indispensable for ensuring lasting
peace and security. Outside the boundaries of
international law, there can be no justice or friendly
relations amongst States, much less cooperation for the
good of the billions of individuals we represent.

Today, I will address the three main topics
suggested in the concept paper prepared by your
delegation, Sir, for this debate (S/2010/322, annex),
namely, the promotion of the rule of law in conflict and
post-conflict situations, international justice and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, and the efficiency and
credibility of sanctions regimes.

The Security Council, as the organ of the United
Nations entrusted with primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, is
expected to help ensure the effective implementation of
international law. That means, first and foremost,
ensuring compliance with its own resolutions. It also
implies upholding international law applicable to
conflict situations - an obligation that the Council
should strive to consistently fulfil on all issues on the
agenda.

Our challenge is therefore to reconcile the
political nature of this body with the imperative to
strengthen the rule of law. In fact, there is no
opposition between the two goals: in the long term, the
observance of international law serves the interests of
all of us.

The need to restore and sustain the rule of law is
even more evident in post-conflict situations. In war-
torn societies, fragile national institutions usually
hamper consolidation of the rule of law. It is important
that the international community be able to assist
national efforts to re-establish State institutions. In the
context of such efforts, my delegation greatly values
the measures that have been taken to include the rule-
of-law perspective in United Nations activities,
including creation of the Rule of Law Coordination and
Resource Group and the Rule of Law Unit.
Numerous bodies have worked towards the
settlement of disputes, thus avoiding the occurrence of
possible deadly conflicts. Among them, the
International Court of Justice has a particular
importance, as it adjudicates very sensitive cases, thus
significantly contributing to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

The International Criminal Court also deserves
special mention. It has become a powerful tool against
impunity and thus a means of prevention. The deterrent
effect is a central part of the work of the Court and
probably its most important contribution to the
maintenance of international peace and security. If
leaders and persons vested with authority around the
world understand that they are not above international
law, they will probably use power in a manner less
likely to cause instability and conflict and therefore
violence.

Furthermore, as the Court's jurisdiction is
complementary to national criminal jurisdictions,
States still have the primary responsibility of bringing
to justice those responsible for the most serious crimes.
This approach has led many States to enact appropriate
legislation concerning those crimes, which in turn
contributes significantly to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Another positive note on the Court is the
important outcome of the first Review Conference of
the Rome Statute, in Kampala. The Conference
highlighted the strong commitment of the international
community to the Court and resulted in an historic
agreement on the definition of the crime of aggression
and the trigger mechanisms for exercise of the Court's
jurisdiction over one of the most serious crimes. It is
our expectation that in 2017, States parties will agree
to activate the agreed mechanisms.

Sanctions may play a role in efforts to maintain
international peace and security. But they should be
used sparingly and wisely and never to the detriment of
negotiated solutions to differences. As highlighted in
the document annexed to General Assembly resolution
64/115, they should be carefully targeted in support of
clear and legitimate objectives and should be
implemented in ways that balance effectiveness to
achieve the desired results against possible adverse
consequences, including socio-economic and
humanitarian.

It is worth recalling that the purpose of sanctions
should be to modify the behaviour of the targeted State,
party, individual or entity threatening international
peace and security. The purpose must never be an
indirect or undeclared means to cause regime change or
punish or otherwise exact retribution. The further we
depart from the original concepts, the less legitimacy
and effectiveness sanctions will have.

In devising and implementing sanctions regimes,
the Security Council should avoid adverse effects for
individuals and entities not targeted or for third States.
When sanctions include measures against certain
individuals or entities, listing and de-listing procedures
need to be clear and fair and must observe the due
process of law. There have recently been important
improvements in this regard, especially in the 1267
sanctions regime, related to Al-Qaida and the Taliban.
Further efforts will have to be made to ensure the
Security Council continues to fully respect
fundamental freedoms and human rights.

We believe the strict observance of international
law is closely linked to long-lasting peace and security.
Efforts made in that regard merit our unwavering
support. We hope they will be sustained and expanded
throughout the United Nations system.

