Mr. Prendergast: Let me start, if I may, with the
military situation, since for the past month Afghanistan
has been gripped by renewed and more intense fighting
than usual between the Taliban and the United Front. The
Security Council was briefed on the developments during
informal consultations on 28 July and again on 5 August.
The Secretariat's information comes mainly from public
as well as Afghan sources, since the United Nations
Special Mission to Afghanistan (UNSMA) has no
presence in the areas of active fighting. The Taliban
launched their long-anticipated summer offensive on 28
July. On 5 August, the United Front launched a counter-
offensive against Taliban forces north of Kabul and in
certain northern areas along the Oxus River. The United
Front subsequently recaptured within a week virtually all
their lost ground. The front lines then returned more or
less to their pre-fighting configuration.

The United Nations Mission estimates that around
1,200 Taliban and 600 United Front fighters have been
killed in the past month. This fighting, however, has
made little overall difference to the military balance
between the two warring sides. The greatest impact has
been on the civilian population, who have suffered greatly
and whose plight I shall describe later.

On ll August, the Taliban launched yet another
initiative. They quickly seized territory in the Shomali
plains north of Kabul, including towns along and adjacent
to the so-called Kabul old road. Taliban forces currently
are in the vicinity of the airbase at Bagram, but it appears
that neither side is seeking to occupy the airbase, which
no longer has its former strategic importance. When
Commander Masoud held it he progressively used it less
because of its vulnerability to Taliban missile attack. To
relieve pressure on his forces near his stronghold of the
Panjsher valley, Commander Masoud has made some
diversionary attacks on Taliban forces on the eastern flank
in the provinces of Laghman and Kunad, and also more
limited ones to the west in Goa province. The United
Front claimed to have captured some five districts in
Laghman and Kunad. The Taliban partially refute this
claim.

In the past week, the United Front claimed that
Taliban aircraft had bombed civilian populations in
Takhar province in northern Afghanistan. The Taliban
claimed to be challenging Commander Masoud's western
supply route into Taloqan, one of his main command
centres. The United Nations can confirm that fighting is
continuing between the two sides in Bangi district on the
Kunduz/Takhar provincial border. The renewed Taliban

 

attacks have been reinforced by a large influx of recruits
from the religious schools or madrassas in Pakistan. An
estimated 2,000 to 5,000 young students, including Afghan
and others, have joined the war.

If I may turn to the political situation, the present
condition is that it is at a stalemate. There has been no
direct contact or meeting between the two warring sides
since their bilateral meeting in the margins of the "six-plus-
two" high-level meeting at Tashkent on 19 and 20 July.
Nevertheless, UNSMA, the United Nations Mission, has
continued its quiet, behind-the-scenes diplomacy. In an
effort to test the readiness of the two sides to meet again,
the acting head of UNSMA was in contact with
Commander Masoud on a number of occasions during the
period from 10 to 12 August. Commander Masoud
indicated his continued readiness, despite the ongoing
fighting, to meet with the Taliban to discuss a political
solution to Afghanistan's problems. He made clear that he
was not interested in surrender to the Taliban.

With his consent, the United Nations Mission passed
this message privately to the Taliban leadership in
Kandahar. Mullah Omar's response was that the Taliban
could not reopen direct talks with the United Front until
they, in his words, "show their sincerity". Despite inquiries
by the United Nations Special Mission, the Taliban have
not clarified what measures of sincerity the United Front
would need to demonstrate in order to persuade the Taliban
to resume dialogue with them. The car bomb attack in
Kandahar on 25 August, reportedly aimed at Mullah Omar,
could make it even more difficult to bring the two sides
back to the negotiating table.

In a separate initiative, the Pakistan Government has
sought to bring the two Afghan sides together. Pakistan has
indicated that its initiative was taken in response to a
telephone appeal made by the President of the Islamic State
of Afghanistan, Professor Rabbani, to the Prime Minister of
Pakistan. Accordingly, a Pakistan delegation led by the
Additional Secretary at the Ministry of the Interior, Rustan
Shah Mohamed, met a United Front delegation in Dushanbe
on 18 August and subsequently met with Mullah Omar in
Kandahar before returning again to Dushanbe on 22-23
August. The United Front have publicly rejected any
Pakistan effort at mediation, asserting that Pakistan's
military and political support for the Taliban makes this
impossible. Privately, however, the United Front have
welcomed the direct contact with Pakistan in order to
convey their viewpoint. To date there has been no public
Taliban comment on the talks.

If I might now raise the issue of human rights, it
should be recalled that the Secretary-General, in a
statement of 6 August, expressed his alarm about reports
of massive forced displacements of civilians from the
areas where fighting has been raging in Afghanistan. In
this context, the Secretary-General pointed out that the
parties responsible for committing criminal acts such as
forced displacements subsequently turn to the United
Nations and the international community as a whole to
help save their own people from disasters provoked by
those who claim to be their country's leaders.

The United Nations has compelling evidence that the
Taliban, in the course of their attack in the Shomali
plains, have meted out completely unacceptable treatment
to the civilian population. The Taliban assert that they
have only destroyed houses used by opposition guerrilla
fighters. But the extent of the destruction of homes and
crops and livestock does not seem in any way compatible
or commensurate with these Taliban claims. Furthermore,
the Taliban have conducted a policy whereby the menfolk
have been separated from families of internally displaced
persons transported by the Taliban to Jalalabad. The
Taliban have also carried out detentions and arrests of
those suspected of supporting or favouring the United
Front. These detentions have included five United Nations
Afghan national staff members or their dependants. All
but one have been released within the 72 hours of
detention permitted under the United Nations security
protocol with the Taliban authorities.

The growing use of boy soldiers by both sides, but
particularly by the Taliban in their recent offensive, is
another alarming trend. As members of the Council are
aware, the Secretary-General expressed his deep concern
over reports of the involvement in the Afghan conflict of
students, some as young as 14, and he called on the
warring parties to respect the Convention on the Rights of
the Child.

In terms of the humanitarian situation, reports of
forced displacement and the burning of houses and crops
in the Shomali valley have been confirmed by an
increasing number of sources. The flow of internally
displaced persons into Kabul is ongoing. More than
30,000 internally displaced persons were counted at
checkpoints at the outskirts of the capital between 8 and
20 August. It is believed that the number of internally
displaced persons in Kabul may be as many as 40,000.
However, estimates on the exact number of internally
displaced persons are difficult, as many people prefer not
to disclose their place of origin or identity for fear of

 

retaliation from the Taliban authorities. Many of these
internally displaced persons have found accommodation
with friends and relatives in the city. The United Nations
has not obtained, to date, official permission from the
Taliban authorities to conduct independent identification of
internally displaced persons in the capital.
As of 22 August some one thousand families are
housed in the ex-Soviet Embassy compound in Kabul. The
size of the families - between two and four members -
is much smaller than usual as they are mainly women with
young children and the elderly. The relative absence of
young men is notable among the internally displaced
persons. These families came with very few personal
possessions. The World Food Programme has organized
emergency feeding for the people in the compound.

A United Nations assessment mission is currently in
the Panjsher valley and we expect to have more detailed
information on the numbers, location and condition on the
numbers, location and conditions of the internally displaced
persons in the valley, as well as coordination requirements,
by the beginning of next week. An estimated 60,000 people
are currently displaced in the area. Most seem to be
accommodated with local families, although some 15,000
people are reportedly camping in the open with no shelter.
This causes serious concern, as the valley is very difficult
to access.

There are also approximately 10,000 internally
displaced persons, including women and children, in
Kunduz and Taloqan provinces as well as in the northern
area of Pulikhumbri.

Systematic destruction of the agricultural base in the
Shomali valley is reportedly under way for military and
other reasons. It seems that, in addition to the widespread
burning of houses, boundary walls around properties are
being demolished and irrigation systems destroyed. These
are ancient irrigation systems, resulting in the loss of trees
and important fruit crops that were due for harvesting. If
carried out over a wide area, and not just close to strategic
roads, as has been the case in the past, this sort of action
will have a devastating impact on the livelihoods of the
local communities. Many of these people had returned to
their villages from Pakistan during the period 1994-1995
after the rehabilitation of the irrigation systems on which
they depend.

As in the past, the use of landmines continues, which
has added to the ranks of the disabled, the orphaned and the
widowed. Both parties to the conflict have bombed and
rocketed with impunity areas inhabited by civilians. I am
afraid it is the case that the warring parties in Afghanistan
have, time and again, exhibited a callous disregard for the
way in which their activities cause loss of life, limb and
livelihood to the people of Afghanistan.

It is deeply disturbing that the fighting in
Afghanistan, reignited by the Taliban's offensive on 28
July, resumed immediately after the Tashkent meeting of
the group of the "six plus two" on 19 and 20 July.

This fighting in Afghanistan has almost a ritual
quality, with the front line moving to and fro. It is also
extremely troubling that outside support for the warring
parties has not diminished. On the contrary, as the
Secretary-General indicated in his statement on 6 August,
in addition to reports about ongoing deliveries of
ammunition and other war-making materials, there are
now thousands of non-Afghan nationals taking part in the
fighting. If this trend is not reversed by the warring
Afghan parties and their outside supporters, the nature of
the senseless war in Afghanistan will increasingly evolve
towards an even more widespread and destructive regional
conflict.

The unabated involvement of neighbouring and other
countries in the Afghan conflict not only continues to fuel
the fighting inside the country but also appears to call
into question the practical significance of the various
declarations agreed upon by the members of the group of
"six plus two", a group that includes all of Afghanistan's
neighbours. As members of the Council may be aware,
the Secretary-General, in his message to the Tashkent
meeting of the "six-plus-two", explicitly stressed the need
for concerted and effective action of that group.
Regrettably, we cannot say that this has taken place.

The apparent trend of growing disunity among the
members of the "six plus two" can be expected to call
into further question the relevance of that group as
presently constituted. It should be recalled in this
connection that the "six plus two" were originally
assembled almost two years ago with a View to adopting
a joint strategy vis-a-vis a peaceful solution to the Afghan
conflict.

As we all know, this has not happened. A new
formula of Member States' support for the peace-making
efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy
may be required. It is therefore the sincere hope of the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy that today's
debate in the Security Council will generate new ideas

 

and approaches for the United Nations and the international
community as a whole with regard to the senseless fighting
in Afghanistan. Hopefully, today's debate will facilitate the
return of a sense of international urgency with respect to
the twenty-year-old Afghan tragedy so that finally a
peaceful solution can be more realistically envisaged. We
owe it to the heroic Afghan people who are the real victims
of this unprecedented catastrophe inflicted upon them.

May I end by saying that the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Lakhdar Brahimi, would
very much have liked to be present today and had he been
he would have delivered these remarks, but unfortunately
he is in hospital, and I am sure the Council will want to
send him their best wishes for a speedy recovery.

