Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): Botswana warmly
welcomes the recent inauguration of the Government of
Unity and National Reconciliation in Angola. It is our
fervent hope that this momentous political development will
set Angola on the road to irreversible peace and stability.
The people of Angola have suffered; they have bled and
died needlessly for far too long. It is time this unhappy past
was banished to the museum of history.

The inauguration marked a new era of hope for a
peaceful Angola and a peaceful southern Africa. Peace in
Angola is our peace; it is peace for all the nations of
southern Africa. The presence of the regional leaders,
including my own Head of State, at the inauguration
ceremony bears testimony to the regional dimension of the
Angolan peace process. Like a human body, the region of
southern Africa cannot function or act as one when a part
of it is at war with itself.

While the inauguration of the Government of Unity
and National Reconciliation was a ceremonial event worth
celebrating with due pomp, we should lose sight neither of
the fact that the Lusaka Protocol has not yet been
completely implemented nor of the fact that it will take a
long time to heal the wounds of war and mutual suspicion
among Angolans. The absence of the UN ITA leader, leader
of the largest opposition party, Mr. Jonas Savimbi, from the
inauguration ceremony left too much to be desired vis-a-vis
the future of the new Government of Angola. Mr. Savimbi
cited personal safety as a reason for his absence from the
ceremony. Yet there were Heads of State - 11 of them -
whose security was assured by the Angolan authorities, and
everything went without incident. It can only be deduced
that the UNITA leader is suspicious of a Government of
which he is supposedly now an integral part. It is our hope
that Mr. Savimbi will find it an act of statesmanship and
patriotism to relocate to Luanda to take an active part in the
arduous task of national reconciliation and reconstruction.
The leader of the opposition always has the seat of
government as his base, and his real intentions should not
be the subject of guesswork.

It is an anomaly that the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation is not operational throughout the
national territory of Angola. This must be redressed
without delay. Equally, we call on the Government to
speedily incorporate and integrate UNITA soldiers into
the Angolan Armed Forces, as well as to complete the
demobilization of excess combatants. And we fully
support the call contained in the present draft resolution
for a meeting between the President of Angola and the
leader of UNITA to iron out these problems.

God has endowed Angola with abundant natural
resources for its people to share and by which they can
prosper together. The remaining political and military
problems should not be allowed to stand in the way of the
Angolan people's enjoyment of their natural heritage in
peace and harmony.

The international community has stood by the people
of Angola in their hour of darkest need. We are happy
that they are not about to be abandoned. The provision in
the present draft resolution for a follow-on United Nations
presence after the withdrawal of UNAVEM. III is a clear
indication that the international community will continue
to be ready to help the Angolans to live with one another
as one nation bound by a common destiny. This will take
some time, as I have already indicated, but the onus rests
upon the people of Angola themselves to abandon
mistrust and mutual suspicion lest the international
community's resolve to help them weakens and withers
away before total peace is achieved in that country.
Angola is one of the most beautiful countries of southern
Africa, and we cannot afford to have it destroyed with
reckless abandon.

