Mr. Okello Oryem (Uganda): Permit me to add
my voice to those who that have spoken before me in
thanking the delegation of the United Kingdom, under
your leadership, Sir, for convening this timely and
important ministerial debate on the Sudan. I thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing on
the situation in the country, as well as President Mbeki
for his briefing. We welcome the participation of His
Excellency Mr. Ali Karti, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of the Sudan, and His Excellency
Mr. Pagan Amum, Secretary General of the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement. We are particularly
encouraged by their excellent interventions and
assurances.

The international community and the region in
particular are following with keen interest the
developments in the Sudan. The referendum in
Southern Sudan, scheduled to take place on 9 January
2011, will be a critical milestone in the implementation
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). It is
important that it take place on time in a free, fair and
transparent manner and that the results be respected by
all. We commend the parties for their continued
commitment to conducting the referendum as provided
for in the CPA.

It is important, however, that this commitment be
followed up by concrete steps to ensure a credible
referendum. In the run-up to the referendum, it is
important that both parties exercise maximum restraint.
We call on the international community to fulfil the
financial pledges made and to provide logistical
support for the referendum. The role of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) remains
critical to the support and conduct of the referendum.

We welcome the progress made so far by the
Southern Sudan Referendum Commission. In
particular, we are pleased to note that voter registration
started yesterday and expect that the other steps in the
timetable will be fulfilled. We encourage the
Commission to work with cohesion, unity of purpose
and focus for the accomplishment of its mandate.

We remain concerned over the lack of progress in
the organization of the Abyei referendum, and
especially the failure to establish the Abyei referendum
commission. We note the challenges the parties face in
resolving this issue, and stress the importance of
reaching an amicable solution consistent with the
existing agreements.

On a related note, it is important that the parties
accord equal attention to the popular consultations in
Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan, as well as post-
referendum arrangements in Southern Sudan. In this
regard, we welcome the efforts of the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel on the Sudan, under
the chairmanship of President Thabo Mbeki, in
bringing the parties together to agree a framework
agreement on outstanding CPA-related issues. We
welcome the cooperation the parties have extended to
the Panel thus far, and urge them to make full use of
this mechanism.

It is essential that the African Union maintain its
engagement on these issues, with the support of the
international community. In this regard, the decision of
the African Union Peace and Security Council of
28 October to extend the mandate of the High-Level
Panel for another year is a welcome and timely
development.

We commend the Chairman of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, His
Excellency Mr. Meles Zenawi, for the important role
he is playing in assisting the parties to reach agreement
on post-referendum arrangements.

The security situation in Darfur remains fragile.
We are concerned by the continuing hostilities and
violence, kidnappings and restrictions on the
movement of the staff and peacekeepers of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), as well as of humanitarian workers. We
commend the efforts of Joint Chief Mediator Djibril
Bassole in facilitating the ongoing negotiations for a
peace process and for the participation of all key
stakeholders. We welcome, in this regard, the meeting
between the Justice and Equality Movement and the
mediation team in Doha. We urge all rebel groups that
have not yet joined the Doha talks to do so.

We commend Joint Special Representative

Ibrahim Gambari and UNAMID staff, as well as

Special Representative of the Secretary-General Haile

Menkerios and UNMIS staff for the important work
they continue to do in challenging circumstances.

In conclusion, the implementation of the CPA has
now reached a critical stage. We call upon the parties
to remain committed, and the international community
to render them its total support to ensure the full
implementation of the CPA.

