Mr. Ramirez Carreflo (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela fully supports today's resolution
2022 (2015) because we consider it a very important
and fundamental contribution to an agreement on
a political and peaceful solution to this conflict. My
country supports a peaceful resolution to conflicts in
accordance with the principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations. Venezuela emphasize's that the
mediation of the countries in the region and active
diplomacy are the path to a negotiated resolution of the
conflict. In that connection, we support the fact that
the Security Council endorses through this resolution
the statement adopted at Minsk on 12 February by
the Presidents of the Russian Federation, Ukraine and
France and the Chancellor of Germany in support of
the package of measures for the implementation of the
Minsk agreements. Those agreements should have all
the necessary political support for their implementation.
We trust in the political will of the Heads of State that
made that possible.

Moreover, Venezuela welcomes the fact that this
resolution reaffirms resolution 2166 (2014) with respect
to carrying out a transparent, full, exhaustive and
independent international investigation, in conformity
with international civil aviation guidelines, that makes it
possible to determine responsibility for the downing of
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 so as to bring to justice
those responsible for that heinous act. We call on the
parties to adhere strictly to the obligations pertaining
to the protection of civilians, including the need to
guarantee humanitarian access to provide assistance
to internally displaced persons, refugees and other
persons residing in the areas affected by the conflict,
in accordance with the package of measures for the
implementation of the 12 February Minsk agreements.

In conclusion, we do not believe that this is a time
for hate, fear or war propaganda. This is a time for
peace, political dialogue and diplomacy.

