Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): There is a pattern in
this repeated taking of the floor, and usually there is one
delegation that ends by taking the floor three or four
times. We rarely do that, but this time I have a couple
of comments. First, it is not easy for any country, be it
Ukraine or any other country, to work on a constitution
in conflict or at gunpoint, where there are so-called
self-defenders, which is the way Russia has consistently
referred to the illegal bands of militants and criminals
who are better armed than many European armies.

Lithuania has no tanks - not a single one. Estonia,
Latvia and so many other countries in Europe have not
a single tank. How is it, then, that there are hundreds of
tanks in the hands of the militants? There are hundreds
of Tornados, howitzers, or whatever they are. This does
not make any sense. Those things do not drop out of
the sky, so somebody is supplying them. In looking at
the geography, those things can come only from one
direction, where the borders are completely porous and
far from international eyes.

We do believe, and in our national capacity we have
been telling and will continue to tell Ukraine, that it
has to continue with the reforms, that it has to combat
corruption and that it has to do a lot of things in order
to restore the trust that had been lost over the decades,
prior to this Government. But it is very difficult to take
care of a constitution when guns are pointed at your
head.

The other thing that struck me was basically a
phrase about how Kyiv could have nobly capitulated
and allowed the troops to leave. I wonder how many
countries represented in this Chamber would be happy
to capitulate their own city, surrounded by illegal
militants, bandits and insurgents - whoever they
are - far from any ceasefire zone, and to just give up
part of their territory and leave, nobly?

I think it is very cynical to talk ofthe noble potential
of the Kyiv authorities to leave and withdraw their
soldiers, and of Kyiv having missed that opportunity. It
is their territory and they are defending their territory.
That territory is excluded from any ceasefire agreement
reached at either of the Minsk negotiations. It is their
own territory, and I think that any country represented
at this table would do exactly the same. Any country
represented here would defend its own territory to the
last, and Kyiv is no exception.

