Mr. Sahebzada Ahmed Khan (Pakistan): I would
like to express my appreciation to Ambassador Quinlan
for presenting the 90-day report pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006).

Pakistan continues to believe that a peaceful
and negotiated solution to the Iranian nuclear issue
is possible; more importantly, it is essential. But a
demonstration of political will and flexibility by all
concerned is required. Reciprocal confidence-building
measures are necessary. A negotiated solution needs to
be facilitated by striking a balance between sanctions
and negotiations. We call upon the Council and the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006) to consider revisiting the
objectives and strategy, as set out in the relevant
resolutions.

We thank the Panel of Experts for its final report
(see S/2013/331, annex). We look forward to discussing
and examining its recommendations in the Committee.
We also share the views expressed by other Council
members with regard to strict compliance by the Panel
with its mandate. The Panel's reports and research
must conform to high standards of objectivity and
impartiality. Its findings and recommendations must
always be backed by credible evidence.

The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and the statute of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), as well as Iran's Safeguards
Agreement, provide the framework that stipulates Iran's
obligations and rights. Any path towards a resolution of
the nuclear issue should be based on those instruments.
We urge Iran to stay engaged with the IAEA and
fully cooperate with the Agency with a view to resolving
all outstanding issues. We also encourage the countries
of the five permanent members of the Security Council
and Germany to persevere with the dialogue process.

We note the reappointment of all of the Panel's
previous experts. Broadening the composition of
the Panel, particularly with regard to experts from
developing countries, remains an important issue. The
appointment of experts in all the subsidiary bodies of the
Council must be based on prior, not past, consultations
with the Committee. The principle of transparency
and the recruitment process must be adhered to by the
Secretariat.

