Ms. Nakamitsu: At the outset, please allow me
to express my gratitude to Japan for convening this
meeting on the issue of small arms and light weapons
and for giving me this opportunity to brief the Security
Council. I welcome the Council's commitment to
considering small arms on a regular basis.

At a time of deepening regional tensions,
expanding terrorist and criminal networks and
traditional and non-traditional conflicts wreaking
havoc on communities, it is indeed important that
Council members are meeting to discuss one of the key
determinants of crises - small arms, light weapons
and their ammunition. In that context, I am pleased
to offer some remarks this afternoon, including some
reflections on the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2OI7/1025) just circulated to Council members.

Given the wide-ranging impact of the misuse and
illicit circulation of small arms and light weapons,
an earlier report of the Secretary-General from 2015
(S/2015/289) recommended that the Security Council
consistently address the arms situation when considering
both geographic and thematic issues on its agenda. I
can only reiterate that recommendation here today. The
issue of small arms and light weapons is so essential to
the full spectrum of the Council's work, that this organ
requested the Secretary-General, through resolution
2220 (2015), to include in reports and briefings on
country-specific situations more comprehensive and
detailed information and recommendations relating
to the impact of the illicit transfer, destabilizing
accumulation and misuse of small arms and light
weapons. I would certainly support that practice and
encourage broader and deeper mainstreaming of
relevant arms and ammunition considerations into the
Council's work.

While the Council has addressed small arms in the
framework of its thematic and country-specific agenda
items, its decision to take up this matter as a stand-
alone agenda item, first in 1999, has created a new
avenue that allows for an inclusive and comprehensive
approach to small arms. This inclusive approach is
vital given the relevance of small arms to a range of
contexts - from arms embargoes, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR), child soldiers
and counter-terrorism, to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict and transnational organized crime.
The multidimensional and cross-cutting nature of
small arms is indisputable. The biennial reports of the
Secretary-General, issued in 2008 (S/2008/258), 2011
(S/2011/255), 2013 (S/2013/503), 2015 and now 2017,
offer a wealth of reflections that demonstrate just how
critical small arms, light weapons and their ammunition
are in the context of threats to international peace
and security.

While the focus of the report of the Secretary-
General and my remarks here today is on small arms,
recent Council discussions on the use ofheavy weapons
and their impact on civilians are also demonstrative of
the increasing salience of addressing conventional arms
more broadly in contemporary conflicts. Furthermore,
in many countries, attacks using improvised explosives
now kill and injure civilians and combatants more than
any other type of weapon. Effectively dealing with this
growing threat requires a comprehensive approach,
including action by the Security Council. I would
encourage Council members to continue considering the
role of all types of conventional arms in perpetuating
conflict and in contributing to its humanitarian toll.

I would now like to turn to the substance of
the Secretary-General's report and highlight some
salient points he raises in the substantive trends and
developments section. The Secretary-General describes
various trends and developments organized by
substantive theme, inter alia, the protection of civilians
and human rights; terrorism and violent extremism; and
United Nations support for weapons and ammunition
management. He offers to Council members a useful
reflection on how small arms and light weapons, as
well as their ammunition, impact threats to peace and
security, and notes the various actions taken, including
by this very body, to address these challenges. Like
previous ones, this report paints a vivid picture of
how extensive the implications of small arms and light
weapons can be in the context of the Council's work.

While the report notes some successes achieved
in the past two years, the global picture of small
arms is nonetheless sobering. The impact of the wide
availability, misuse and destabilizing accumulation of
small arms is vast and well documented. A significant
portion of direct-conflict deaths are attributable to
the use of small arms, and nearly half of all violent
deaths are nowadays caused by firearms. Significantly,
firearms-related homicides in post-conflict societies
frequently outnumber battlefield deaths.

Small arms are force multipliers whose availability,
ownership and use contribute to the initiation and
sustainment of conflict, and they can facilitate all forms
of conflict, including civil wars, inter-State conflict
and the perpetration of violent crimes. They are key
determinants in the lethality and longevity of conflicts.

There are three key observations.

First, arms flows into conflict-affected and
violence-ridden societies exacerbate already fragile
circumstances. It is important that the Council remain
cognizant of the destructive effect of weapons and
ammunition flows into these settings. By way of
example, I note the decision of the Security Council to
empower the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei to confiscate and destroy weaponry and report on
possible arms movements into the Abyei area through
resolution 2287 (2016). This mandate is an effective
response to the previous recognition by the Council of
the threat to peace and security in the Abyei area arising
from the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and
misuse of small arms and light weapons.

Secondly, high levels of illicit arms and
ammunition in circulation also contribute to violations
of international humanitarian and international
human rights law. Small arms are often used in the
commission of human rights violations such as killing
and maiming, rape and other forms of sexual and
gender-based violence, torture and the recruitment of
children. More human rights violations and abuses are
committed with them than with any other weapon, from
the recruitment of children as soldiers to acts of sexual
violence perpetrated in conflict. Small arms are often
a common denominator in such circumstances. United

Nations personnel are not immune from such tragedies.
Small arms frequently play a role in the deaths of
United Nations employees and peacekeepers, as well
as workers from humanitarian and non-governmental
organizations. The human cost of the illicit transfer,
destabilizing accumulation and misuse of small arms
runs very deep.

Thirdly, of growing concern are the increased
links between transnational organized crime, illicit
small-arms trafficking and terrorism, as well as the
mounting use of the Internet, including the "dark web",
and of emerging technologies for illicit trafficking and
production. The use of illicit previously deactivated
firearms in the terror attacks in Paris in November 2015
is evidence of the need to restrict the supply of all types
of weapons to terrorist groups.

In this context, I welcome the work of the Council,
including the adoption of resolution 2370 (2017),
on denying terrorists access to weapons and urging
States to undertake the national measures necessary to
eliminate this supply. The issue of improvised explosive
devices is, of course, of relevance in this regard, and I
would underscore in particular the potential diversion
of ammunition and explosives for the manufacture of
such devices.

On a positive note, weapons and ammunition
management has become a critical component of United
Nations peacekeeping operations and in Security
Council activities to address conflict-affected situations
more generally. Attention to this issue was often
reflected in DDR programmes or physical-security and
stockpile-management activities. For example, in the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Mali, DDR components have established
weapon-registration and marking systems to ensure the
traceability of all weapons and ammunition collected
during the DDR process. This is a welcome trend. The
United Nations stands ready to continue supporting
States in this regard. I would like to point out the
table on pages 5 and 6 of the report of the Secretary-
General, which provides several examples of United
Nations support to managing arms and ammunition in
peacekeeping settings.

I would like also to highlight the table of
recommendations included as annex I to the report
under the Council's consideration. The table reflects
an effort to assist States in the operationalization of
many of the small-arms-related recommendations that
have been previously made to the Council through
the four previous reports of the Secretary-General on
this topic. While the majority of actions are directed
towards States, either Security Council members or the
broader United Nations membership, the Secretary-
General also identifies actions for the United Nations
system and relevant entities. Forty eight concrete
recommendations have been made to the Council on
how best to address small arms, light weapons and
ammunition in the context of this organ's work. Many
of those recommendations remain highly relevant.
While not all 48 recommendations are included in the
table, the table represents a solid mix of suggested
actions on the key areas of concern for the Council,
including weapons and ammunition management,
peacekeeping, arms embargoes, community safety
and law enforcement, the protection of civilians, and
armed violence. Consideration is also given to gender
mainstreaming and to the value of applying international
standards and guidelines. The actions suggested are
intended to be as concrete and specific as possible.
I would encourage Council members to review the
suggested actions identified by the Secretary-General
and consider their operationalization.

Annex II of the report is submitted to the Council
pursuant to the request made in resolution 2220 (2015)
for the Secretary-General to compile best practices and
arrangements that could be used by United Nations
peacekeeping operations and other relevant Council-
mandated entities to guide the implementation of tasks
related to arms embargoes. The Secretary-General has
examined various mechanisms that the United Nations
has instituted in its field missions and drawn best
practices from those experiences for the consideration
of Council members.

I would be remiss if I did not underscore the
particular significance of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and its relationship to peace
and security. In a 1999 presidential statement, the
Security Council acknowledged that "the challenge
posed by small arms is multifaceted and involves
security, humanitarian and development dimensions."
(S/PRST/1999/28) That statement could be seen as a
foreshadowing of the critical acknowledgement in
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development of the
inextricable link between peace and development. The
report of the Secretary-General on small arms and
light weapons notes the significance of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) because of their explicit
recognition of the link between arms regulation and
development, as well as between the illicit trafficking
in arms and organized crime. As members are aware,
one of the targets under Goal 16 includes a significant
reduction in illicit arms flows.

As the Secretary-General points out in his report,
the significance of target 16.4 is threefold. First,
it closely connects adequate arms regulation with
proper functioning institutions, which thereby ensure
the sustainability of implementation over the long-
term. Secondly, by virtue of that target, States have
acknowledged that arms regulation is not only relevant
for national security and defence sectors, but it also
benefits communities by mitigating the proliferation of
illicit weaponry, thereby creating the security conditions
conductive to social and economic development.
Thirdly, the new development agenda demonstrates
that arms regulation, more than ever, should be pursued
through policies and actions anchored in a measurable
way. The Secretary-General encourages the integration
of measurability in all small arms-control related
activities and has suggested that the development of
indicators on that topic in the context of the SDGs
is an excellent means of monitoring concrete and
demonstrable signs of progress towards a specific goal.

While Goal 16 is the most explicit in recognizing
the relationship between peace and development,
the entirety of the 2030 Agenda can be viewed in the
framework of peace. At the sixth Biennial Meeting
of States to Consider the Implementation of the
Programme of Action on Small Arms, States noted
that the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
has implications for the realization of several SDGs
in addition to Goal 16, including those related to
poverty reduction, economic growth, health, gender
equality and safe cities. As the development agenda
was intended to be a comprehensive and inclusive
framework, the mainstreaming of security-related
issues into implementation efforts is most logical.

Before I conclude, and with your permission,
Mr. President, I would like to say a word on the
Secretary-General's approach to conventional weapons,
including small arms. The Secretary-General is deeply
committed to crisis prevention, which he has placed
at the centre of his reform agenda. We believe that
investing in the effective management of small arms
and light weapons, including their ammunition, is to
invest in conflict prevention. Disarmament and arms
control are key enablers of sustainable peace, and
have long played a role in preventing conflict, easing
international tensions and creating space for dialogue.
Owing to the breadth and depth of their impact,
adequate controls for small arms and their ammunition
are vital. When armed conflict rages, effective arms
and ammunition management is imperative. When
international security is challenged, that is precisely
when such control efforts should be pursued with even
greater urgency.
