Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome
the convening of this meeting and thank Mark Lowcock
and Virginia Gamba for the important work they have
been carrying out and for the extremely troubling
information they have just provided us. The picture they
have painted is bleak. The Syrian conflict continues to
claim civilian victims and features scenarios where
the risk of new escalation is alarming. Humanitarian
assistance is very limited. International law and
international humanitarian law continue to be violated
with impunity.

Peru deeply regrets that situation and is
particularly concerned about the vulnerability of
internally displaced persons and refugees, particularly
in the southwest of the country. We note that more
than 13 million people require humanitarian assistance
in Syria, and more than 5 million are children. We
underline the ethical and legal commitment of the
Syrian authorities and other influential actors on the
ground to facilitating full, unimpeded and immediate
access to humanitarian assistance from the United
Nations and other relevant agencies.

We also stress the need to facilitate the safe and
voluntary return of Syrian citizens to their homes
and businesses, in accordance with internationally
agreed standards. That requires political will,
confidence-building and resources. We believe that
the support of the international community and the
participation of the United Nations is critical.

We note with concern the negative consequences
that the implementation of Law 10 would have on
millions of displaced persons and on the building of
sustainable peace in Syria. Similarly, we are alarmed
by the risk of an escalation of violence in Idlib, which
could lead to a new hell on Earth. We consider it of
the utmost importance to prevent a new humanitarian
tragedy, and we stress that the fight against terrorism
in no way justifies the violation of human rights or
international humanitarian law.
It is important to bear in mind that children
are particularly vulnerable. Death, orphanhood,
malnutrition, injury, illness, trauma, neglect, destruction
of schools - these are the consequences of violence for
millions of children in Syria. Many of them have known
only conflict and forced displacement. According to the
Secretary-General's report (S/2018/724), in 2017 alone,
there were almost 3,000 serious violations of children's
rights, more than in the previous year. And the number
of verified cases of recruitment and use of children for
military purposes increased by 13 per cent, mostly in
Aleppo, Hama and Idlib provinces.

In view of that, we would like to highlight the
timely and necessary emphasis placed by the Swedish
presidency on the responsibility to protect them. That
means providing them with a peaceful environment in
which to recover and develop a life free from violence
of all kinds, as part of a comprehensive strategy to
resolve the conflict and maintain peace.

I conclude by underlining the particular
responsibility of this Council, in line with recent
resolution 2427 (2018) on children and armed conflict.
In particular, we emphasize the need to promote
rehabilitation activities for recruited children, with a
view to facilitating their reintegration into society and
building sustainable peace in Syria.

