Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa wishes
to welcome Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, back to the
Security Council and to thank him for his briefing on
the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We also
welcome His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremic', Foreign

1 1-23 603
Minister of Serbia, and Mrs. Vlora Citaku, and thank
them for their statements.

According to resolution 1244 (1999), part of
UNMIK'S mandate is to promote security, stability and
respect for human rights in Kosovo, in coordination
with the leadership in both Belgrade and Pristina.
Those are important aspects of UNMIK'S mandate,
which my delegation strongly supports. An integral
part of implementing that mandate towards securing
sustainable security and durable peace in Kosovo is the
promotion of dialogue and reconciliation between the
two sides.

South Africa urges both sides to commence to
resolve outstanding issues with direct constructive
dialogue, as mandated by General Assembly resolution
64/298. Furthermore, we consider it critical to continue
with the implementation of UNMIK's mandated
activities aimed at promoting reconciliation, such as
addressing the issue of missing persons, the return of
displaced persons and the protection of religious and
cultural heritage sites.

My delegation is concerned about the attacks
against UNMIK reported in the media in Kosovo and
all attacks aimed at undermining the legitimacy of
UNMIK as mandated by the Security Council. We urge
parties to continue supporting UNMIK in the
implementation of its mandate.

South Africa continues to be concerned that the
current political impasse undermines peace and
stability in the region, thus further undermining the full
potential for sustainable development and regional
integration. Since dialogue is essential to the peaceful
resolution of the crisis, it is important for Belgrade and
Pristina to start full-fledged dialogue on outstanding
matters between them to achieve a sustainable solution
to the situation in the Western Balkans.

My delegation therefore calls on the authorities in
Pristina to exert all efforts to reach a political solution
that will allow them to start the dialogue process. We
also call on both sides to start such talks in good faith
and be willing to listen and to compromise, with the
aim of reaching agreement.

The need to address issues of direct concern to
the population in Kosovo has an impact on
reconciliation. In that regard, we are pleased to note
the progress made in the return of displaced persons,
but continue to be concerned about the lack of

ll-23603
resources to deal with the forced returns in Kosovo.
More work needs to be done to address the challenges
currently faced.

In addition, we welcome the limited progress in
the Working Group on Missing Persons, and have
noted the call by Serbian and Kosovo Albanian
families for the Working Group to hold joint briefing
sessions. In our view, such briefings would continue to
contribute towards establishing direct contact between
the various communities, especially the Serbian and
Albanian communities, which, we believe, directly
contributes to reconciliation efforts. Another example
of progress relating to reconciliation is the work done
by the Reconstruction Implementation Commission on
the reconstruction of religious and heritage sights.

The fragile progress towards stability is also
undermined by the continued volatile situation in
Northern Kosovo/Mitrovica. It is essential that the
Security Council-mandated mission be respected
throughout Kosovo and that its authority not be
undermined. All sides must also refrain from any acts
of provocation and must respect the international
presence throughout Kosovo.

Furthermore, South Africa is concerned that the
limited progress in reconciliation could also be
unravelled by the disturbing allegations of organ
smuggling against several leading political figures in
Kosovo. Those allegations need to be fully and
properly investigated, and South Africa is of the view
that an appropriate international response aimed at
ending impunity must be found.

It is clear that much work remains to be done in
Kosovo. We remain ready to work with the Council to
ensure that UNMIK's mandate is fully implemented.

