Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): Let me begin by expressing our
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for organizing today's
open debate on the situation of civilians in armed conflict.
Six months have elapsed since the Security Council held its
first open debate on the subject and issued a presidential
statement, under the Canadian presidency. It is timely for
the Council to focus again on the plight of civilians in
armed conflict. We would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his opening remarks today and for the excellent
report which addresses the situation of civilians in armed
conflict in a very comprehensive and effective manner. The
report contains a number of concrete and useful
recommendations to the Security Council, which deserve
our full attention and careful consideration. We are also
grateful to Mrs. Mary Robinson, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, for her remarks, and to
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, for his committed and effective
work.

The recent conflicts around the world have been
devastating for civilians. Deliberate attacks against civilians
have become an abhorrent standard feature of many
contemporary armed conflicts. The fate of children is
particularly appalling. The norms of international
humanitarian and human rights law that set standards for
conduct in conflict situations are flagrantly violated by
belligerent parties. It is therefore of the utmost importance
to promote a "climate of compliance", to borrow a term
used in the Secretary-General's report, and to enforce
respect for existing norms of international humanitarian,
human rights and refugee law. Those responsible for
violations of those norms have to be brought to justice. It
is a duty of all States to prevent impunity through their
national systems of justice as well as through an effective
International Criminal Court. The idea of holding
combatants financially liable to their victims, also
advocated by the Secretary-General, could be a helpful
step in the direction of giving practical effect to
substantive norms of humanitarian law.

The problem of civilians in armed conflict has many
aspects. The legal aspect is one of them. However, the
key to human security is to ensure physical rather than
only legal protection. We are convinced that the current
spirit of resolve in the Security Council to make progress
in that direction could lead to real improvement. This is
an important priority of our time.

One of the answers is in the evolution of
peacekeeping. The concept of peacekeeping operations
that recognizes the multidisciplinary nature of such
operations is evolving. These operations are not limited
only to the military component but increasingly include
tasks such as civilian police activities, humanitarian
assistance, disarmament and demobilization measures and
human rights monitoring.

The protection of the civilian population requires
action, taking into account the special needs of women,
children and other vulnerable people. Access by the
humanitarian organizations to the people in need is
critical to ameliorating the situation of civilians in armed
conflict and, indeed, to helping them survive. The work
of the humanitarian organizations on the ground is
indispensable. It is crucial that parties to the conflict
ensure safe and unimpeded access to civilians in need and
that the safety and security of humanitarian personnel is
preserved. The Security Council should play a significant
role in bringing pressure to bear on the parties in that
regard.

It is appropriate for the members of the Security
Council to continue to ask themselves what their proper
role is in dealing with humanitarian problems. The report
of the Secretary-General is a useful reminder of the basic
role of the Security Council in situations which generate
humanitarian problems. According to the United Nations
Charter, the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for international peace and security. In other

 

words, the task of the Council is to prevent military
conflicts and, if they occur, to make a meaningful
contribution towards their resolution. Furthermore, after the
end of military conflicts the Council has a responsibility to
enable transition to post-conflict peace-building.

The primacy of these essentially political purposes of
the Security Council must be always borne in mind. When
addressing humanitarian issues, the Council must avoid the
trap of using humanitarian action as a substitute for the
necessary political or military action.

We are therefore grateful to the Secretary-General for
his ideas expressed in the report and for his bold approach
to the issues of political and military action in cases of
systematic and widespread violations of international law,
especially those ideas expressed in paragraph 67 of his
report. His ideas represent a real help to the Security
Council. They remind us that the Council should address
the difficult issues directly. In many situations hard choices
are necessary and the Security Council should have a
proper policy approach in addressing them. The Secretary-
General has offered a basic outline of such an approach and
the Security Council must study that suggestion carefully.

Today, my delegation does not wish to attempt a
comprehensive elaboration of all the Secretary-General's
recommendations. Instead, I wish to offer the following
four comments on the question of enforcement action in
cases of systematic violations of humanitarian principles, as
embodied in paragraph 67 of the report before us.

First, the political, conceptual and terminological
clarity needs to be assured. Moreover, it has to be recalled
that enforcement action in cases of systematic and
widespread violations of humanitarian law is permissible
under the contemporary lex lata, the applicable international
law. Let me, by way of illustration, remind the Council of
Article VIII of the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of Crime of Genocide, which stipulates:

"Any Contracting Party may call upon the
competent organs of the United Nations to take such
action under the Charter of the United Nations as they
consider appropriate for the prevention and
suppression of acts of genocide or any of the other
acts enumerated in Article III."

This is an authorization which has been available to the
Security Council for more than four decades.

Suppression of genocide necessarily involves the
option of enforcement action, based upon appropriate and
legitimate decisions of the competent organs of the
international community. One of the problems in this
regard has been the reluctance of States Members of the
United Nations and parties to the Convention to avail
themselves of this mechanism when necessary.

Secondly, the notion of enforcement action
necessarily requires collective action, authorized by a
competent international body, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations. The Security Council, with
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, has a central, albeit not
necessarily exclusive, role in this context.

The Security Council must use its powers wisely and
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
That means that it must not act prematurely or in any way
in contravention of international law. However, on the
other hand, the Council must not shy away from its
responsibilities in the face of an emerging humanitarian
disaster.

Thirdly, the Secretary-General offered five factors
or, perhaps, conditions which need to be considered to
determine the legitimacy of enforcement action. They
range from the assessment of the scope and systematic
character of the violations of international human rights
and humanitarian law to the principle of proportionality
of the use of force. These factors could provide useful
guidance to the Security Council in its decision-making in
future specific situations. The Council should aim at
consistency in its practice and should use objective
criteria in its decision-making. The decision of the
Council and Council members, including the decisions by
the permanent members who may resort to the threat or
use of the veto, should be based on such objective
criteria. While considerations of national interest cannot
be completely excluded from decision-making, they
should be restrained and not used as an impediment for
the Council's action when action is legitimate and
necessary. The recent experience with the preparation of
resolution 1264 (1999) on the situation in East Timor
demonstrates that decision-making based predominantly
on the principles of international law and the needs of the
international community as a whole is possible.

Fourthly, and finally, the Security Council needs to
be consistent in its practice and to refine its general
policy framework without any unnecessary formalization.
It should be clear that the Council is not seeking to revive

 

the doctrines of humanitarian intervention known from
earlier historical periods. On the other hand, the Council
needs to uphold its responsibility under the Charter in
practice, and this requires occasional resort to enforcement
action.

We believe that on the basis of such an understanding
and with the advantage provided by the Secretary-General's
recommendations, the Council can take a significant step
forward in developing its policies and practices aiming at
the effective protection of civilians in armed conflicts.

Slovenia also supports the draft resolution which is
before us today and will vote in its favour. We look
forward to the continuation of the discussion within the
Council on the Secretary-General's recommendations and
on identification of the means for their effective
implementation.

