Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), Mr. Ghassan Salame, for his briefing,
and we take this opportunity to convey to him again
our unstinting support for the outstanding work he
continues to carry out. Similarly, we appreciate the
briefing by Ambassador Olof Skoog on the activities
carried out in his capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya.

Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolutions 2376 (2017)
and 2357 (2017), there is a clear and pressing need to
reaffirm the importance of the full implementation of
the Libyan Political Agreement to bring the transition
period to a definitive end. That task should also be
reinforced through compliance with the provisions of
the action plan promoted by the Special Representative,
which methodically and clearly lays out a road map to
that end.

With regard to the progress achieved, we would
like to highlight the fact that, in February, the Libyan
Supreme Court finally resolved the cases against
the Constitution Drafting assembly brought before
administrative courts, thereby removing the legal
obstacles that prevented the national referendum
on the new constitution from taking place. We look
forward to the tasks being undertaken by the House of
Representatives to develop the necessary legislation and
regulatory structure to clearly establish the elements
and requirements for conducting both the referendum
and the subsequent electoral processes. That normative
development is also essential for the establishment of
reliable and capable institutions, which are the bedrock
of the State.

In the same vein, we highlight the progress made in
voter registration by the High Commission for National
Elections. At the time the report was issued, nearly
2.5 million people had been registered, almost half
of whom were women. That demonstrates once again
the importance of the role of women in the future of
Libya. It is therefore essential to guarantee the full
participation of women in electoral processes, as well
as that of young people and all segments of society.

We also highlight the efforts and initiatives for
tribal and community reconciliation and rapprochement
carried out by different actors in the localities of
Kufra, Misrata and Zintan. We are convinced that
the strengthening of that dialogue and the constant
exchange of perspectives on the freedom of movement,
equal access to services, and accountability and justice
will establish a common understanding that will
contribute to preventing future conflicts and tensions.

We also appreciate and highlight the ongoing efforts
that have continued to be made by various regional
organizations and actors, such as the African Union and

the League ofArab States, and countries such as Egypt,
Algeria, Tunisia and Chad, among other countries, to
strengthen, support and advance the Libyan political
process and plan of action.

Despite those positive developments, the worrying
increase in violence and fighting among the parties
continues to wreak havoc. The steady stream of
reports of abductions, torture, arbitrary detentions
and summary executions, in particular in the cities
of Sabha, Derna, Tripoli and Benghazi, are alarming,
especially when it is clear that, according to the report
of the Secretary-General, at least 16 people lost their
lives and approximately 30 people were injured in the
crossfire during sporadic clashes and as a result of the
use of explosives in public and civilian spaces in blatant
violation of international humanitarian law.

In that context, my delegation reiterates once again
its appeal to the parties and local actors to lay down
their arms and refrain from any rhetoric that seeks to
justify violence as a means of achieving any objective,
as those attitudes are an attack on the lives of innocent
people and undermine the progress achieved so far in
implementing the Libyan Political Agreement.

The continued presence on Libyan territory of
irregular combatants and foreign armed groups who are
engaged in armed clashes in the south of the country is
also a serious threat to the political process and to the
stability of that part of the country. That threat is further
exacerbated by the presence and ability of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham to traffic weapons, despite
the embargo in force, and to coordinate and perpetrate
deadly attacks, such as the one against the Libyan High
Commission on National Elections, in Tripoli on 2 May,
in which more than 15 people died. We condemn that
attack in the strongest possible terms. The presence
of foreign armed groups and the existence of sleeper
cells of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant pose an
imminent risk that endangers not only the security of
Libya, but also the entire region.

We are concerned about the reports of widespread
human rights violations in detention centres. It should
be noted that despite the commitment of the Presidency
Council and the Libyan National Army to initiating
and conducting investigations into such abuses, so far
not one person has been brought to justice for these
violations. The death of a detainee in Am Zara prison,
presumably from torture, makes the situation even more
alarming and urgent. The repeated reports of violations
of the rights of migrants, who are being indefinitely
held in detention centres under inadequate conditions
and subjected to degrading treatment, torture, forced
labour, sexual violence and denial of medical help,
highlight the importance of addressing this situation
in a cross-cutting manner. We call on the parties to
prevent abuses and violations of these people's rights
and urge them to comply with their obligations under
international law. In that regard, we reiterate our
call to the Libyan authorities to initiate appropriate
investigations for identifying those responsible for these
violations so that their acts do not go unpunished, as
well as to support and cooperate with the investigations
by the Office of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court identifying those responsible for these
acts, which will come under the Court's jurisdiction
should they constitute crimes against humanity.

We reiterate that there can be no military solution to
this conflict, and we therefore call on all parties to join
the ongoing efforts to maintain a dialogue that can lead
to a peaceful, orderly and inclusive political transition
that responds to the interests of the Libyan people and
will enable them to freely and consensually define
their future within the framework of their country's
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
To that end, compliance with the Libyan Political
Agreement, recognized by resolution 2259 (2015)
and reaffirmed through the presidential statement of
14 December 2017 (S/PRST/2017/26), is imperative.

Finally, it is important to bear in mind that
the impact that the Libyan conflict has had on the
security situation in the region is a direct consequence
of interventionist practices and policies of regime
change that have had a collateral effect in the Sahel,
bringing about the emergence of chaos, terrorism and
militarization, with regrettable results that continue to
be have repercussions to this day.

