Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock for their briefings. We are grateful for the
tireless efforts of their teams, and I look forward to
working with them to bring lasting peace and security
to the people of Yemen.

Before I continue, I would like to briefly address
the deeply troubling attacks on Saudi oil facilities
that occurred this past weekend. The United States
condemns those attacks in the strongest possible terms
and stands firmly with our Saudi friends. We must all
be clear-eyed about that event - it is a direct assault on
the world energy supply. Claims of responsibility have
been made but, as Secretary of State Mike Pompeo
has clearly stated, there is no evidence that the attacks
came from Yemen; the emerging information indicates
that responsibility lies with Iran.

Turning to today's briefing, the United States offers
its condolences for the loss of life due to clashes in
Yemen. This ongoing unrest distracts from the broader
settlement process, which benefits only Al-Qaida in
the Arabian Peninsula and other malign actors. We
urge the parties to use the Saudi-led talks to address
their differences, and we commend Saudi Arabia for
creating a space for that dialogue. To be clear, the use
of force to express grievances will further destabilize
Yemen and lead to greater suffering. Only an inclusive
political settlement will guarantee Yemen's stability,
unity and prosperity in the long term.

We support the Special Envoy's efforts to facilitate
a comprehensive political agreement, and we encourage
the parties to demonstrate progress, particularly by
implementing the Al-Hudaydah Agreement. We call
on the Houthis to cease escalatory attacks that have
affected civilians in Saudi Arabia. Moreover, Iran
must stop providing lethal aid in defiance of the arms
embargo outlined in resolution 2216 (2015).

As the Under-Secretary-General explained in his
briefing, civilians continue to bear the brunt of this
conflict. Nearly 80 per cent of the population is in
need of humanitarian assistance. Allow me to repeat
myself: nearly 80 per cent of the population is in need
of humanitarian assistance.

Humanitarian aid alone will not solve this crisis.
However, it remains critically important for millions of
vulnerable Yemenis. As one of the largest humanitarian
contributors in Yemen, we are encouraged to hear that
a portion of the outstanding $1.2 billion in aid funding
pledged by Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates
may be disbursed in the coming weeks. These urgently
needed funds will help essential aid programmes
resume operations, and we are especially encouraged by
Mr. Lowcock's announcement today that money is on its
way. We call on all donors to increase their funding for
these under-resourced programmes. Beyond funding
constraints, humanitarian aid workers must also be
permitted immediate access to civilians affected by
unrest. Finally, as we have heard, currency instability
further worsens Yemen's humanitarian crisis. In that
regard, we call on the parties to continue to respect
the Central Bank of Yemen and other Government
institutions underpinning economic stability.

I would like to conclude by reiterating my personal
desire to work closely with the members of the Security
Council and the entire United Nations to support the
people of Yemen.

