Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
As this is my delegation's first time to address the
Security Council during Australia's presidency, let me
wish you, Madam President, and your delegation every
success and congratulate you on your presidency. I
believe that the statement by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs this morning set the pace for our reflection on
the challenge that terrorism represents today for all of us.
We are grateful for the concept note (S/2014/787, annex)
provided to the Council, which also serves as a point of
reference.

Colombia rejects and condemns terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations and reaffirms that it is not
justified under any circumstances. We have increasingly
witnessed the brutality of those who resort to terrorism
as a means to achieve their ends. Our response must be
clear and unanimous, as has been reflected in all of the
statements made today. There are no circumstances or
conditions that justify such acts.

Colombia is a country that has been a victim of
terrorism, as the Council well knows, and has suffered
its consequences. We are therefore committed to
combating it, and we express our full solidarity with its
victims. It is clear that terrorism is a global threat that
manifests itself in different ways in different regions of
the world and does not spare anyone. That requires us
to take measures in line with the principles shared by
all humankind.

As recently stated by the Secretary-General, we
must respond to terrorism by collectively strengthening
all our efforts and policies in the fight against terrorism
and ensuring that they are consistent with international
human rights norms and humanitarian law, and that all
the measures we undertake are in line with the goals,
values and universal principles of the United Nations.

In Colombia's view, it is vital that we adopt a
sustained and comprehensive approach that includes
reobust measures to address the conditions conducive
to the spread of terrorism, such as a lack of social and
economic development, as highlighted this morning. For
military force alone will never be enough to vanquish
terrorism, and events have proven repeatedly that we
cannot associate terrorism with a single country, region,
religion, culture or set of specific social conditions.

Addressing the growing phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters requires that we take multilateral
measures agreed to on the basis of consensus, in an
inclusive and participatory manner, strengthen national
legal frameworks, identify best practices and share
successful experiences for strengthening international
cooperation in the fight against terrorism.

Regarding the funding of such groups, much
emphasis has been placed on the payment of ransoms
for kidnapping. In considering that question, Colombia
believes it is important to be clear on the fact that the
kidnapping victim also faces the imminent risk of losing
their life, in addition to having lost, at least temporarily,
their freedom. Their right to life and freedom are
internationally recognized values and rights that must
be respected and protected. Therefore, in dealing with
kidnapping, the State and the international community
should take measures that do not make criminals out of
the victim or those trying to defend them.

Based on that firm commitment, we must
develop and strengthen national laws and institutions
relating to financial information and intelligence, the
establishment of effective mechanisms for information
sharing and the development of effective and efficient
border controls.

One of Colombia's biggest concerns is the diversion
of arms to non-State armed groups and its harmful
impact on the global fight against terrorism. The arms
from the trade in and illicit transfer of weapons not
only have negative impacts on the human rights of
populations, exacerbate conflicts and undermine the
stability and security of States, but have a significant
connection with terrorism.

In that regard, as has also been stated here, the
adoption of the Arms Trade Treaty represented an
important step forward. Its entry into force this
December will be important for all of us, and its full
implementation will contribute to the activities aimed
at preventing and eliminating terrorism.

Colombia is a State party to most international
instruments to combat terrorism and believes that their
full implementation is a sine qua non for achieving
the goals we have set for ourselves as an international
community. However, our actions will not be entirely
successful if we lack a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism, since it is through such an
instrument that we will be able to complement other
existing instruments, resolve remaining gaps and
strengthen the international legally binding framework
to combat this crime. The Council can always rely on
my country's support.

