Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):

At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his valuable briefing on the latest
developments in Mali, especially in the light of the
upcoming presidential elections in July and the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
We also welcome the presence and participation of
Mr. Tieman Hubert Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali.

I would like to address three aspects as part
of our discussion today, namely the political
situation, the security situation and the renewal of
MINUSMA's mandate.

First, on the political situation, we followed with
interest the latest visit of the Secretary-General to
Mali, particularly after all relevant parties have signed
the new road map in March. We are pleased that real
progress has been made recently in implementing the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. We
also welcome the efforts of the Prime Minister to move
the peace process forward, as well as the steps taken by
his Government, in cooperation with all relevant parties,
to activate the Operational Coordination Mechanism
and to provide the delivery of basic services to northern
Mali. We call on all parties to commit to implementing
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme as soon as possible.

We welcome the first report of the independent
observer, the Carter Center, and its comments with
respect to the implementation of the agreement. The
report stresses the need to build trust between the
Malian people and the Government while involving the
people in the political peace process. We believe that
achieving this objective will be totally contingent on
the implementation of the basic elements of the peace
Agreement, which is the main terms of reference to
solve the crisis in Mali, including carrying out the
necessary reforms and focusing on long-term and
sustainable stability. We call on all parties to cooperate
and to step up their efforts in order to make progress in
this area for achieving the aspirations of the friendly
Malian people.

We look forward to asmooth and transparent
holding ofpresidential elections in July that includes all
constituencies of Malian society. We appreciate the role
of MINUSMA in preparing for the electoral process by

providing technical, security and logistical support. We
encourage the Mission to continue its support in the
coming period, especially after the elections, in order
to reduce tensions among all parties. We also call on
those parties to cooperate with the Malian authorities
to ensure the security of the electoral process.

Secondly, concerning the security situation in Mali,
we remain concerned as threats from terrorist groups
continue, evidenced by the awful recent attack on the
MINUSMA camp. We appreciate MINUSMA's efforts
to contain that threat and to reduce any further damage.
The role of peacekeepers in Mali remains important
and critical, and the Security Council must ensure
their protection by providing them with the necessary
equipment in order to help them perform their work and
shoulder their responsibilities. We are deeply saddened
by the loss of life of 101 peacekeepers.

Terrorist groups pose a threat not only to
peacekeepers, Malian forces and the French force, but
also to Malian civilians, especially in central Mali. We
are concerned by the deaths of more than 40 civilians
during the period under review, and we welcome all the
initiatives of the Government to counter these threats.
Regrettably, we have noticed an increase in the use
of improvised explosive devices, rising to almost 100
incidents since the beginning of this year. That is why
the Mission must step up its efforts in training and
outreach, and we encourage it to pursue its efforts in
the future to reduce the damage resulting from these
explosive devices.

Finally, regarding the renewal of the MINUSMA
mandate, we welcome the findings of the strategic
review led by Ms. Ellen Margrethe Loj, and we thank
her very much for her efforts. We stress the need to take
the review's recommendations into consideration in the
next renewal of the mandate. The scope of the mandate
must be clarified in order to ensure its effectiveness
and success in advancing the political process in
the country. We agree with the recommendation to
prioritize the tasks of the Mission so as to ensure the
full implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali.

