Ms. DiCarlo: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to address the Security Council on
silencing the guns in Africa. I would like to commend
the presidency of Equatorial Guinea for organizing
today's debate.

Silencing the guns is an initiative to promote the
prevention, management and resolution of conflicts in
Africa. It is critical not only for what it aims to do but
also for what it says about the importance of African
leadership in partnership with the global community. It
was the African Union (AU) that pledged in 2013 not to
bequeath the burden of conflict to the next generation
of Africans and undertake to end all wars by 2020.
The AU Peace and Security Council then took the lead
in 2017 and developed a master road map of practical
steps to silencing the guns by 2020. It was endorsed by
the AU Assembly of Heads of State and Government in
January 2018.

His Excellency Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, AU High
Representative for Silencing the Guns in Africa, whom
we have the honour to welcome here today, has worked
closely with the United Nations to accelerate the
implementation of the initiative, and this cooperation
is wide-ranging. Indeed, the United Nations-African
Union strategic partnership has become a cornerstone of
United Nations peace and security initiatives in Africa.

The United Nations and the AU share a common
mission: to prevent conflict. Silencing the guns also
means keeping them from firing in the first place. In the
past two years we have each strengthened our ability to
detect and defuse crises before they escalate, in addition
to strengthening our cooperation to help resolve them.
Our partnership with the AU involves concrete action.
In January 2018, among other initiatives, the United
Nations kicked off a two-year project to support policy
dialogue and technical assistance on conflict prevention
and mediation in Africa.

The African Union and the United Nations
partnership is bearing fruit in different countries on
the continent. The AU, with United Nations support,
shepherded the recent signing of the Global Peace
Agreement in the Central African Republic. The
signing of the revitalized peace accord in South Sudan,
facilitated by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, with the support of the AU and the United
Nations, has sparked renewed hope, even as more needs
to be done to definitively silence the guns and end
abuses, including sexual and gender-based violence in
South Sudan. The United Nations and the AU continue
to work together in support of Somalia's State-building
agenda, its fight against violent extremism and efforts
to restore peace and stability in the country.
Furthermore, the United Nations continues to work
closely with the AU and other partners to ensure the
peaceful conduct of elections on the continent. The
United Nations and the Southern African Development
Community actively supported the good offices led
by the African Union and Mr. Lamamra during the
2018 presidential election in Madagascar. Their efforts
contributed to a peaceful process.

The United Nations has also increased its support to
counter-terrorism efforts and prevent violent extremism
in Africa. In June 2018, the United Nations signed with
the AU a memorandum of understanding in this area to
increase its cooperation and capacity-building support
to the AU and several subregional organizations, as
well as to Member States.

Silencing the guns for good requires the
participation of all. As we assess efforts to increase
women's leadership and meaningful participation in
political processes, we see that progress has slowed,
despite the combined work of the United Nations, the
AU and civil society. We must redouble our efforts in
this critical pursuit.

Building resilient societies is also key for silencing
the guns. That implies strong institutions that respond
to the needs of citizens, good governance and inclusive
politics. the continent has made great strides in
recent years in deepening democracy and democratic
institutions, including through the implementation
of the African Governance Architecture. However,
numerous governance challenges remain, including
the marginalization of certain groups from political
processes, the prevalence of a winner-takes-all
approach, corruption and the mismanagement of
natural resources.

The United Nations continues to work with the
AU and the regional economic communities in helping
to build strong national institutions and addressing
the root causes of armed conflict, including through
support to democratic consolidation, upholding human
rights, ending marginalization and promoting inclusive
socioeconomic development, in line with the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the African
Union's Agenda 2063.

As the Secretary-General has stated, pointing to
recent peaceful elections and truces, a wind of hope is
blowing in Africa. Furthermore, across the continent,
entrepreneurship is up, access to education has
increased and child mortality has declined. One year
ago, Africa's leaders launched the African Continental
Free Trade Area. These and other positive developments
are clear evidence that it is Africans, in partnership
with the global community, who are leading the way to
sustainable peace and prosperity on the continent.

In silencing the guns African countries have a
central role to play in making the initiative a success,
as do the African Union and Africa's private sector
and civil society. But it is vital that the international
community lend its support to Africa in achieving this
objective. Let today's debate galvanize global support
for these efforts.

