Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): Mr. President, since
you are going to be summarizing today's discussions, I
will take the floor very briefly simply to comment on
some ofthe points that have been raised.

First of all, I would like to thank all the speakers
for their contributions and for their kind words
addressed to me and to the members of the Working
Group. Certain comments that they have made have
already been answered by our colleagues in the
Security Council. We are very much encouraged by the
wide support for the ad hoc Working Group and for the
programme of work that we have submitted. We are
very appreciative of the comments that have been
made, and we are certainly going to take them on board
as we consider the future work of our Working Group.
Let me just take one or two points that have been
raised and comment briefly on them. First of all, it is
agreed by one and all that there needs to be greater
coordination between the Security Council and regional
and subregional organizations. I think this point was
made by almost all of the speakers. Therefore, there is
a need to have very close coordination and contact,
both with the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
itself and with all the other subregional organizations.

Another proposal was made to invite, whenever
possible, the executive heads of subregional
organizations. I want to just say that this idea is very
much on our mind, because this Working Group is an
informal one, and we are obviously in a position to
invite whoever can help to contribute to the work ofthe
Working Group. Likewise, the ad hoc Working Group
is going to be open - and I think the question of
transparency and openness has been stressed. We
should be able to meet with anyone who can contribute,
as well as with those countries that are directly
concerned with any subject under discussion. I just
want to reassure members who have raised these
points.

The other point that has been stressed is
preventive actions and the possibility of using the
subregional organizations as a means to get early
warning on conflicts. We can also assure members that
we will certainly look into that.

When Mr. Ibrahima Fall made his statement early
this morning he mentioned the close contact that exists
already between the Secretary General of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and our
Secretary-General and also between the United Nations
Secretariat and OAU secretariat. That is very true.
They do meet every six months, once in New York and
once when there is a meeting ofthe OAU Summit.

But we have not found the same kind of contact
between the Security Council and the OAU Office.
This is why I think we will now have to work much
harder with the OAU, and especially with the OAU
Observer Office here. I think the point has also been
made that we have to be very clear about initiatives
which are taken, because very often there can be
divergence of views and policies as to what the OAU
and the Security Council might be doing. So it will be
extremely important to have a special channel of
communication, as Mr. Fall puts it, between the
Security Council and the OAU Central Organ.

One question was asked by the distinguished
Ambassador of Benin. It was rather a point of
clarification that he was looking for with regard to
what we had in mind with respect to election
observation. This is a pretty sensitive issue. We have
all felt in the Working Group that very often
democratic elections are the beginning of a peace
process, such as what we are doing in Sierra Leone.
Now there are going to be elections and hopefully there
is going to peace after that. But in some cases,
elections have been at the very origin of conflicts, as is
the case, for example, in Madagascar. The idea here is
not only to observe elections at the last stages, when
the elections are actually taking place, but to help with
the electoral process right from the beginning. The
Ambassador of Benin clearly pointed out how
important it is that electoral lists be up to date at the
time that they are prepared and renewed, because that
is the time when the whole election process can be
defeated. The idea would be therefore to assist any
Member State, obviously at its request, in the whole
electoral process, right from the beginning all the way
until the end. There is also the question of coordination
of the observation between OAU observers, United
Nations observers and occasionally European Union
observers.

The other important issue that has been
mentioned is the question ofillicit traffic in small arms
and the implementation of the recommendations of the
Panel of Experts on this issue. Here I just want to say
that the Working Group, as we said earlier, is not going
to be duplicating the work of the Security Council or
any other body. This is definitely an important issue,
but we feel that this matter is being addressed in other
forums and other groups.

Somebody also mentioned the question of
mercenaries, and that is also a matter that needs to be
addressed. What we are going to try to do at the level
of the Working Group is to revisit this issue and see
whether the Working Group should be taking upon
itself the work of trying to deal with the question of
illicit trafficking in small weapons.

The final point is the importance, which
everybody has been stressing, of having very close
contact with the Economic and Social Council in order
to have very special working relations with the
advisory group on African countries coming out of
conflicts. What we need to do here is not only to
enhance the cooperation, but also, as Ambassador
Greenstock puts it, to make sure that we see the results
on the ground. We certainly look forward to working
very closely with Ambassador Ivan Simonovie on this
matter, and we hope very soon to be able to have him
attend one of our meetings and share his views on this.

These are the few points that I wanted to make at
this stage.

