Mr. Kebe (spoke in French): Thank you, Sir, for
inviting me to take part in this meeting. I should like to
convey to you my warmest congratulations on your
accession to the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of October. Given the steadfast commitment
of your country, Namibia, to the ideals of the United
Nations and the cause of peace and security throughout
the world, there can be no doubt that, during this month
of October, considerable progress will be made on all
the items on the Council's agenda.

I also wish to extend congratulations to your
predecessor, Ambassador Moctar Ouane of Mali, for
the achievements in the month of September, the most
remarkable of which was certainly the Council meeting
of the heads of State.

The current violence in the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip is so serious that, if we are not careful, it
could jeopardize the entire peace process that the
international community has patiently and obdurately,
year after year, in one attempt after another had
managed to get on track.

In today's debate, the purpose of my statement is
mainly to bring to the Council the statement made by
His Excellency Dr. Salim Ahmed Salim, Secretary-
General of the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
on 4 October 2000 to express the OAU's concern at the
serious turn events have taken in that part of the world
so dear to us all.

"I have followed with great concern the
deplorable escalation of violence in the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip where a great many
Palestinians and Israelis have met their deaths
and where hundreds of Palestinians have been
injured.

"This situation has arisen as a result of the
visit that General Ariel Sharon, leader of the
Israeli Likud party, made under a strong military
escort to Al-Haram Al-Sharif, one of the most
important holy places of Islam. The Palestinian
people saw in this visit as a provocation. The
demonstrations which followed degenerated into
clashes between Israeli security forces and
Palestinians. The Israeli forces have tried to
repress the protests with violence, using
excessive brutality and causing a great many
victims.

"I make a heartfelt appeal to the Israeli
authorities for them to take every necessary
measure to deal with the underlying causes of this
resurgence of violence in the West Bank and in
the Gaza Strip and I call upon them to show
restraint to avoid any further loss of life on either
side.

"I most particularly call on the Israeli and
the Palestinian authorities to create conditions
conducive to ending the violence that prevails and
for them to enter into face-to-face negotiations so
as to arrive at a comprehensive and lasting peace
in the region. In this respect, I welcome the recent
initiative taken by the United States Government
and express the hope that it may indeed defuse
the crisis.

"Finally, I wish to reaffirm the support of
the OAU for the Palestinian people in their
struggle under the leadership of the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO) to exercise their
inalienable national rights, including the right to
return to their homeland and to recover their
property, their right to self-determination and to
establish an independent State on national
territory, in accordance with the principles of
international law and the relevant resolutions of
the United Nations."

I thank you, Sir, for having allowed me to bring
this important message to the Security Council.

