Mr. Ruzieka (Slovakia): First, I would like to
commend Argentina for choosing this important topic
for today's open debate. Of course, my country's
words of thanks also go to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, to the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, and to Mr. Philip Spoerri,
Director for International Law and Cooperation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, not only for
today's briefings, but for all of their active dedication to
this important topic.

The history of humankind is, unfortunately, a
history of war and conflict. The loss of any life is a sad
story. When a soldier dies, it is a tragedy. But when a
civilian, woman, or child is killed it is a tragedy and a
crime. As it was said in the 1960s, "war is not healthy
for children and other living things".

At the outset, I would like to align myself with the
statement made earlier by the observer of the European
Union.

The implementation of and compliance with
international humanitarian and human rights law,
together with respect for the rule of law, are core
requirements for the protection of civilians from
atrocities committed during armed conflict. But there
is a paradox. On the one hand, never before has the
so-called right to the integrity of life been universally
recognized. In the final decades of the twentieth
century, human rights documents of sweeping scope
and rigorous specificity were produced. On the other
hand, despite that fact, during the conflicts recognized
between 1934 and 1994, at least 80 per cent of the
approximately 20 million killed and 60 million wounded
in declared wars, civil wars and other major conflicts
have been civilians. Of those, three of every five have
been children.

Since the 1990s, we have witnessed many new
conflicts, most recently in Syria and Egypt, and
earlier, in Rwanda and Chechnya, where civilians
have been - or are being - killed on a massive
scale, or internally or externally displaced. More often
than ever, situations occur in which the international
community fails to protect civilians - mainly women
and children - and fails to provide basic humanitarian
assistance, not to speak of protection.

Violations of the medical neutrality granted by the
1949 Geneva Conventions, customary international law
and medical ethics are routine in almost every current
conflict. The recent attacks against doctors in Somalia
represent only one example to add to the mosaic of
massive abuses carried out in the past in many countries
on every continent, without exception.

Instead of stepping up efforts and effective
cooperation at the local and global levels, we have
entered the twenty-first century bearing the heritage
and reappearance of one of the ugliest human rights
abuses, namely, conflicts in which the central purpose
of military action has been the forced removal of
civilian populations from their homes and land on the
basis of religion, nationality or ethnic identity.

Our task in this Organization is - or should be - to
make every effort, using all legal and diplomatic tools,
in order to prevent conflict. If we are unable to prevent
a conflict, we should join together to end it as soon as
possible. If we fail again, we should protect those who
may be in the wrong place at the wrong time and are
unable to protect themselves - they are mostly women
and children.

The most heinous crimes committed during armed
conflict cannot stay unpunished. We therefore consider
the International Criminal Court to be a key judicial
body with a leading role in the fight against impunity.
We call on the full United Nations membership to ratify
the Rome Statute and thus achieve its universality.

Slovakia is a small country, but it is ready to
support any activity leading to an improved system
at both the international and the national levels. The
implementation of the pledges made by Slovakia at
the thirty-first International Conference of the Red
Cross and Red Crescent in 2011 is in progress. We
have also joined the initiative of the Governments of
Norway, Argentina, Austria, Indonesia and Uganda on
reclaiming the protection ofcivilians under international
humanitarian law. In addition, in November 2012, the
Ministry ofForeign Affairs organized a special seminar
on the protection of children in armed conflict.

Many words have been spoken here by many
countries. But what we lack is a genuine common,
determined and effective effort to reach those goals.

Slovakia is concerned about the deterioration of the
situation in Syria, where humanitarian law has been
gravely violated and many innocent civilians are dying
every day. We encourage the members of the Security
Council to act by referring the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court so that the perpetrators,
no matter what side they are on, will face independent
and unbiased justice.

One ofthe best possible ways to decrease the number
of victims is the elimination, reduction and control of
all kinds of arms. Therefore, we strongly encourage the
early ratification of the Arms Trade Treaty, and we call
upon all other instruments in this area to be strongly
adhered to by the international community.

