Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his
briefing on the situation in Syria.

Syria has, historically and in contemporary times,
been an important country in the Middle East. Its role
in the Middle East peace process and in the stability of
the wider region cannot be overemphasized. Thus,
prolonged instability or unrest in Syria may have
ramifications for the region and beyond.

Reports of violence during the recent
demonstrations in parts of Syria, resulting in the deaths
of several demonstrators and security personnel, are of
concern. There have been reports of armed extremist
elements mingling with the demonstrators and using
the demonstrations to attack security personnel and
damage Government property, and there is an apparent
lack of information regarding those responsible for
those violent attacks.

We have noted that Syria has appointed a
commission of inquiry into the violence during the
demonstrations and announced various measures to
address the grievances of its people, including the
lifting of emergency laws, the abolition of State
security courts, the transfer of investigative powers to
the police, and so on. The Government has also
announced procedures for organizing peaceful
demonstrations. We hope that these measures, initiated
by the Syrian Government as part of an inclusive
process of political dialogue and reform, will initiate
the process of meeting the aspirations of all sections of
Syrian society.

As we deplore any violence from any quarter, the
Council needs to make clear that it is the responsibility
of sovereign States to respond to the aspirations of
their people through administrative, political, economic
and other measures. At the same time, it is for States to
decide on the best course of action to maintain internal

law and order and to prevent violence. The primary
responsibility of the Council in this particular instance
is to urge all sides to abjure violence in any form and
to seek a resolution of grievances through peaceful
means.

We believe that regional and subregional
organizations have an important role to play in
resolving the crisis in the region, including in Syria. It
is essential that all efforts be made to de-escalate
tensions rather than to exacerbate them. My delegation
would support all measures designed to end violence
and restore peace.

