Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to extend our sincere thanks and
appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Sameh Shokry
Selim, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Arab
Republic of Egypt, for holding this important meeting
on countering the narratives and ideologies of terrorism.
I would also like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency.

At a time when campaigns of manipulation and
recruitment by terrorist groups continue unabated, I
would also like to thank our three briefers and welcome
the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2016/6
on the issue under consideration. We commend the
Egyptian initiative in this regard.

Jordan, under the leadership of His Majesty King
Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein, King of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, has always vigorously countered
the ideologies and narratives of terrorism, in particular
those of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS).
One and a half years ago (see A/69/PV.6), His Majesty
recalled before the General Assembly the serious
threat of religious manipulation and other practices by
terrorist groups around the world, in particular through
social media and secret partnerships involving religious
figures and stressed the need to face up to this danger
and to reach peaceful and just settlements to political
crises.

The continued political crises in many countries, in
particular in our region, and the failure to reach peaceful
settlements create a fertile ground for terrorists,
exacerbate the problems and provide them with space
to develop their agendas. Therefore, the restoration of
peace and security to countries that undergoing political
crises is the main tool to face up to this phenomenon. I
would also like to stress that, although we firmly believe
in the importance of military and security measures,
we still stress the importance of strategies that address
the intellectual and ideological dimensions.

I would like to stress that facing up to this
phenomenon cannot succeed through unilateral
governmental efforts, but rather all stakeholders must
cooperate effectively and particularly through the
following means. Religious scholars of all faiths - and
I would like to thank the President for hosting the
important figure from Al Azhar Islamic Research
Academy - have boldly faced up to this dangerous
phenomenon and they should raise their voices against
religious manipulation and the ideologies of the traitors
of our age, ISIS, who hide behind Islam when Islam
has nothing to do with what they preach. They use it
to justify their barbarity and violence against civilians,
manipulating Islam in their own interests.

I would like to stress how important it is to
ensure the verification of all those edicts by religious
institutions and not to allow them a free hand to issue
whatever edicts they desire. Under that elevated concept
of religion, Jordan has launched various initiatives in
that area, starting with the 2004 Amman Message and
ending with the 2010 World Interfaith Harmony Week,
focused on the importance of education, particularly
regarding different creeds and beliefs, and emphasizing
the peaceful and diverse nature of Islam.

We should also focus on young people and
on protecting them from recruitment by terrorist
organizations, ensuring that they have economic,
political and social opportunities. Jordan has stressed
the importance of the issue through its sponsorship
of resolution 2250 (2015) on the relationship between
young people and peace and security during its
presidency of the Council in April 2015 and in the
Amman Youth Declaration, adopted at the Global
Forum on Youth, Peace and Security in August 2015.

We also stress the importance of working with
social-media companies and Internet service providers
and of coordinating Government efforts in that regard,
while ensuring full respect for human rights and the
principles of international law. Terrorists are making
effective use of those communication channels, which
are also very important on the military and security
fronts, particularly in the battle for cyberspace.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize how crucial
this issue is. It will require us to seriously evaluate all
our efforts to deal with the problem of terrorism, and in
that regard, I commend the final paragraph of today's
presidential statement (S/PRST/2016/6), which calls for
establishing an international framework for dealing
with that phenomenon and stresses our willingness to
cooperate with the efforts of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and other relevant bodies.

