Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Envoy Staffan de Mistura and his team for all the work
they do on the ground.

It is good that we are discussing this issue
because it gives us an opportunity to recall, as the
French Ambassador has just done, exactly how many
agreements have been reached by the Security Council,
including but not limited to resolution 2254 (2015), on
what exactly the political process needs to do. I will not
repeat what Ambassador Delattre said, but I do want
to express the full support of the United Kingdom for
everything said.

It is also good that we are discussing this because
the people of Syria continue to need our help. They
cannot rely on their own Government to protect them
and, after all of the shenanigans over the constitutional
committee and Sochi, they cannot rely on the partners
of their own Government - namely, the Russian
Federation and Iran - to protect them. I think that is a
key point that the proponents of the Syrian authorities"
sovereignty mantra would do well to bear in mind.

We fully support Special Envoy de Mistura.
We want him to convene an inclusive, balanced and
constitutional committee by the end of the year, and
I join other colleagues in urging him to fully use
the authority that has been granted to him through
resolution 2254 (2015) in order to do so.

The key to moving forward is obviously rapid
and palpable progress on the political track. Other
speakers have referred to the commitment undertaken
in the Istanbul communique of 27 October to launching
the constitutional committee by the end of this year.
Given that Foreign Minister Lavrov and President
Putin contributed to the Istanbul communique, it is
mystifying why it has not yet been implemented. The
Special Envoy has been crystal clear that it is vital to
have political progress. Resolution 2254 (2015), which
was adopted unanimously, is also clear that the Special
Envoy has the authority to bring it about. We would
welcome more detail as to why that vital piece of the
political machinery has not yet been put in place.

It is right that the Special Envoy should consult,
and we completely agree that if it is to be effectiveness,
the constitutional committee must be credible and
acceptable to all sides. That obviously requires the
committee to be representative and inclusive, but not
that any one side has a veto over its makeup. The Syrian
authorities' argument that Syria's "sovereignty" defines
what the international community can and cannot do in
the Syrian crisis is a red herring and a distraction.

Under Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations, Members ofthe United Nations agree to confer
on the Security Council the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security, and they
further agree that the Council acts on their behalf. That
is true whether the resolution falls under Chapters VIII,
VII or VI, or where there is no specification. They agree
that the Security Council acts on their behalf. That is
what the Special Envoy is doing, and he deserves the
explicit and concrete support of everybody around
this table. I repeat that I would really welcome an
explanation today on why further progress has not been
possible. It is absolutely vital that we get this political
process launched before the end of the year.

I will end by making a statement about the political
process that, although general, holds deeply true.
Without an irreversible and durable political process,
there will be no reconstruction, refugee return at scale
or rehabilitation for Syria. We have all been shown a
way forward and I would welcome everybody around
this table to today rallying to the Special Envoy and
getting the constitutional committee set up well before
the end of the year, so that this crisis can eventually
begin a long and slow path towards resolution.

