Mr. Van Dunem "Mbinda" (Angola): I would like
to begin by congratulating you, Madam President, on
behalf of the Government of the Republic of Angola and
on my own behalf, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. Your qualities as
a diplomat and your long experience will, I am sure, help
guide the Council's deliberations during February.

I also congratulate the outgoing President,
Ambassador Weston, on the wise and dynamic way in
which he steered the Council's work during his mandate.

I cannot neglect also to congratulate the new
members of the Council - Chile, Egypt, Guinea-Bissau,
Poland and the Republic of Korea - which earned the
trust of the other members of the United Nations to help
this important body solve the serious problems that
continue to threaten international peace and security.

We have come a long way since the Angolan
internal conflict was first included on the Council's
agenda. It has been a complex and difficult road;
nevertheless, as never before, we are very close to the
successful conclusion of a negotiated peace formula, and
consequently of a definite settlement of the conflict.

In fact, the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol
has entered its most decisive and most defining stage -
unfortunately, not without difficulties, some of which
were caused by non-compliance and violations on the part
of UN ITA; others obviously resulted from the very nature
and complexity of the conflict and from the process of the
practical implementation of the Agreement. We should
not lose sight of the fact that the Lusaka Protocol has a

 

broad scope, aiming not only to accomplish the effective
cessation of military hostilities, but also, and above all, to
reach a solution that will prevent a reversal of the process,
as it calls for genuine national reconciliation, compliance
with democratic rules and the establishment of a basis for
the economic recovery and development of Angola.

The current meeting of the Security Council offers us
an opportunity to make a global assessment of the status of
the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, and to discuss
its progress and setbacks to it, as well as to find ways to
boost this process.

It is undeniable that major, substantial progress has
been made, the most significant aspect being the
maintenance of the cease-fire one year after its signing.
There remain obstacles to be removed, and without their
removal it will not be possible to attain further progress.

The main issue is the question of the quartering of the
UNITA military forces, their disarmament and
demobilization within the framework of the Lusaka
Protocol. The delays in this process are affecting the
conclusion of the formation of a single national army, the
integration of UNITA cadres into the national unity
government and other activities related to the
implementation of the Protocol.

My Government considers unfounded the repeated
arguments presented by UNITA to justify excessive delay
in the quartering of its troops, and demands unconditional
fulfilment of the deadlines agreed upon.

In the same way, we would like this process to be as
transparent as possible and entirely verified by UNAVEM
III, in order to avoid any military forces or war materiel
escaping the control of the United Nations, as was the case
in the past, at the time of the implementation of the Bicesse
Accords.

In addition, we are very concerned about the continued
UNITA military activity in some regions of the country, in
a pattern of military movement without prior notification to
UNAVEM. III and of isolated attacks and ambushes against
civilian and military targets alike, almost always resulting
in a loss of human life. We demand that an end be put once
and for all to such activities, which, besides constituting a
violation of the cease-fire, are undermining the climate of
trust that is necessary for the successful development of the
whole process.

The difficulties posed by UNITA regarding the free
movement of people and goods in the areas that are still
under its control are one of the other serious obstacles
that the implementation of the Protocol is facing, because
they hamper the free movement not only of Angolan
citizens but also of UNAVEM. III personnel, preventing
them from performing their tasks under normal
conditions. The prevalence of this situation could lead to
serious deficiencies in the verification and monitoring
work, with a negative impact on the whole process.

We also would like to call the attention of this
Council to the human rights situation that exists in those
UNITA-controlled areas, given the numerous cases of
abuse reported by people who had to abandon those
places. My Government, taking into account its
responsibilities towards the people and the nation, cannot
remain indifferent to this situation.

In spite of these obstacles, we believe that this is not
the time for us, particularly the members of this Council,
to fall into total scepticism and desperation. On the
contrary, the Council should encourage the use of
appropriate ways and means to remove such obstacles and
make all the parties fulfil completely their responsibilities
regarding the peace process.

In recent months a number of events have disrupted
the progress of the process and, while not putting peace
at risk, contributed to increasing the impatience of this
Council and the international community. With a view to
overcoming this imbroglio and to reviving the peace
process from its lethargic state, the Government of
Angola has taken significant and transcendent steps that
have deservedly received the support of the international
community.

Specifically, we returned the national army units to
the closest barracks, especially in locations that are more
vulnerable and susceptible to ready military involvement.
We confined the rapid-reaction police to barracks under
the supervision of UNAVEM. III. As a gesture of
flexibility, we decided to end the agreement between the
South African company Executive Outcomes, whose sole
mission was to train specialists in our young army and to
perform security services. All of its personnel have been
repatriated in an operation supervised by UNAVEM. III.
We freed unconditionally all UN ITA prisoners of war -
a total of 350 people - although UNITA has not yet
done the same, thus displaying an attitude that is totally
unacceptable and calls for urgent action on the part of this

 

Council and UNAVEM. III in cooperation with the
International Committee of the Red Cross.

I must also inform the Council that UNITA's
guaranteed leadership positions in the Angolan Armed
Forces as soon as the quartering and subsequent integration
of approximately 30,000 UNITA military personnel into the
Angolan Armed Forces are completed. Personnel from
UNITA and the Government in excess of the military needs
of the future Armed Forces will be incorporated into a
so-called fourth branch of the Armed Forces. For
approximately three years, this organization will enjoy a
paramilitary status, while providing technical and
professional instruction to its members. This will allow
their gradual and progressive integration into civil society.
The procedure avoids the creation of an army of abandoned
soldiers and all the inconveniences that would represent for
Angolan society. These demobilized personnel will be
involved in national reconstruction brigades and will receive
a salary that will increase over the three-year period.

In addition to these steps, we have tried to reinforce
our political dialogue with the UNITA leadership, including
at the highest level, with some encouraging results. One
example of that was the recent initiative by my Government
to hold a fourth meeting between the President of the
Republic and the leader of UNITA. We want to believe that
such results will permit us to overcome rapidly the
obstacles that still exist and help build mutual trust and
confidence.

Such action calls for a responsible, firm position,
justified by our commitment based on the Accords, to a
rapid solution to the crisis created by UNITA in 1992 after
the elections in my country. My Government will continue
to make every possible effort to reaffirm more and more
the irreversible character of the pacification process in
Angola, while remaining aware that its success ultimately
depends on the Angolans. But, at the same time, we will
demand that UNITA fulfil completely its obligations and
that it do so in good faith, moving from promises to real
action.

We Angolans interpret the extension of the UNAVEM
III mandate as a vote of confidence by the international
community with regard to the re-establishment of peace in
Angola. In our opinion, the new term of the mandate
should be reasonable and appropriate for the
accomplishment of the main tasks required by the Protocol,
particularly those that are being excessively delayed. As the
new mandate begins, it is imperative that non-compliance
and unjustified delays be prevented and that those
responsible for them be held accountable.

The priority given on the agenda of this Council to
the question of Angola, in Africa, where the United
Nations is currently carrying out one of the largest peace
operations in its history, along with the deployment of
occasional missions to monitor the development in the
field of the process, certainly facilitates the taking of
rapid action whenever the situation requires. As an
example, we cite the positive outcome of the recent visit
to Angola of Ambassador Madeleine Albright and, in the
recent past, by His Excellency Mr. Ismat Kittani and
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, since those
visits very much helped push the implementation of the
Bicesse Accords.

The question of humanitarian assistance should also
be the object of special attention during the new mandate.
The Secretary-General's report is clear enough when it
blames UNITA for the difficulties raised regarding the
distribution of emergency humanitarian aid in the areas
under its control, where it should reach the segment of
the population most affected by the war.

As my Government has stated to this Council on the
appropriate occasions, there continue to be violations by
the Government of the neighbouring Republic of Zaire of
the clause contained in resolution 864 (1993) that
prohibits the supply of military or any other assistance to
UNITA.

The Government of Zaire, in a clear challenge to the
authority of this Council, continues to serve as a base for
the UNITA planes that violate Angolan airspace and land
clandestinely in areas under its control to obtain supplies
of lethal materiel. We hope that this Council, and the
Sanctions Committee in particular, will adopt urgent and
effective measures to discourage Zaire from engaging in
such behaviour, which can only contribute to increasing
the obstacles to the implementation of the Accords and
which constitute gross interference in the internal affairs
of my country.

My Government is optimistic regarding the success
of the peace process and reaffirms its commitment to
continuing its efforts in a spirit of flexibility and with the
goal of reconciliation for all Angolans, so that peace and
stability can be a reality in Angola in the short term.

We appeal to UNITA to heed this call of the
Angolan people, which for 30 years has been the victim

 

of war, destruction and suffering. We reaffirm here our
willingness to continue to render our full cooperation during
this mandate, for the sake of the success of UNAVEM's
mission.

To conclude, I would like to express the gratitude of
the people and the Government of Angola for the personal
commitment to peace in Angola shown by the Secretary-
General, his Special Representative to Angola and the
troika of observer countries. This acknowledgement goes
also to all the Governments that have agreed to provide
troops and observers for contingents of UNAVEM. III.

We pay tribute to the Brazilian soldiers, Mr. Paulo
Cesar de Sousa Nascimento and Mr. Claudio Milson dos
Santos, who passed away in the service of peace in my
country.

We also thank all Governments, specialized agencies
of the United Nations system and non-governmental
organizations for the generous assistance they have
provided to the Angolan civilian population, which has been
a victim of the effects of the war.

As to the draft resolution that the Security Council
will be considering, my Government endorses all positive
steps consistent with the present situation concerning the
peace process in my country.

