Mrs. Telalian (Greece): We would like to thank
you, Madam President, for organizing this debate on an
issue which lies at the heart of the concerns of the
international community. I wish also to express our
appreciation to the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Jan Egeland, for his detailed
presentation of recent problems and challenges
concerning civilian protection. We support his
recommendations.

Despite the many and persistent efforts of the
United Nations in this field, the humanitarian situation
in some parts of the world, such as Darfur in the
Sudan, Cote d'Ivoire and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, has not improved, and the civilian
population continues to suffer massive and systematic
human rights abuses.

The United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, personally, and the various reports of
the Secretary-General have highlighted the serious
problem of grave human rights violations against
civilians and vulnerable groups. Gender-based violence
against women and girls, the forcible recruitment of
children and child abduction continue to be major
problems. As a result of this violence and the serious
obstacles to the freedom of movement of humanitarian
workers, thousands of people have been displaced or
redisplaced, and on many occasions have been left with
limited access to humanitarian aid.

In the past six years, the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict has gained prominence in
the Security Council's decisions and discussions
regarding the design of its peacekeeping operations in
the field. The adoption last April of resolution 1674
(2006), on the initiative of the delegation of the United
Kingdom, is indicative of the Council's determination
to address this issue more consistently. The resolution
addresses a range of key issues which are critical to the
protection of civilians and which have a direct impact
on durable peace and reconciliation. I would like to
highlight some of those issues.

First, the resolution underlines the obligation of
all parties to a conflict to strictly comply with
international law, including international humanitarian
law, human rights law and refugee law. We firmly
believe that compliance with the international rule of
law is the most effective guarantee of the safety of

civilian populations. In that respect, we urge States
which have not yet ratified all the treaties relating to
the protection of civilians - and particularly the
Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their Additional
Protocols of 1977 - to do so.

Secondly, the resolution emphasizes the
importance of the State concerned ending impunity and
of its obligation to prosecute those responsible for war
crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity. As
impunity continues to be a major contributing factor to
the worsening of humanitarian conditions in many
conflict situations, States concerned should institute
genuine criminal proceedings against those who
commit such violations. In that respect, we would also
like to underline the crucial role of international justice
and reconciliation mechanisms, in particular, the
International Criminal Court (ICC), in the pursuit of
peace and justice. We reiterate our call on the Security
Council to fully support the ICC in the accomplishment
of its difficult mission in Darfur.

Thirdly, the resolution stresses the primary
responsibility of States to maintain the security and the
civilian character of camps for refugees and internally
displaced persons. It also mandates peacekeeping
missions with the task of protecting civilians within
their zone of operation. We fully support those
provisions. In our View, if a State cannot provide such
protection to civilians on its own territory, the Security
Council should authorize the deployment of a robust
peacekeeping mission to protect civilians, including
refugees and internally displaced persons, from
targeted attacks. The voluntary and safe return of
refugees and internally displaced persons to their
villages should also be part of such protection. The
mandates of peacekeeping missions should also
provide for the protection of witnesses.

Fourthly, the resolution urges all those concerned
to allow full and unimpeded access by humanitarian
personnel to civilians in need, and to promote the
safety, security and freedom of movement of
humanitarian personnel and United Nations and
associated personnel. Recent Security Council
resolutions have incorporated such language. However,
it is important that the United Nations develop a more
coherent strategy to better implement these resolutions.
Regular reassessment of the implementation of the
protection mandates by peacekeeping operations, so as
to reflect changing needs and priorities on the ground,
is, in our view, an important requirement. More clarity
is also needed in interpreting those mandates into
action, so that protection can be more effective. The
tool of targeted sanctions, as part of the Council's
holistic strategy in supporting peace agreements, is
another means to protect civilians against those who
seriously violate their human rights and freedoms.

Fifthly, the resolution underscores the importance
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) of ex-combatants in the protection of civilians
affected by armed conflict. It is obvious that civilians
will never be safe in conflict-affected areas unless the
DDR processes is effectively dealt with. In that regard,
the Council should ensure that in its current and future
peacekeeping mandates there are provisions for
effective measures for DDR.

We also believe that regional organizations can
play a very important role in the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. That is particularly true for the
African Union and its role in the Darfur crisis.

The adoption of resolution 1674 (2006) proves
the commitment of the Security Council to ensure the
safety of civilians during armed conflict and to provide
a secure environment conducive to lasting peace and
security. The Council should now implement those
provisions in a more comprehensive and coherent
manner in its current and future practice.

