Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): Tensions in Kosovo have been
simmering for a decade. In the month of June 1989, a
policy shift on the part of the Belgrade authorities towards
the ethnic Albanians in Kosovo marked the beginning of a
cycle of intolerance in the former Yugoslavia. This shift
would eventually lead to destruction and suffering in the
Balkans on a scale not seen in Europe since the Second
World War. At the core of this tide of violence were the
policies of certain leaders who lost the capacity to
understand the logic of peace. Instead of seeking unity in
diversity, strength in pluralism and accommodation through
dialogue, they resorted to discrimination and violence,
without realizing, perhaps, that they were sowing the seeds
of disruption of their own society.

The Balkan wars of the 1990s have cast a tragic
shadow over the expectations raised by the end of the cold
war for a world of increased international cooperation for
peace and security. They have wreaked havoc in south-
eastern Europe and spread discord on a global scale. In
dealing with the complex challenges posed by Bosnia and
Kosovo, the Security Council has not always been able to
devise the most effective strategies to reach its shared
objectives of combating ethnic hatred and promoting
regional stability.

These have often been times of frustration for those
who, like we in Brazil, remain just as firm in their rejection
of the instruments of intolerance as they remain committed
to preserving and strengthening the authority of the Security
Council.

Today we have perhaps reached a turning point. It is
with a considerable measure of relief that my Government
lends its support to a Security Council resolution that paves
the way for the return of refugees to Kosovo under
conditions of safety. We trust that these measures will lay
the groundwork for putting an end to the enormous
suffering that the inhabitants of the region have been
subjected to in recent weeks and months. Thousands of
lives have been lost. A large number of civilians have died
or been wounded. More than a million remain displaced.
Those who make it back to their former homes will, for the
most part, be returning to destroyed villages. Even if a new
regional agenda for cooperation takes hold, it will be years
before any semblance of normality can be aspired to.

At the same time - and independent of the moral
considerations invoked for these actions, with which we
fully identify - problematic precedents have been set in
the resort to military force without Security Council
authorization. These have neither contributed to upholding
the Council's authority nor improved the humanitarian
situation.

It is possible to hope that today's meeting will
herald a new chapter for the countless Kosovars and
others in the region whose lives have been shattered by
the ravages of this bloody conflict. It is possible to hope
that the Security Council will build upon this day to find
a new blend of realism and idealism that will translate
itself into greater wisdom and true effectiveness. It is
possible to hope, together with the Secretary-General, Mr.
Kofi Annan, that, in the future, countries will not have to
choose between inaction and genocide, intervention and
Council division.

The Security Council and the entire United Nations
system are now presented with a historic opportunity to
demonstrate their unique capacity for legitimate joint
action to promote reconciliation and stability, and to
promote peace on the basis of international law. No
doubt, the path ahead will be fraught with great
challenges as an ambitious programme for a civil and
security presence in Kosovo is put into place and a
provisional administration for Kosovo is established. But
we are confident that this is the correct way for the
international community to proceed. As the Security
Council resumes its rightful role in the handling of this
crisis, there is even scope for hoping that a new
inclination to find, within the Council, multilateral
solutions to other serious problems affecting world
security, will gradually emerge.

Let me conclude by quoting the prominent Albanian
writer Ismail Kadare, whose Funeral Chants for Kosovo
suggest that

(spoke in French)

"Without hope, time passes far more slowly than
when it is imbued with hope".

(spoke in English)

The traumatic experiences of the past 10 years will
not be easily forgotten. But if an age of hope can now be
imagined, it is up to the members of the Security Council,
as participants in the only universally recognized organ in

 

the field of peace and security, to ensure that Kosovo is
allowed a new beginning.

