Mr. Carmon (Israel): At the outset,
Mr. President, allow me to congratulate you on your
able stewardship of the Council this month and to
thank you for convening this debate. I also wish to
thank Under-Secretary-General John Holmes for his
informative briefing and to congratulate him and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on
their important and ongoing humanitarian work.

Israel assigns Vital importance to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict and is encouraged by the
continued efforts of the Council and the Secretary-
General and his staff in this area. We believe that all
individuals should live without fear of physical, sexual,
psychological and other forms of abuse that stem from
or are aggravated by conflict.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is
one of the main objectives of international
humanitarian law. It emanates from the universal
understanding that acts of hostilities should be
restricted, as far as possible, to armed forces in order to
spare civilians from the horrors of war. This
fundamental objective is reflected in the most basic
principles and rules of international humanitarian law,
in particular the principle of distinction between
combatants and civilians.

Regrettably, this fundamental principle is often
ignored in practice, as evidenced by the troubling fact
that civilians account for the vast majority of casualties
in contemporary armed conflicts. A quick snapshot of
conflicts around the world reminds us of the almost
daily deliberate Violence carried out against civilians,
as well as the cynical exploitation of civilians by their
own Governments and insurgents, who intentionally
choose to operate from densely populated areas, to use
civilians as human shields and to recruit children for
military tasks. It further reminds us of the failure of a
number of States to protect their own civilians from
immediate threats to life and security brought about by
forces of extremism and instability.

The disturbing neglect of the duty to protect
civilians in armed conflict does not originate from a
lack of binding legal norms. It is the outcome of
intentional and flagrant violation of existing norms.
The efforts of the Security Council in this regard
should be commended, above all resolution 1674
(2006), which marks a clear framework for action for
all Member States.

One of the primary threats to the safety and
security of civilians in contemporary armed conflicts
stems from the activity of terrorist groups, as for them
nothing is more alien than the protection of civilians.
Terrorism, in its essence, is the international targeting
of civilians, as we have been witnessing throughout the
world and in our region for so many years. The
abhorrent celebrations of Hamas and other terrorist
organizations in the Gaza Strip after the cold-blooded
murder of eight Israeli students in Merkaz Ha-Rav
seminary in Jerusalem, just recently, were a dreadful
reminder of the true nature of terrorism.

Moreover, the blatant disregard of terrorists for
the sanctity of human life is not restricted to the
civilians of their adversary, but is extended also to their
own populations. Abuse, manipulation and
endangerment of civilians are at the heart of terrorist
thinking and tactics. In Lebanon, Hizbullah maintains
its military activity from within the fabric of civilian
life. In the Gaza Strip, Palestinian terrorists use similar
tactics and launch rockets and mortars from densely
populated areas, while turning the civilians living in
those areas into human shields. Only last week we
observed a dreadful demonstration of the cruelty and
disregard of the safety and security of civilians by the
terrorist groups in Gaza when the Israel Defence
Forces found weapons and ammunition hidden in a
schoolyard in one of Gaza's neighbourhoods.

In Gaza, we have further seen the violence
against Israel accompanied by manipulative activity
orchestrated by Hamas to prevent the supply of
humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian civilians
under its control and responsibility. Hamas is
deliberately targeting those crossings that Israel uses in
order to transfer the humanitarian supplies, and
afterwards allocates the supplies for its own terrorist
means, instead of allowing their distribution among the
civilians who really need them. In this case, civilians
are not merely used as shields to mask acts of Violence,
but they are deliberately deprived of humanitarian
assistance. They are, in fact, held hostage by terrorism.

Hamas's Violent activity, aimed at blocking
humanitarian aid to the citizens of Gaza, constitutes a
manifest violation of international humanitarian law. It
is regrettable that this malicious tactic was not
specifically mentioned in today's comprehensive
briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs among the other illegal
constraints that violate international law that were
mentioned.

The tactics of terrorist groups, a few of which I
have just alluded to, present a great challenge to those
States that struggle to protect their civilians from the
threat of terrorism. Our foremost obligation as a nation
08-35364

is to protect our civilian population from violence. Yet,
we must also take great pains to minimize any harm to
other civilian populations, thereby preserving the
fundamental values and principles that define us as a
nation, which we proudly embrace. All States must act
to strike a proper balance between their obligations to
fight terrorism and protect their citizens and their
responsibilities under international humanitarian law.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
common interest of the international community, and
much more can and should be done to achieve this
shared commitment. Israel recognizes that it is the duty
of all States first and foremost to protect their civilians
from all harm. Equally important is the obligation
incumbent upon all States to ensure that intentional
attacks against civilians are not launched from their
own sovereign territory.

When sovereign States fail to govern responsibly
according to their duties under international law,
terrorists and other non-State actors seek to take
advantage of the void. Similarly, when States support
terrorist groups by providing safe haven, weapons,
training and financing, they should bear responsibility
for the actions of those groups and be held accountable
for violations of international law.

The international community must respond firmly
to illegal threats to the safety and security of civilians,
as its choice to firmly address those situations now
could save the lives of countless civilians in the future.
The failure to hold accountable those armed groups
that abuse the protected status of civilians and thereby
endanger civilian lives will only encourage terrorist
groups to increase their reliance on those reprehensible
tactics.

