Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to thank you, Madam President, for having
convened this debate on Timor-Leste. I also wish to
thank Mr. Annabi for presenting the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2005/310) and to congratulate
Mr. Hasegawa for his work as Head of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET).

As we have said on other occasions, we feel that
the experience of the United Nations in Timor-Leste
was extremely positive. The successive missions
deployed by the Organization to that territory over the
last two five-year periods have made a significant
contribution to the process of Timor-Leste's transition
to independence and to the consolidation of its
institutions. Of course, none of that would have been
possible without the commitment of the people and
Government of Timor-Leste in consolidating a
democratic and viable State in such a short period of
time. President Gusmao and Prime Minister Alkatiri
and Mr. Ramos-Horta, and other Timorese leaders such
as Ambassador Guterres, deserve our recognition, as
do the whole of the people of the country.

Despite all the significant progress, it is clear that
the help of the international community will continue
to be necessary in coming years to ensure that what has
been achieved will be sustainable over time and to
continue building on that base, as detailed in the
Secretary-General's report. This was also the approach
followed by the Security Council in adopting
resolution 1599 (2005) establishing the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL). We would have liked
the resolution to also have included deployment of
more military officers, as had been recommended at the
time by the Secretary-General and requested by the
Government of Timor-Leste.

With regard to this and other aspects of resolution
1599 (2005), we agree with the report saying that with
effect from 20 May there will be a vacuum in some of
the areas covered until now by international support.
We believe the Security Council should be prepared to
react rapidly and flexibly in case circumstances require
the country to seek international assistance to maintain
security and stability.

We believe that the signing of a comprehensive
agreement concerning the border between Indonesia
and Timor-Leste continues to be a matter of priority.
The strengthening of the relations between Timor-Leste
and its neighbours, particularly Indonesia, is vital.
President Yudhoyono's visit to Timor-Leste in early
April was an additional step on the correct path being
taken by both countries. We are pleased that on that
occasion, the President of Indonesia reaffirmed his
country's commitment to resolving the issues
outstanding between them, particularly the refugees in
Nusa Tenggara and the demarcation of the maritime
and land borders between the two countries.

With regard to the maritime border, we hope that
a satisfactory solution can also be achieved in the
negotiations between Australia and Timor-Leste and
that the utilization of the natural resources of the
continental shelf will help the people of Timor-Leste.
We must not forget that the country ranks the lowest in
Asia in the human development index and urgently
needs the additional resources that could come from
the exploitation of the Timor Sea's natural resources.

With respect to the bilateral Truth and Friendship
Commission agreed to by both parties on 9 March, we
reaffirm Argentina's support for all initiatives that can
help to clarify the terrible events of the past and that
can lead to genuine reconciliation between the peoples,
although we are aware that time is needed for that
process to move forward. We also believe that
reconciliation must not be achieved at the expense of
justice; there must be no impunity. We believe that the
quest for justice also requires knowledge of the truth.
We support the work of the Commission of Experts
appointed by the Secretary-General, and we hope that
it can carry out its task in fruitful collaboration with
the new Truth and Friendship Commission.

In conclusion, I should like to reaffirm
Argentina's firm support for Timor-Leste in the process
of institution-building and in its efforts to build a
democratic society and to promote sustainable
economic and social development. Although we
believe that the primary responsibility in attaining
those objectives lies with the people and the leaders of
Timor-Leste, the international community also has an
important role to play. That is why we support the
maintenance of a substantial United Nations presence
in Timor-Leste for as long as necessary. We pledge to
continue to explore other options in case the significant
progress achieved to date should be put at risk.

