I thank you, Mr. President, for your initiative in convening today's open video- teleconference of the Security Council on the theme "Towards the fifth anniversary of the youth, peace and security agenda: accelerating implementation of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018)". The Republic of Korea takes this opportunity to offer its deep appreciation to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his timely report (S/2020/167) and briefing on this important subject. My delegation also thanks Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake, the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth; Ms. Olla Al-Sakkaf, project coordinator at Youth Without Borders Organization for Development, Yemen; and Mr. Gatwal Augustine Gatkuoth, founder of the Young-Adult Empowerment Initiative, South Sudan/Uganda, for their enlightening interventions today. The Republic of Korea welcomes the marking of the fifth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015), which recognized the important positive contribution of youth to the maintenance and promotion of peace and security. As Secretary-General Guterres' March 2020 report rightly points out, it is critical that the international community support young people in fulfilling their full potential as a positive force for building peaceful and just societies. Indeed, the role of youth in the field of peace and security is especially important in that young people often form the majority of the population in countries affected by armed conflict. At the same time, young people will have a durable impact on the future of their own societies, as they hold the key to the trajectories of future generations. In that connection, the Republic of Korea believes that the international community must redouble its collective efforts to harness the potential of youth with a view to maintaining and promoting peace and security. My delegation believes that a comprehensive approach - in line with the humanitarian-development-peace nexus - is greatly needed to achieve that driving vision, and would like to highlight the following five points to that end. First, we should prioritize the strengthening of a mechanism to channel the youth voices in the field of peace and security. Building upon the progress of political democratization in many parts of the world, we need to develop new forms of communication, including forward-thinking online and offline forums, to integrate more young people into decision-making processes. Secondly, we must do our utmost to provide better access to employment and other forms of economic opportunity. All across the globe, in both developing and developed countries, high unemployment rates and a lack of opportunity for young people create significant levels of marginalization, which then becomes a root cause of social instability, and, in some instances, extremism, thus directly affecting peace and security. Thirdly, we need to establish a legal and institutional framework that ensures inclusivity for all young people, regardless of their gender, race, religion, nationality, sexual orientation, disability or affiliation of any kind. Bearing in mind the importance of the full enjoyment of human rights for youth, we also need to take firm action, with greater awareness, against violence and discrimination in order to protect marginalized groups who are frequently targeted. Fourthly, we must greatly expand the culture of peace, tolerance and intercultural and interreligious dialogue all around the world. Global citizenship education is key in that regard, as it provides youth with the tools to cultivate a deeper understanding of themselves and others in our interconnected world. Fifthly, we need to bear in mind the great significance of the latest technology, such as information and communications technologies, and its importance in the lives of young people. Such technologies can serve as a medium for political reform but, simultaneously, as a recruiting tool for terrorist organizations. They can serve as a crucial avenue for the exchange of innovative ideas and positive messages, but also for the spread of disinformation, hatred and division. As such, we must maximize the positive impacts of new technologies while simultaneously limiting their negative effects. Through such a comprehensive approach, we can enhance the constructive role of young people and ensure that they will, in turn, serve as models for future generations. Youth's catalysing effect has the potential to pay exponential dividends in the field of peace and security in the years to come. In the Republic of Korea, the role of youth has always taken centre stage in overcoming the major challenges each generation has experienced. Student protests helped end military rule and usher in democracy. Young people, as innovative entrepreneurs and earnest workers, were integral in transforming one of the poorest countries in the world into an economic powerhouse within a single generation. They spoke out against various forms of discrimination and social injustice. And today, the strong voices of our dynamic youth continue to hold leaders accountable for providing good governance. Based on that rich experience, Korea has been actively contributing to the strengthened role of youth in the field of peace and security. That includes our leadership in the Peacebuilding Commission as the previous Chair and our robust support of the recently released Peacebuilding Fund Strategy 2020-2024, which clearly lays out the Secretary-General's prioritization of youth empowerment projects. The Republic of Korea has been a proud champion of youth engagement in the field of disarmament. As I emphasized at the 74 Years of Nuclear Disarmament and the Contribution of Youth Beyond 2020 event that my Mission co-hosted with the Office for Disarmament Affairs, youth engagement is meaningful for securing diversity, as well as creating new positive momentum for disarmament discussions that have been polarized and have remained at a standstill for quite some time. Such efforts include presenting last year's landmark draft resolution on youth, disarmament and non-proliferation in the First Committee for the first time in history. The Republic of Korea is also proud to be scaling up its engagement with various United Nations Development Programme projects, such as the YouthConnekt initiative in Rwanda, youth volunteers supporting peace and recovery in Darfur and strengthening women's and youth leadership to accelerate participatory, inclusive and sustainable local governance in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as with UNESCO, including youth empowerment through technical and vocational education and training in the Gambia, to name just a few. Youth are undoubtedly among the most vulnerable in the face of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, with its historic economic impact, including unprecedented levels of unemployment. Moreover, COVID-19 has serious implications for young people's ongoing role in the field of peace and security. The Republic of Korea has been targeting its response on the basis of transparency, openness and accountability to its citizens and is making efforts to mitigate the impact on the most vulnerable. As a result, Korea was able to successfully hold its nationwide legislative elections in the shadow of COVID-19 and saw the highest voter turnout for a general election in 28 years. At this election, the Korean Government 108/123 lowered the voting age to 18, thereby expanding the participation of young people in the political process. My delegation believes that our recent experience in that regard can provide some hope for others, including young people, as the world collectively responds to the unique challenges presented by the pandemic. There are various prospects for the post-coronavirus global order, and it is our own choice what path we elect to take. Will we choose a world that is divisive, exclusive and closed owing to bigotry, stigmatization and demagoguery? Or will we rise to the challenge and consider the possibility of a world that is inclusive, cooperative, peaceful and based on solidarity, tolerance and transparency? This is a critical moment for all peoples and nations, and the choices we make in the construction of the post-coronavirus order will have outsized and long-lasting ramifications on our youth and subsequent generations. Together, let us energize our efforts in order to make the choices that will propel us forward in the right direction. It is also important to highlight that the youth, peace and security agenda is closely interlinked with the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals. The Republic of Korea notes with appreciation United Nations efforts to expand the critical role of youth in helping to achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The Republic of Korea strongly supports global efforts to strengthen the youth, peace and security agenda and will continue to play its part, alongside the United Nations and other Member States, to ensure that our world is more peaceful and secure for our future generations.
