Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): It's
good news that the Security Council has unanimously
supported this resolution, which addresses the search
for a comprehensive peace throughout Sudan. We
expect the parties now to honour the commitment they
have just made, namely, to conclude by 31 December.

It is essential also that the resolution emphasize
the need to end attacks and atrocities in Darfur, and
remind the parties that the provisions of previous
resolutions remained valid today. The British
Government remains gravely concerned about the
security situation in Darfur. The primary responsibility
for the security of the citizens of Darfur rests with the
Government of Sudan. But the rebels too have a direct
responsibility for recent attacks, as we have repeatedly
made clear. We expect both the Government and the
rebels to fulfil their commitments within the
humanitarian and security protocols, and to put in place
the mechanisms and timetables to end the attacks on
innocent civilians in Darfur, and to bring about an
immediate improvement in the security situation. No
one should interpret this resolution as reducing their
commitments and obligations, as set out in Security
Council resolutions 1556 (2004) and 1564 (2004). We
interpret this resolution as reiterating the Council's
determination to ensure that all parties in Darfur fulfil
their obligations. We remind them of the prospect of
measures under Article 41 of the Charter for those who
do not comply. We expect to see rapid improvement in
the security and humanitarian situation in Darfur.

This is the third Security Council resolution
adopted this year on Sudan. This is right, because the
situation in Sudan has been and remains a threat to
international security and stability in the region. The
Council needs, therefore, to remain seized of this issue
and to be ready to take tougher action if and when this
is needed to enforce implementation of this agreement.

The United Kingdom has long supported the
efforts of the Government of Sudan and the SPLM. to
reach a comprehensive peace agreement in the
Naivasha process. We recognize that such an
agreement is key to political progress in Darfur and
key to changes in governance throughout Sudan. But
there can be no lasting peace in Sudan without an end
to the conflict and instability in Darfur, and indeed in
other areas of the country. The resolution we've just
adopted supports the Naivasha peace process and other
negotiations and holds open the process of wider
international support, once a comprehensive peace
agreement is being implemented. But that prospect is
conditional upon the good will and the cooperation of
the parties. We expect them to conclude imminently the
necessary agreements to end the conflict and to choose
the path of cooperation and peace. Bilateral donors, the
European Union, the African Union and others are
ready to help. But if the parties do not choose this path,
then it is they who will bear the consequences.

