Ms. Hendrie (United Kingdom): I thank
Ms. Judy Cheng-Hopkins and Ambassador Sylvie
Lucas for their briefings.

It seems clear from what we have heard this
morning that we are making real strides as the
international community towards providing support for
countries emerging from conflict. We are now much
better equipped to help them as a collective community
to tackle the challenges that they face.

However, what we have also heard this morning
is that we still have some way to go. Peacebuilding is a
collective endeavour and all of us must work together
to raise our game. A key element of that is getting
strong and effective leadership in the field. The United
Kingdom would like to note that the recent
appointment of experienced individuals with strong
peacebuilding backgrounds, such as the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General in Libya and
South Sudan, indicates that we are making progress in
that direction. It is possible to put the people with the
right skills on the ground.

Such leadership is important not only in the
context of a mission but also in non-mission settings.
In the latter, it is essential that resident coordinators
also have the right skills and experience to tackle the
challenges that they face in post-conflict settings. They
must be able to access the right kind of support from
Headquarters and the wider international system in a
timely way. The political support that the
Peacebuilding Support Office has provided to the
United Nations team in Guinea is quite a good example
of that.

We are also pleased to hear in the briefing of
Ms. Cheng-Hopkins that the United Nations has
sustained its momentum on integrated mission
planning. That is absolutely essential. A process that
brings together all key actors and clearly sets out the
sector leads and the necessary benchmarks to gauge
progress is the most effective way to ensure well-
coordinated delivery.

In that regard, we would again like to point out
what we think was a good example, namely, the
pre-assessment planning process for Libya. That
involved a team that brought together all relevant parts
of the United Nations system and the World Bank into
the same conversation sufficiently in advance.

As Assistant Secretary-General Cheng-Hopkins
pointed out during her briefing, the review of civilian
capacities is clearly an important vehicle to improve
United Nations performance on peacebuilding. The
United Kingdom welcomes the Secretary-General's
report (see S/2011/85). Of course, we look forward to
hearing about the results that have been achieved in the
field in consequence of that initiative in the near
future. The report rightly places the principle of
national ownership front and centre. In that regard, we
look forward to progress on identifying and supporting
national sources of capacity and on building global
South capacities and triangular cooperation to find the
most appropriate civilian expertise for the context.

Turning now to a critical issue, which is that of
roles and responsibilities, the United Kingdom feels
that we really need to do more in that area. In
particular, we would like to point to the need to make
progress on the rule of law. That is an area where,
frankly, the least amount of progress has been made
since the Secretary-General's report of 2009
(8/2009/304). We know that our failure to resolve that
affects delivery on the ground. The World Development
Report 2011 has provided evidence that there are
crucial gaps in the international system in the provision
of support for the rule of law, and that the United
Nations has a key role to play in that regard.

Such continued gaps mean that countries are
often unable to access the support that they need on
key issues, such as justice reform. We welcome efforts
at more joint programming, which improves
coordination among actors in the field. However, that
is not the whole story. We need greater clarity over
which part of the system is the global service provider
for which specific function under the rule of law
heading. We need a framework that is clear, but also
flexible enough to be able to adapt to the realities in
the field. We hope that he Secretary-General's report in
2012 can demonstrate real progress on the issue.

Ms. Cheng-Hopkins rightly said that Member
States need to be engaged in that discussion if progress
is to be made. The United Kingdom agrees with that
and strongly supports it. As Member States that are
also members of the governing boards of the funds and
programmes, we must be ready to actively support
integration in those forums rather than fragmentation.

Finally, the United Kingdom welcomes the
update on women's participation in peacebuilding and
the partnership between the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office and UN-Women. We
welcome the fact that progress is being made in the
areas of mediation and political dialogue and in
integrating gender equality into post-conflict needs
assessment and rule of law work.

However, there is still much to be done to ensure
the participation of women at all stages of
peacebuilding, including the appointment of more
women as special envoys and chief mediators. In the
words of UN-Women chief, Michelle Bachelet, if
women are not represented at the negotiating table,
society itselfis not represented.
