Mr. Motomura (Japan): I would like to express,
on behalf ofthe Government of Japan, my appreciation
to you, Sir, for convening this debate and for giving
non-members of the Security Council, particularly
countries from Africa, an opportunity to speak on the
working methods of the ad hoc Working Group. I
would also like to thank Ambassador Koonjul of
Mauritius for his briefing on the activities of the
Working Group; and Ambassador Ivan Simonovic',
President of the Economic and Social Council;
Ambassador Amadou Kebe', Permanent Observer of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU); and
Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for their very informative statements.

Convinced that world stability and prosperity will
not prevail in the 21st century unless the problems of
Africa are resolved, the Government of Japan has
addressed the situation in Africa as one of the most
important foreign policy issues for Japan. From that
standpoint, I would like today to discuss three points
with respect to the activities ofthe Working Group.

The first point concerns the enhancement of
cooperation with the Economic and Social Council, as
indicated in the mandate of the Working Group. We
have stressed that for effective conflict prevention it is
imperative to take a comprehensive approach that
integrates political, economic, social and humanitarian
measures based on requirements from moment to
moment. Such approach should be applied to all steps,
from conflict prevention to post-conflict peacemaking.
Furthermore, it goes without saying that it is important
to ensure cooperation and coordination among the
entities engaged in conflict prevention. To achieve
lasting solutions to the conflicts in Africa, it is again
necessary to take a comprehensive approach that
envisions not only traditional peacekeeping operations,
but also the observation of elections and the
demilitarization, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants, as well as post-conflict assistance for
reconstruction and development. I believe such a
comprehensive approach requires well-coordinated
cooperation between the work of the Security Council,
which bears primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, and that of the
Economic and Social Council, whose function is to
make recommendations to the General Assembly, the
United Nations Member States and the specialized
agencies concerned with international economic and
social problems. I therefore welcome the fact that the
Working Group is focusing on this issue.

As referred to in the programme of the Working
Group, the Economic and Social Council is now
carefully considering the possible establishment of an
ad hoc advisory group on emerging conflicts in African
countries in order to encourage the international
community to extend its support during the transition
from peacekeeping to peacemaking. Although the
Economic and Social Council has not yet concluded its
work, it is important to avoid any duplication of work
by the two groups. Thus, if such advisory group is in
fact established, it should co-organize meetings with
the Working Group and jointly propose ways of
bridging the gap between emergency relief activities
during a conflict, and reconstruction and development
assistance once a conflict has been resolved. In doing
so, the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council could together present an entire roadmap for
conflict resolution and the achievement of lasting
peace.

The second point I would like to raise concerns
the New Partnership for Africa's Development
(NEPAD), which was initiated by the African countries
themselves. As preconditions for development, NEPAD
stresses such aspects as the importance of prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts; peace
enforcement, peacekeeping and peacemaking; post-
conflict reconciliation, rehabilitation and
reconstruction; and issues relating to small arms and
demining. That approach coincides with the
comprehensive approach I have just described. I look
forward to a constructive dialogue between the
Working Group and the Organization of African Unity/
African Union on this issue.

My third point concerns the transparency of the
Working Group's activities. Although the Group is
essentially an informal body, in focusing on measures
to deal with a post-conflict situation while a conflict is
coming to a resolution, it could benefit from input by
non-members of the Security Council that have the
experience and ability to play a major role in post-
conflict reconstruction and development assistance. In
that sense, we consider today's debate quite useful, and
we hope that interested non-members of the Security
Council will be briefed on its activities, if possible, at
each meeting ofthe Group.

The international situation continues to be
extremely tenuous owing in large part to the political
and economic impact of the terrorist attacks in the
United States last September. But even under such
circumstances, the international community needs to
strengthen its joint efforts to resolve the conflicts that
Africa is now facing. The international community
must provide proactive and continuous support for the
ownership efforts initiated by African countries
themselves.

At the end of 2003, the Government of Japan
expects to convene the third Tokyo International
Conference on African Development. Designating the
year or so leading up to that event as the Year for
Soaring Cooperation with Africa, the Government of
Japan will take concrete measures further to enhance
Japan's policies towards Africa.

In closing, let me express our hope that, under the
leadership of Ambassador Koonjul, the Working Group
will achieve positive results contributing to the efforts
of the international community, including those of
Japan.

