Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening this
open debate on the situation in the Middle East, an
issue of paramount importance to international peace
and security.

It is a great honour for me to address this body
just one day after presenting my credentials to the
Secretary-General. I would like to join other speakers
in thanking Mr. Michael Williams, the Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
comprehensive briefing today and to pay tribute to him
for all that he has accomplished in the course of a long
and distinguished career at the United Nations.

There have been a number of significant events
and developments in the Middle East in recent months.
We welcome in particular the convening of the summit
meetings between the leaders of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority that have taken place since July.
These meetings have contributed to the establishment
of a good atmosphere conducive to further dialogue on
the whole range of issues of mutual concern. The
international community should make its best efforts to
maintain this momentum and promote this dialogue.

I would like to affirm that Japan remains fully
committed to engaging actively in the peace process
and to providing the utmost tangible support to
President Abbas, the legitimate leader of the
Palestinian Authority, and to the new Government led
by Prime Minister Fayyad in their endeavours to
achieve peace. We recognize that the only way toward
the achievement of peace in the Middle East is to foster
coexistence and co-prosperity between Israel and
Palestine.

It was to these ends that the Government of Japan
announced, on the occasion of the visit in mid-August
of our Foreign Minister to Jordan, Israel and the
Palestinian territories, its decision to provide a new
package of assistance, valued at over $20 million. It
consists of $11.2 million in direct financial assistance
to the Palestinian Authority and $9.3 million in food

aid, medicine and other humanitarian assistance to the
Palestinian territories. Japan will consider further
assistance to the Palestinian Authority for the purpose
of building a self-sustaining Palestinian economy.

In this connection, Japan has been advancing the
concept of the corridor for peace and prosperity, to
which the representative of Bangladesh kindly referred
a few minutes ago. It is development plan aimed at
contributing to the creation of a viable Palestinian
economy based on developing the private sector by
establishing an agro-industrial park in the West Bank
and facilitating the transportation of goods from the
West Bank through Jordan, mainly to the Gulf States.

On 15 August, Japan's Foreign Minister
organized the second ministerial-level meeting of the
Four-Party Consultative Unit in Jericho, in the West
Bank, with the participation of Vice Prime Minister
and Foreign Minister Livni of Israel, Head of the
Negotiations Affairs Department of the Palestinian
Liberation Organization, Mr. Erakat, and Foreign
Minister Khatib of Jordan. At the meeting, an
agreement was reached on the building of an agro-
industrial park in the southern part of the Jericho
governorate.

The parties welcomed the initiative as a catalyst
to confidence-building between the parties concerned.
For instance, Foreign Minister Livni made a remark to
the effect that the visits to Jericho in quick succession
by the Prime Minister and then the Foreign Minister of
Israel were a symbolic indication of the very beginning
of normalization between Israel and Palestine.
Mr. Erakat said, for his part, that the concept of the
corridor for peace and prosperity could help to give the
Palestinians a future.

Japan believes that in order to promote the peace
process, it is critically important for Palestinians to
maintain hope for the future. It is therefore appropriate
that we should address the problem from both the
political and economic perspective, in parallel.

While there are such encouraging developments,
much remains to be done. Among the subjects that
must be taken up are improving security, problems
associated with the settlements and the security barrier
in the West Bank, easing movement and access,
continuing the transfer of tax and customs revenues,
and releasing the Israeli soldier abducted by Hamas as
well as a greater number of Palestinian prisoners being
held in Israel. It is also essential to restore unity to the
West Bank and the Gaza Strip in order to realize the
shared goal of a two-State solution. Moreover, the
involvement of the Palestinians in the Gaza Strip in the
peace process is of critical importance. Japan strongly
urges both the Israeli and Palestinian sides to redouble
their efforts toward these ends.

In the view of the series of important
international gatherings scheduled this year, Japan for
its part will continue to play a proactive role in
advancing the peace process in cooperation with its
partners in the international community, taking into full
account all parallel good offices efforts, including
those of the relevant Arab countries, to advance the
Arab Peace Initiative.

Before concluding, Mr. President, let me touch
briefly upon the situation in Lebanon. Japan supports
the efforts of the Lebanese Government, under the
leadership of Prime Minister Siniora, to achieve
stability in Lebanon. We hope the concerned parties
and factions in the country will engage in efforts to
promote stability and reconstruction through dialogue
and without resort to violence.

There remain many challenges in Lebanon that
must be addressed in order to achieve full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and
stabilization of the situation. A permanent ceasefire and
long-term solution require that the international
community tackle vigorously tasks including an arms
embargo, the disarming and disbanding of all
remaining militias and the delineation of the borders.
We are deeply concerned that the two Israeli soldiers
abducted by Hizbollah have not been returned and that
in fact no proof of life has been provided.

A comprehensive peace that includes both a
Lebanese and Syrian track is the only way to achieve
permanent peace in the region. From that point of view,
Japan expects Syria to play an active role in the
realization of regional peace and stability.

