Mr. Gillerman (Israel): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his informative
briefing.

In the absence of the President, I would like to
point out that the growing instability and dangers to
international peace and security in Lebanon,
particularly those posed by Hizbullah in the areas south
of the Litani River, are more severe today than ever
before. The two Katyusha rockets fired on northern
Israel on 8 January and the terrorist attack that
wounded two Irish peacekeepers on the same day are
mere by two examples.

While Israel welcomed the Council's statement to

the press condemning those terrorist attacks, much

more needs to be done to implement resolution 1701
(2006) in its entirety.

Weapons continue to pass through the porous
Syrian-Lebanese border, in violation of the arms
embargo. Moreover, some of those weapons are
destined for areas south of the Litani River, where a
re-armed Hizbullah maintains a presence.

Udi Goldwasser and Eldad Regev, the two Israeli
soldiers kidnapped by Hizbullah on 12 July 2006, are
still being held, without any sign of life or visits by the
Red Cross. Resolution 1701 (2006) is explicit in its call
for the immediate and unconditional release of the
Israeli soldiers. I call on the Council, as I have done
before, to implement those provisions and help to bring
our boys home without delay.

Lastly, the incident on 7 January in the Halta
area, when a Lebanese crossed into Israel, is a
reminder of the need to demarcate the Blue Line.
While Israel returned the suspect to Lebanon after a
short investigation, we hope that marking the Blue
Line, as well as placing warning signs, will prevent
future incidents.

Let me now turn to the situation with Hamas in
the Gaza Strip and the peace process with the moderate
Palestinian Authority leadership. The ugly face of
Palestinian terrorism - the relentless, vicious and
horrifying acts of violence directed at Israelis simply
because they are Israelis - is the greatest
humanitarian crisis and threat to human rights and
peace and stability in our region. Israel calls on the
moderate Palestinian Authority leadership to shoulder
its responsibilities under the various agreements,
including the Road Map, and put an end to the violence
and terrorism and to the incitement to commit such acts
against our people.

The events of last week demonstrate just how
terrorism not only endangers and threatens civilian
lives but also places the entire peace process in grave
peril. Last Thursday evening, two armed Palestinian
terrorists infiltrated Kfar Etzion in the West Bank and
wounded three Israelis. In another incident that
occurred at around the same time, Palestinian terrorists
opened fire on Israeli police officers stationed near the
Shoafat refugee camp in Jerusalem, killing a police
officer and wounding another.
While those acts of terrorism took place, over
230,000 Israelis have continued to live within range of

Palestinian rocket fire from the Gaza Strip. Since
Hamas came to power, more than 4,200 rockets and
mortar rounds have been fired at Israel's southern cities
and towns. Within that group, the city of Sderot has
sustained the majority of the rocket attacks - with
astonishing courage but also tremendous pain and
suffering.

Sderot - as a British journalist covering the region
has said - is a city that measures life in 15-second
intervals. Fifteen seconds: that is all the time that the
people of Sderot have between the sounding of the red-
alert warning siren and the inevitable crash and
explosion of Qassam rockets. There is no normal life in
Sderot. Everyone is on edge, fearful of leaving their
homes, terrified of dropping their children off at
schools and kindergartens and frightened even to go to
the supermarket. That terrifying version of "Russian
roulette" - and I assure the Council that it is not a
game - has been given that name because no one
knows when the next rocket will be fired or where it
will land and it is a source of tremendous terror.

Hamas directs its terrorist campaign from the
Gaza Strip, where it violently seized control last year,
in order to menace, maim and murder innocent
civilians. Two weeks ago, a Hamas sniper murdered a
20-year-old volunteer from Ecuador, Mr. Carlos
Chavez, in the fields of Kibbutz Ein Hashlosha. Not
only does Hamas fire rockets indiscriminately, they
now also target civilians with precision weapons.

I remind the Council that Israel disengaged from
the Gaza Strip more than two years ago in the hope that
the Palestinians would govern the area responsibly -
looking after their own people and improving the
standard of living and the quality of life. Instead, the
Palestinians turned Gaza into a terror base and a
launching pad for missiles against Israel.

My Palestinian colleague has continued -
unashamedly or because he is uninformed - to
repeatedly refer to Israel as the occupying Power,
blatantly ignoring the fact that Israel did indeed leave
Gaza totally over two years ago. The only occupying
Power in Gaza is the terrorist occupation of Hamas,
which keeps not just Israelis but also its own people
hostage to its terror and violence.

Very characteristically, the Palestinian Observer
has yet again used the word "occupation", this time 13
times. He did not use the word "Hamas" even once. He
should remember that this is the real world. This is the
Security Council. This is not theatre.

While those acts of terrorism have been taking
place, Israelis live in constant fear and danger.
My Government has been clear - in words and in
deeds - that it will do everything possible to prevent a
humanitarian crisis in the Gaza Strip. The flow of
electricity to Gaza is continuing, meeting at least three
quarters of Gaza's electricity needs. Supplies including
cooking gas, 500,000 litres of diesel fuel for
generators- primarily for hospitals - 2.2 million
litres of industrial fuel for power plants and 50
truckloads of humanitarian aid have all entered the
Gaza Strip since last week. Israel works closely with
the relevant United Nations and humanitarian agencies
on the ground to ensure that the needs of the civilian
population are met.

In contrast, what can be said of Hamas's
commitment to Gaza's humanitarian needs? Hamas
diverts the fuel supply that is being sent in to produce
domestic power. It keeps the Gaza population in the
dark, so that it can manufacture more rockets to fire at
Israel. By firing on border crossings, the terrorists
cynically force closures, which hamper efforts to
deliver humanitarian aid. Recently, we even saw
humanitarian convoys being used by Hamas to
smuggle explosives and weapons into Gaza. Hamas
stages images of misery in its ongoing manipulation of
the media, making Gaza not only its theatre of
operations but also a theatre of disinformation.

Hamas does not have the word humanitarian in its
vocabulary. As noted in Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe's briefing last week, more than 20 months have
passed since the kidnapping of Corporal Gilad Shalit,
whose whereabouts and condition remain unknown.
The terrorists holding him will not allow any Visits to
assess his well-being. That is the real ongoing
humanitarian crisis.

On several occasions, my delegation has stressed
that terrorists are dependent on States for support and
assistance. Syria is home and headquarters to numerous
terrorist organizations, including Islamic Jihad and
Hamas. The political leader of the latter, Khaled
Mashal, lives there while continuing to orchestrate the
killing of Israelis.

Iran also funds Hamas and Hizbullah and
generously supports terrorism elsewhere around the
globe. Iran uses Holocaust denial and threatens to
destroy Israel to promote its utterly racist worldview.
Iran cannot live in a world where there is a Jewish

State, and so it bankrolls terrorists on the ground to do
its dirty work. It must be stopped, and I sincerely hope
this Council will make sure that it is. Speaking before a
televised audience only yesterday evening, the Iranian
President reiterated his belligerent threats against
Israel, saying "The life of Zionists will sooner or later
come to an end". Surely, such inflammatory and
inciting rhetoric shakes every one of us to the very
core.

But it is all the more alarming as the Iranian
President's remarks come only one day after the United
Nations observed international Holocaust remembrance
day, a solemn occasion when the international
community reaffirmed its resolve to preserve the
eternal memory of the Holocaust and to utilize the
instruments of human rights and civic responsibility to
ensure that genocide never again occurs anywhere.

During a week in which the nations of the world
have come together to remember the victims of the
Holocaust and perhaps the greatest example of the
perversion of civic power, it is appropriate to recall
how the extremists seek to undo those efforts. Hamas
and Hizbullah are undemocratic parties that use the
instruments of civil society to achieve their own racist,
hateful and violent agenda. They manipulate and
misuse democracy and human rights to promote
instability and chaos.

The international community must not be fooled.
It must know that Hamas is the enemy of everything
the United Nations stands for. Hamas does not
represent the will of the Palestinian people, but rather
the will of the extremists who seek to undermine
everything we have worked for. An unfettered Hamas
in power is nothing less than civilization in retreat.

The urgency of the need to realize that terrorists
seek to undermine our democracies and destroy our
human rights was underscored recently by the recent
statement of the Coordinating Bureau of the
Non-Aligned Movement on the situation in the Gaza
Strip. In seeking a purely political condemnation of
Israel, the Non-Aligned Movement's statement makes
no mention of Palestinian terrorism or Hamas, let alone
Hamas' indiscriminate and vicious rocket attacks
against Israel. In essence, it fails to reflect an
understanding of the reality on the ground and the
overall responsibility of this Council. How ignorant or
cynical can even the Non-Aligned Movement get? As
the late Daniel Patrick Moynihan once said, what
indeed is the Non-Aligned Movement non-aligned
about? Is it even relevant today?

We believe in continued dialogue, as ongoing
today between Israel and the Palestinian Authority.
That means, however, taking a balanced and fair
approach to the conflict and not promoting biased
narratives. We recently saw the harmful effects of one-
sided rhetoric in the resolution adopted by the Human
Rights Council in Geneva. Clearly, such initiatives do
not benefit peace or human rights. If anything, they
threaten the possibility of reconciliation and reaching
an agreement.

Darkness has fallen over Gaza, but it is not a
darkness that stems from the absence of physical light.
The darkness over Gaza is the result of darkness
imposed by the extremists in Tehran and Damascus,
whose terrorist proxies on the ground, Hamas and
Hizbullah, want nothing less than to extinguish all
progress, development, hope and light. The light of
hope in Gaza can be turned on in an instant. The
situation can change dramatically in a millisecond. All
it takes is for the rockets to stop and for terror to cease.

Thankfully, the moderates in the region are hard
at work to counteract the extremists. Israel went to
Annapolis last November to bring the light and spirit of
peace back to all people in the region. Israel is
committed to the vision of two States - one Jewish
and one Palestinian - living side by side in peace and
security, as the ongoing dialogue between Prime
Minister Olmert and President Abbas demonstrates. We
are committed to seeing moderate Arab and Muslim
States in the region support the process between us and
the Palestinians. Stagnation is neither our policy nor
our interest. Israel believes that an independent
Palestinian State that desires to live in peace as our
next-door neighbour is Vital to realizing sustainable
peace and security in the region.

But the moderates must work together.
Undercutting each other and pointing fingers will only
undermine our collective strength. Siding with the
terrorists gives them no incentive to reform and end the
violence. Each of our roles here is important. With a
precise understanding of those roles, Israel hopes that
we can achieve a lasting peace for all citizens of the
Middle East in our time.

