Ms. Guo Xiaomei (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First, I wish to thank the Under-Secretary-General,
Ms. O'Brien, and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Fedotov, for
their briefings.

The root cause of the Somali piracy issue is on
land, and therefore it should be treated in terms of both
symptoms and root causes. The key is to achieve peace
and stability in Somalia and to promote its economic
and social development. Therefore, the Transitional
Federal Government of Somalia and the international
community should adopt an integrated strategy and
promote works in various fields in a balanced manner.

We welcome the important consensus reached by
the parties concerned in Somalia with regard to the key
transition task of drafting a constitution and deciding
the country's future political system. We call on the
international community to continue its efforts to assist
Somalia to achieve peace and development.

With regard to the establishment of Somali
specialized anti-piracy courts, I wish to emphasize the
following.

First, we believe that prosecuting and imprisoning
Somali pirates and ending their impunity is an important
aspect of combating Somali pirates. We are open to the
choice of means to achieve that objective and are
willing to explore all possibilities, including the
establishment of specialized anti-piracy courts in
Somalia and other countries of the region.

Secondly, we have taken note of the problems
involved in establishing such courts in or outside
Somalia and that the parties concerned have not
reached an agreement. As reflected in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2012/50), this idea still faces
various political, legal and security challenges. We
support the international community continuing its
efforts to find the most feasible and effective solution
while giving due respect to the views of Somalia and
the other countries concerned in the region.

Thirdly, irrespective of whether the anti-piracy
courts in Somalia can be established in the short term,
strengthening the capacity of Somalia and other
countries of the region has always been key to the
successful prosecution and incarceration of Somali
pirates. We have noticed that with assistance from such
agencies as the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), judicial capacity-building
in Somalia and other countries in the region - such as
Seychelles, Kenya, Mauritius and Tanzania - is
making good progress. We appreciate the efforts by
UNDP and UNODC and the other countries concerned,
and we call on the international community to continue
this assistance to Somalia and other countries of the
region to further enhance their capacity.
