Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America): I want to join other colleagues in thanking Germany for calling this meeting today in crucial support of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). I also thank High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing. The Security Council tackles some of the greatest challenges to international peace and_ security, including the prevention of the further proliferation of nuclear weapons. As we approach the fiftieth anniversary of the entry into force of the NPT, we look forward to celebrating that historic occasion together here at the United Nations on 5 March. Over nearly five decades, the NPT has proven to be critical to the maintenance of international peace and security. It has made us all the more secure by constraining the spread of nuclear weapons, and it has thereby both enabled the global peaceful use of nuclear energy and helped to create conditions conducive to progress on nuclear disarmament. Fifty years ago, few would have dared to predict that we would be here today, celebrating the success of the Treaty. Prior to the NPT, the United States expressed dire concerns over a possible snowball effect of cascading proliferation, which would increase the world's nuclear-weapon stockpiles and undermine confidence in the ability of non-proliferation policies to prevent such a dangerous sequence. Yet in a demonstration of remarkable diplomatic resolve, the international community joined together against that collective threat, reflecting a rare consensus during a time of Cold War polarization. Our efforts culminated in the successful negotiation of that vital Treaty and its subsequent entry into force. There has been unwavering international consensus about the indispensable role of the Treaty in maintaining collective peace and security. The NPT has succeeded for half a century precisely because it serves the fundamental and widely recognized common interest of curbing the proliferation of the world's most dangerous weapons. We have also seen enormous progress on disarmament, in part because the NPT helped to curtail the emergence of new nuclear Powers. With the easing of Cold War tensions and the success of the NPT-based proliferation regime in impeding the spread of nuclear weapons, it has been possible to reduce the nuclear arsenals of both the United States and Russia to levels not seen since the 1950s. The stockpile of the United States today has been reduced to less than one eighth of its Cold War peak. We must also recognize that advancing towards the ultimate goal of a world without nuclear weapons must take into account the global security environment. We cannot overlook the fact that the actions of those States that are expanding and modernizing their nuclear stockpiles, threatening their neighbours and violating their arms-control obligations have contributed to a deterioration in global security conditions. To address the security challenges that impede progress on disarmament, the United States, together with more than 40 international partners, has launched a path-breaking new initiative, entitled "Creating an Environment for Nuclear Disarmament", or CEND. The CEND Working Group has already met twice and will meet again in April. The Working Group seeks to foster constructive dialogue on identifying the challenges to disarmament and on exploring ways to improve the underlying conditions in the global security environment so as to make further progress towards and ultimately achieve nuclear disarmament. In that regard, in addition to its emphasis on dialogue and diplomatic engagement with all relevant parties, the CEND initiative stands in stark contrast tothe Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, which fails to address the security challenges that continue to make nuclear deterrence necessary. It will not eliminate a single nuclear warhead or make any nation more secure. In fact, when reviewing the text of the Treaty, it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that its drafters sought to give greater legal weight to their document at the expense of the NPT, which is unfortunate. As we turn towards the 2020 NPT Review Conference, the United States seeks a positive outcome of that meeting that reflects consensus on the broadest basis possible. We believe that consensus is possible if the parties to the NPT focus on the big picture, emphasize their common interests and avoid insisting on divisive positions that cannot lead to consensus. To strengthen the NPT and the non-proliferation regime, States must support the universalization of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) additional protocol, which is an important tool that provides the IAEA the ability to verify the peaceful use of all nuclear material in States with IAEA comprehensive safeguards agreements. Those agreements, in combination with the additional protocol, have become the de facto international standard in nuclear safeguards. Moreover, nuclear supplier States should make the adoption of the additional protocol by recipient States a requirement for nuclear exports. States must also be united in the goal of the final fully verified denuclearization of North Korea. We must remain committed to a secure, peaceful and bright future for North Korea if it fulfils its obligations. We must remain united in our determination that Iran must never acquire a path to nuclear weapons. The 2020 NPT Review Conference will also be an opportunity to highlight how the NPT and the broader nuclear non-proliferation regime have made possible thriving international cooperation on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, science and technology. We aim to build on that success. We are optimistic that the NPT will remain at the centre of international security. Yet that outcome is far from guaranteed. We must continue to preserve and strengthen the NPT so that 50 years from now our successors may mark the one hundredth anniversary of the Treaty as an enduring accomplishment that continues to promote international security and prosperity.
