Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
I, too, would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda for
her presentation of the seventeenth report of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in accordance
with resolution 1593 (2005). Since her last report, the
situation in Darfur has developed in various ways. At
the political level, progress should be commended and
should be encouraged, in particular the consolidation
of institutions established by the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur, such as the Darfur Regional Authority.
In that regard, we welcome the convening of the donors
conference for Darfur, which was held in Doha on
7 April, and we hope that the donations that will be
collected will enable us to finance development in
Darfur.

However, development in Darfur cannot begin
without first restoring peace and ensuring the security
of its population. The agreement between the Justice
and Equality Movement and the Government of the
Sudan was welcome, but the recent assassination of its
leader will undoubtedly have a significant impact on
the continuation ofthe peace process and on the actions
of the other groups that have not yet joined the process.
Furthermore, the resurgence of violence among the
rebels of the Sudan Revolutionary Front, together with
violent intertribal clashes, have severely deteriorated
the security situation and led to the displacement of a
great number of civilians. The international community
must bear all of those factors in mind.

For its part, Morocco has always advocated a
political settlement among all the parties involved
in order to attenuate the suffering of the civilian
population, and reaffirms its commitment to the
principles of international humanitarian law and
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Sudan.

Morocco welcomed the signing of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur and the launch of
the process for implementing its provisions. The
agreement, which covers all of the issues underlying the
conflict - such as the measures aimed at the equitable
redistribution of power and resources, compensation,
the return of displaced persons, reconciliation and the
maintenance of dialogue - in our view remains the
only possible way out of the conflict in Darfur, and
therefore must supported.

The Sudan's history stretches back to ancient times
and is intimately entwined with that of the African
continent. The current situation of the country is worthy
of the full support of the international community so as
to enable peace and stability to be restored.

The Sudan has sacrificed a great deal within the
framework of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
and the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, as well
as with the recent signature of a number of agreements
with South Sudan and rebel groups. The decision of the
ICC to indict President Al-Bashir has never enjoyed
international consensus. The Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and the League of Arab States have
questioned the basis of such an approach.

In conclusion, we are convinced that the lengthy
process that will allow peace and stability to be restored
in Darfur cannot be successful without effective and
coordinated cooperation among all the parties to the
conflict, regional organizations and the mediation
mechanisms involved.

