Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I should like at the outset
to take this opportunity to wish you every success, Sir,
in your functions as President of the Security Council
during the month of March and reiterate to you our full
support for all of your initiatives and endeavours.

Resolution 2270 (2016), which the Security Council
has just adopted, condemns the nuclear test and the
launching of a rocket with ballistic-missile technology
carried out by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
in January and February, respectively. It stresses the
concern of the international community at the negative
consequences of these acts for international peace
and security, in particular on the Korean peninsula,
which increases the risk of a possible confrontation.
The seriousness of these events requires the Security
Council to redouble its efforts to promote dialogue and
negotiation between the parties in order to contribute to
a negotiated solution to this crisis.

In this context, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, committed as we are to non-proliferation,
nuclear disarmament and the need to focus on the
consensus reached among the countries of the region,
voted in favour of the resolution because we believe
that the implementation of the measures set out in the
resolution and in other Security Council resolutions
on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea should
have the single objective of helping to find a political
peaceful solution to the issue of the denuclearization
of the Korean Peninsula, with the aim of strengthening
peace and stability in the region.
The measures set out in the resolution must be
applied in a responsible and transparent manner, with
a view to achieving specific goals, in keeping with
the principles of international law and with clear
benchmarks for their lifting if the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea complies with the demand that it
put an end to its nuclear programme. This is not about
undermining a Government or punishing its people, but
about making progress in the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula. We therefore need to ensure that the
measures emanating from this resolution do not have
negative humanitarian consequences for the civilian
population and do not affect their human rights or the
well-being of the North Korean people.

In this regard, we are concerned that the restrictions
imposed on imports of raw materials into the country
could have an impact on the population. We also believe
that these exceptional measures on this issue must not
serve as a precedent to limit the right of States to the
sovereign use of their natural resources for their own
economic and social development in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 1803 (XVII).

We call upon all parties to act with caution in order
to avoid an escalation of tensions in the region that
could degenerate into an armed conflict. In this regard,
we should work hand in hand, with a comprehensive
focus on various mechanisms and formulas, so as to
gradually build an environment for dialogue that will
lead to peace, with the aim of strengthening the basis
for a negotiated and sustainable resolution of the issue,
in order to preserve and guarantee the stability of the
Korean peninsula.

The implementation of the measures listed in
resolution 2270 (2016) should in no way hamper the
cooperation provided by international organizations
to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea aimed
at creating the conditions for stability and well-being
that are necessary for peaceful and friendly relations
between countries, such as those established by
Chapter IX of the Charter of the United Nations. In
this regard, we appreciate the efforts of the multilateral
organizations that have provided technical assistance
to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and
that continue to back projects aimed at promoting
human development, the achievement of the recently
adopted Sustainable Development Goals and increased
food security for vulnerable groups in rural areas in
the country.

In conclusion, we reiterate our call to Member
States that have influence in this sphere to undertake
the efforts necessary to promote a climate of trust
that will help to break the impasse in a peaceful and
constructive manner, through the relaunching of the
Six-Party Talks as the most important mechanism for
easing tensions on the Korean peninsula and the only
way to peacefully resolve these differences.

The initiatives taken to achieve the denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula and to maintain peace and
security there through diplomatic measures and
political negotiations constitute the path that should be
followed so as to build a lasting peaceful solution.

