Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I thank you,
Mr. President, for your patience, and for deciding to
make this open debate on working methods a focus
of your presidency. I would also like to thank you for
your guiding concept note (S/2018/66, annex), and to
pay tribute to Mr. Ian Martin for his remarkable work
not only on working methods, about which I would like
to share some thoughts, but on all issues linked to the
Security Council.
First, dealing with the working methods of the
Security Council is just as important as the discussions
that are also taking place on restructuring the Council's
membership. They are both crucial tracks towards
Security Council reform and we should not let any
shortcomings of either track hamper us.

Secondly, it is obvious that changing the Council's
working methods will improve the sense of ownership
of the general membership, who, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, have conferred on
the Security Council primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security and
the ability to act on their behalf. Needless to say, the
Security Council's growing responsibilities render
its working methods even more important, and the
scope and consequence of its decisions require that it
work towards an even greater degree of transparency,
understanding and acceptance.

Clearly, the Council's decisions must be accepted
and implemented. In that regard, we consider it
essential to consider how those decisions are prepared
and how they evolve, particularly where sanctions are
concerned. The working methods should ultimately
affirm the connections between the members of the
Council and the general membership. All nations
should really feel that the Council is acting on their
behalf and for the benefit of the maintenance of peace
and security in the world, and they should not feel
disenfranchised by its working methods. I would like
to suggest some ideas about how we see things with
regard to practical areas where improvement should be
possible and sometimes essential.

First, considering that it has been 36 years since
the last amendment to the rules of procedure was
adopted (resolution 528 (l982)), it is high time to seek
something less provisional and confirm established
practices. The number of public meetings should
increase, in accordance with Articles 31 and 32 of
the Charter of the United Nations. Ironically, the
wider membership's participation on certain issues is
sought after, but they have no real possibility of being
consulted or contributing information when required.
Closed meetings and informal consultations are
certainly necessary, but they should be the exception.
A form of briefing of the wider membership should be
a rule after such meetings. The Council's establishment
of subsidiary bodies should accord with the letter and
the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations, and they
should function in a way that enables adequate and
timely information on their activities to be provided to
the general membership.

The annual reports of the Security Council to
the General Assembly should be more explanatory,
comprehensive and specifically analytical in assessing
the Council's work, including cases where the
Council has failed to act and the views expressed by
its members during discussion of the agenda item
under consideration. Pursuant to Article 15, paragraph
1, and Article 24, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the
United Nations, the Council should submit special
reports for the consideration of the General Assembly.
The Council should ensure that its monthly assessments
are comprehensive and analytical and issued in a timely
fashion. The General Assembly may consider proposing
parameters for the elaboration of such assessments.
The Council should fully take into account the
recommendations of the General Assembly on matters
relating to international peace and security, consistent
with Article 11, paragraph 2, of the Charter.

Although tremendous amounts of work and energy
go into negotiating agreements on many working
methods, some are not properly heeded and some
are never implemented. We believe that cooperation
between the Council and regional and subregional
organizations is crucial. States that have undertaken
mediation initiatives should be given ample opportunity
to interact with the Council. At the end of the day, that
would be of benefit to the international community as a
whole, as such endeavours are aimed at ensuring early-
warning, conflict prevention, conflict resolution and
the promotion of peace.

While stressing that the working methods of the
Security Council are an integral part of the reform
process, we reaffirm the African Common Position in
that regard. We note that all but one open debate on the
working methods was held at the initiative of an elected
member, including today. I salute your instrumental
role in that regard, Sir.

