Mr. Jallow: The revised completion strategy
document submitted by President Byron on
16 November 2007 (S/2007/676), following consultations
with the Prosecutor and the Registrar, sets out in great
detail the progress made so far at the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) in the
implementation of its completion strategy. It was
supplemented this morning by President Byron's
presentation, so I shall not be going into great detail
about the matters already covered. Suffice it to say that
recent judgements have now brought to 35 the number
of accused persons whose cases have been completed
by the ICTR. Taking into account the four applications
for the transfer of detainees, there are now six accused
persons in the United Nations Detention Facility at
Arusha awaiting trial.

Altogether, 23 accused - including some cases
for which judgement is pending - are now standing
trial. We expect the cases of three other accused
persons, two of whom were recently arrested in
Europe, to be transferred to the ICTR shortly. As
President Byron indicated, the third person is Michel
Bagaragaza, who will have to return to Arusha
following the revocation of the transfer of his case to
Holland. It had been determined in Holland, following
the referral of his case by the ICTR, that the Dutch
courts could not exercise jurisdiction over his case. His
trial will therefore proceed in Arusha.

During the reporting period, with the
intensification of tracking activities and the
cooperation of some Member States, the number of
fugitives dropped from 18 to 14, following arrests in
France and in the Federal Republic of Germany. I
would like to express our appreciation for the
cooperation of both France and Germany in that
respect. Of those 14 fugitives still at large, including
Felicien Kabuga, four are considered to be of a
sufficiently high level to be earmarked for trial in
Arusha itself.

The implementation of the strategy for the
referral of cases to national jurisdictions was
effectively begun with the Trial Chamber's decision in
November 2007 to transfer to France, under rule 11 bis,
the cases of two indictees currently living in that
country. Their trials will now proceed there. Again, I
would like to thank the Government of France for
agreeing to share the workload of the ICTR by
prosecuting those persons in its own courts.

There are now pending before the Trial Chamber
five requests by the Prosecution for the transfer of
cases to Rwanda. Four of these relate to detainees in
Arusha, and the fifth relates to a fugitive. Shortly, I
intend to file additional requests for referral, under rule
11 bis, of the cases of additional indictees to Rwanda,
given that the latter is currently the only jurisdiction
willing to take any additional cases from the ICTR.

Of course, the year ahead is of critical importance
to the Tribunal's completion strategy. The Security
Council will recall that it had requested the ICTR -
and indeed the ICTY as well - to conclude all trial
activities at first instance by 31 December 2008 and, in
that regard, to concentrate on the prosecution of the
most senior leaders and to transfer the rest to
competent national jurisdictions for trial.

As this year ends and we prepare for 2008, the
crucial question is whether the ICTR will be able to
complete all its trial activities by the end of 2008, as
envisaged by the completion strategy. Our commitment
and optimism with regard to reaching that target
remain as strong as before. As the report indicates, we
expect to complete by the end of 2008 our current
workload related to the detainees now on trial or
awaiting trial, with the sole exception of the Karemera
case, which, as the President indicated, will probably
run into 2009. While the trial proceedings related to the
other cases are expected to end in 2008, a number of
cases will also be in the judgement writing phase in
2009. The Office of the Prosecutor has already
prepared the cases of the six remaining detainees and is
ready to proceed to trial in the event of any non-
referral of their cases. We thus remain optimistic with
regard to completion.

However, members will recall that, in my
briefings to the Council on 15 December 2006 (see 
12

S/PV.5594) and on 18 June 2007 (see S/PV.5697), I
alerted the Council to the fact that if, for any reason,
referrals of cases to Rwanda were to prove impossible,
that would result in a substantial increase in the ICTR's
workload. While we are still in a position to conclude
the trials of detainees whose referral is not possible,
managing the cases of fugitives that are not transferred
poses a more difficult challenge. A final judicial
determination of the pending requests for referral to
Rwanda would facilitate the search for solutions to that
issue. Similarly, if new arrests are made in 2008, as we
anticipate, that will also add to our workload, and the
Council will have to decide whether to enable the
Tribunal to continue with the trials of such cases or to
explore other alternatives.

At this stage, I am merely alerting the Security
Council to a possible increase in the Tribunal's
workload in 2008, which may have an impact on the
timeline for the completion of trials. If, for any reason,
the workload increases, we shall be returning here to
submit specific recommendations to the Council for its
consideration.

The efforts of our tracking team have been
intensified, with good results, as demonstrated by the
four arrests made since our most recent briefing to the
Security Council. Happily, INTERPOL has also shown
strong interest in assisting with the arrests of the
fugitives and recently agreed with the ICTR on some
measures aimed at cooperation in that respect.
Consultations are ongoing with various parties,
including the United Nations Secretariat, the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and other Member
States regarding those fugitives who are suspected to
be in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. As I said
earlier, it is probable that further arrests can be carried
out during 2008 with the cooperation of Member
States.

Of course, Felicien Kabuga remains one of our
top fugitives who continue to evade justice. The Joint
Task Force established a year ago between the ICTR
and the Kenyan Government submitted its report to
both the Government and the ICTR in August 2007,
with a number of recommendations on the way
forward. In my consultations with the Government last
month, the Government reaffirmed its commitment to
cooperate fully with the Tribunal with a View to, inter
alia, tracking down Kabuga for trial. The Kenyan

Government and the ICTR have agreed on a number
measures, which will now be implemented by the Task
Force and the Kenyan Government within a specific
time frame that has been agreed upon with the
Government. In the light of recent assurances from
Kenya, we hope that it will indeed fulfil its obligations
and commitments within that time frame. I would like
to express our thanks to the ambassadors of the Group
of Friends in Nairobi, whose intervention actually
made possible this recent advance in our discussions
with Kenya. I implore them to continue to maintain
their interest in this particular matter.

Rwanda continues to cooperate with the Tribunal.
The capacity-building programme for Rwanda
continues to be implemented; the Office of the
Prosecutor has, with the help of funding from the
European Union, already delivered a number of
training programmes for various categories of officials
Within the Office of the Prosecutor-General in Rwanda.
Areas covered included investigations and
prosecutions, the use of information technology to
provide trial support and the management of trial
records. The overall objective of this intervention is to
contribute to efforts to improve the legal system in
Rwanda.

Since my last report to the Security Council, my
office has also made progress in the investigation of
the allegations against members of the Rwandese
Patriotic Front. We look forward to concluding this
matter early next year.

There are a number of member States which have
now established special offices to investigate and
prosecute within their territory the offences of
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes
committed by residents. This is a welcome
development that can contribute significantly to the
global campaign to combat those serious violations of
human rights. The Office of the Prosecutor at the ICTR
is already providing support to some of those national
agencies. It is probable that some of them will continue
to operate well after the closure of the Tribunal. But
they will continue to require support, particularly with
regard to access to the Prosecutor's evidentiary
database. We plan in that respect to convene a meeting
early in 2008 with a selected number of such national
agencies in order to enhance modalities for sharing of
information and general cooperation, now and beyond
the closure of the Tribunal.
Finally, I would like to express my profound
appreciation to the Security Council for its decision of
14 September 2007 (resolution 1774 (2007)) to
reappoint me as Prosecutor of the ICTR for a further
four-year term, subject to an earlier termination upon
completion of the work of the Tribunal.

I wish to acknowledge the support of both the
Council and the Secretariat in the discharge of my
mandate. I shall do my utmost to discharge my
responsibilities in that respect for the effective
enforcement of international criminal justice.

