Mrs. Pandor (South Africa): I thank you for this
opportunity, Sir. May I congratulate you on your role
as President.

I wish to begin by thanking the Secretary-General
of the United Nations for his briefing and the speakers
ofthe various organizations associated with this debate.

The debate today affords us an opportunity to
reaffirm the value of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations to address peace and
security challenges, including the scourge of terrorism.
Terrorism continues to threaten our populations and,
on the African continent, has begun to derail our
collective efforts to bring about peace, security and
sustainable development.

Continued terrorist attacks across the world have
shown us that no nation or region is immune to its threat
and there is no short-term solution to countering the
threat of terrorism and its devastating consequences.
If we are to triumph over this scourge, we will need,
in addition to our national efforts, a strengthening of
international, regional and subregional cooperation and
coordination efforts.

A multilateral framework, anchored in the United
Nations, remains critical to preventing and countering
the diverse and evolving aspects of this threat. With
near universal membership, the United Nations is best
placed to foster cooperation across the globe, as well
as to ensure support to Member States and regions
in implementing the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy across its four pillars. The collective
sharing of experiences and information and the
adoption of best practices in dealing with our common
threats contribute positively to the development and
enhancement of our capabilities. It also improves
effectiveness in addressing our specific contexts in
countering terrorism.

We believe that regional organizations are key
partners of the United Nations in that important task.
South Africa has consistently prioritized an enhanced
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, not only in
countering terrorism but also in conflict prevention and
resolution. As a member of the Council, my country
continues to strive for closer partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union. This takes into
account the volume of African conflict situations on the
agenda of the Security Council, as well as the growing
threat of terrorism across Africa.

Different regions of the world experience the threat
posed by terrorist groups and/or the return or relocation
of foreign terrorist fighters differently. We encourage
the development of partnerships with regional
organizations, given their understanding of local and
regional dynamics and of what would be required to
address the issue. In that regard, the international
community must find ways to support the efforts of
regional organizations aimed at fighting terrorism and
violent extremism, including by sharing experiences
and providing technical assistance and adequate
resources for capacity-building.

As we ponder solutions to this awful threat, it is
essential that we understand and address the root
causes and conditions that give rise to terrorism. We
should aim to seek political solutions aimed at resolving
long-standing conflicts in order to create the necessary
conditions for stability and a better future over the long-
term. We should seek to address the marginalization of
some sectors of the population and socioeconomic and
political disparities.

More often than not, where there is conflict there
may also be a deficit of the rule of law, thus allowing
terrorists the space to entrench themselves and expand
their activities. We have seen this on the African
continent with the devastating effects of terror activities
in the Sahel following the conflict in Libya, associated
with the free flow of arms and the rise of terror groups.
The African Union has been proactive in dealing
with the threat of terrorism, as evidenced by its
normative frameworks developed since 1999, primarily
the Organization of African Unity Convention on the
Prevention and Combating of Terrorism and its related
Protocol of 2004, as well as its counter-terrorism
strategy, adopted in 2015. Likewise, our own Southern
African Development Community also adopted its
counter-terrorism framework and strategy in 2015. At
the domestic level, South Africa adopted its national
counter-terrorism strategy in 2013 and has an active
action plan in response to it.

South Africa believes that, owing to the very
nature of terrorism, it is difficult to defeat it militarily
or solely through the use of coercive measures. South
Africa therefore remains supportive of counter-
terrorism initiatives that focus on prevention measures,
addressing conditions that give rise to terrorism
and promoting dialogue, tolerance, diversity and
understanding among peoples, cultures and religions.

South Africa will continue to work with all
Members of the United Nations, the African Union, the
Southern African Development Community and other
relevant parties in addressing the scourge of terrorism
and all its attendant manifestations at the regional and
international levels.

