The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Lebanon and the Syrian Arab
Republic, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Assaker
(Lebanon) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of
the Council, I welcome His Excellency Mr. Boutros
Assaker, Acting Secretary-General of the Lebanese
Ministry for Foreign Affairs and Emigrants.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mekdad
(Syrian Arab Republic) took a seat at the Council
table.


The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Serge Brammertz,
Commissioner of the United Nations International
Independent Investigation Commission.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Brammertz to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them

photocopies of a letter dated 14 March 2006 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council, transmitting the third report of the
United Nations International Independent Investigation
Commission, which was prepared pursuant to
resolutions 1595 (2005), 1636 (2005) and 1644 (2005).
The letter and its enclosure will be issued as a
document of the Security Council under the symbol
S/2006/161.

I now give the floor to Mr. Serge Brammertz,
Commissioner of the United Nations International
Independent Investigation Commission.


