Mr. Gata MaVita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Mr. President, I would like to congratulate your
country, Japan, on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of July and to
express my delegation's delight at seeing you conduct
the Council's deliberations. Allow me also to express
my delegation's gratitude to Mr. Francois Delattre,
Permanent Representative of the French Republic to
the United Nations, for the skill with which he presided
over the Council's proceedings in June. Lastly, I would
like to pay well-deserved tribute to His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his outstanding
ongoing efforts to restore peace in my country, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

My delegation has taken note of the report
(8/2016/579) of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and
duly appreciates its value. Although the Council takes
note of the responses my Government has always
provided on many of the issues raised in his reports,
in order to further our understanding, my delegation
believes it is necessary to briefly reconsider them. In
that regard, please allow me in particular to focus on
the state of progress in the electoral process, which
is the main issue to which the other issues are linked,
notably the political dialogue and what the report refers
to as diminishing political space.

It is true that there have been delays in the electoral
process. The reasons for that have been sufficiently
discussed in our various interventions before the
Council, as well as by my country's Foreign Minister
and by me. It therefore seems to me untimely to revisit
them here. But what is important and deserves the
Council's attention is that, as we have always said, our
country is determined to organize free elections that
respect all international standards of inclusiveness,
transparency and credibility, in a calm atmosphere, in
order to safeguard the hard-won peace. My country's
determination was reaffirmed by the President of the
Republic, His Excellency Mr. Joseph Kabila Kabange.
Just two weeks ago, in Kalemie in Tanganyika province
and in Kindu in Maniema province, he reassured the
Congolese people that elections would take place in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and called on them
to register on a large scale as soon as the registration
process began.

Similarly, the National Independent Electoral
Commission, the technical body constitutionally
empowered to organize elections in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, has started testing registration
kits in Kinshasa and Matadi in Kongo Central province
with a view to updating and ensuring the reliability of
the electoral registry. Given the positive results, the
Commission launched the registration process in July,
starting in Nord-Ubangi province. In order to allow
the Congolese people time to become familiar with
the process, the Commission has begun an awareness-
raising campaign starting in Bas-Uele province.

Moreover, as we have always emphasized, in order
to ensure peaceful elections, overcome obstacles in
the way of the process and prevent any post-election
crisis, it is necessary or organize an inclusive national
political dialogue. In View of the time needed and for
the sake of saving time, in his address to the nation on
30 June the Head of State called on the Facilitator to
make haste in order to start the work this month.

My Government thanks the African Union, the
European Union, the International Organization of
la Francophonie and the United Nations, which are
supporting the dialogue and have underscored its
importance. However, as we have already indicated,
the inclusive national political dialogue that we are
all calling for must first and foremost be a Congolese
undertaking, who must learn to talk to each other as
happens everywhere else. As for the partners and friends
of my country, their role is to help us in conducting a
successful dialogue that leads to consensus among our
country's entire political class.

My delegation thinks it is useful here to return to
the point made about diminishing political space. It
seems to us that none of the explanations that we have
provided to date on the issue have led to any effort to
correct the false perception associated with the matter
in the context of international opinion. We therefore
wonder if the campaign behind all of that, which offers
no objective information on the subject, has not been
created for the purpose of gratuitously discrediting
our institutions. Nevertheless, the truth is that in the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo the political space is
more open than anywhere else in the region, as visitors
to our country and those who live there can confirm.
In fact, we have more than 400 political parties in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and hundreds of
private radio stations and television channels, which
freely set their editorial opinion. Many of them belong
to opposition political actors. Moreover, those radio
and television stations often spend most of their time
criticizing public institutions and even the Head of
State, and they do so openly and without hindrance.

My delegation draws the Council's attention to the
fact that the criticisms levelled against my country often
are not justified, because, as everyone knows, in any
State governed by the rule of law, the primacy of the law
and the equality of all people before it are essentially
the rule. Public freedoms must be exercised according
to the law and while respecting the requirements of
public order. The State is a guarantor of the freedoms
and rights of all and has the duty to ensure that this is
so. The enjoyment of one's rights and freedoms is not
something that can be used to justify defiance of the
protective legal arsenal of the rights and safety of all
with impunity. Hence, when necessary, as with the rule
of law anywhere, courts and tribunals can intervene to
punish offenses when they are committed. My country
has never deviated from this principle.

Belonging to the opposition or to the majority,
or any other body in the country, does not exonerate
someone who breaks the law. For a country like ours,
whose people have suffered greatly on account of the
impunity of those who enjoy privileges because of their
status or social standing, being complacent in this area
does not help to strengthen democracy.
My delegation welcomes the progress made under
the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation or resettlement programme. Nevertheless,
we remind the Council that the process has so far
benefited from only the support of our Government.
It would be desirable if the partners who promised
to contribute to it were to do so in order to enable
the continuation of operations with a view to their
completion.

Lastly, my delegation welcomes the resumption
of cooperation between the Forces armees de la
Republique democratique du Congo and the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in the context of
the fight against the negative forces and armed groups.
We hope that this cooperation will enable us to quickly
put an end to the Forces Democratiques de Liberation
du Rwanda in order to focus all efforts on the Allied
Democratic Forces with a view to making the region of
Beni and the few communities that still suffer from the
presence of armed groups completely safe.

I cannot conclude without expressing the gratitude
of my Government to Mr. Maman Sambo Sidikou,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Mr. Said
Djinnit, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Great Lakes Region of Africa, for their commitment
and their dedication to the cause of my country and the
Great Lakes region. My Government also thanks the
States that have contributed troops, in particular those
that are part of the Intervention Brigade. Once again,
on behalf of my country, I thank all members of the
Security Council.

