The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Oman.

It gives me great pleasure to preside over the work of
the Security Council at this historic moment when we are
meeting today to consider the situation in the former
Yugoslavia, after the signing of the Peace Agreement at
Dayton, Ohio.

It has been more than three years since hostilities
broke out in the area of the former Yugoslavia - a war
that resulted in the deaths of more than a quarter of a
million people, in millions of refugees and displaced
persons, as well as in massive violations of international
humanitarian law.

This meeting of the Security Council, which is held in
connection with the Peace Agreement reached at Dayton,
Ohio, yesterday, 21 November 1995, between the parties to
the conflict, is no doubt a historic one indeed. And for its
achievement, we sincerely hope that the peace agreement
and its annexes will be implemented in good faith by all the
parties. We believe the area will now have a chance to
avoid being haunted by war and killings, and that the
region will enter on the path of peace and normalcy -
elements that have been missing for some time.

All along, Oman believed in dialogue and political
solutions to settle problems and resolve differences - not
only in the area of the former Yugoslavia but in all areas
where conflicts do exist. In the area of the former
Yugoslavia, the warring parties have at last realized this
fact, and have also realized that violence produces nothing
but bitter experiences. Military solutions cannot establish
nations - especially peace-loving nations.

Oman commends the special and exemplary role
played by the United States of America in bringing about
this agreement and making it a reality. Nor can we fail to
commend the role played by the Russian Federation, the
European Union and the complementary role of the
United Nations on the level of the proximity talks held at
Dayton, Ohio.

This Agreement, with its annexes, is not, in our
opinion, an end in itself. It is rather a first step in the
direction of peace and normalcy in the area of the former
Yugoslavia. The days to come will be a testing-ground
for the intentions of all parties, an opportunity for them
to translate their commitments into a working and genuine
reality. In this connection, my country attaches great
importance to the question of mutual recognition of all
States in the region, to the preservation of their territorial
integrity, sovereignty and political independence, within
their internationally recognized borders - a step we see
as consistent with the recently reached Peace Agreement.

Today Oman joins others in voting in favour of two
important resolutions: one that suspends all measures
imposed by, or reaffirmed in, various relevant Security
Council resolutions relating to the sanctions on the former
Yugoslavia, and the other resolution relating to the lifting
of the arms embargo imposed by resolution 713 (1991).
We are happy to be a member of the Security Council at
this point in time. We believe the international
community, the Secretary-General and the United Nations
peace-keepers have done commendable work and deserve
our appreciation, especially for their relentless efforts in
trying to help the parties to resolve their differences and
to minimize the humanitarian difficulties. It is now in the
hands of the States in the region to work together for
confidence and peace in order to alleviate the suffering of
their people. They bear the full responsibility for building
upon the Peace Agreement and bringing the region a step
closer to stability.

 

The days to come will be crucial in harnessing peace
in the former Yugoslavia. We believe that unreserved
cooperation from the parties is important in making it
possible to save succeeding generations in the Balkans from
the scourge of war.

I now resume my function as President of the Security
Council.

The Security Council has thus concluded its voting
procedure.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from the representative of Brazil, in which
he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite that representative to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Valle (Brazil)
took the seat reserved for him at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: I now call on the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina, His Excellency
Mr. Muhamed Sacirbey.


