Mr. Thorns (Germany): The unprecedented spread
of the Ebola virus in parts of West Africa is a massive
humanitarian disaster for the region. It also threatens
the overall political and economic stability in Africa,
in particular in Sierra Leone, Guinea and Liberia.
Germany is and remains committed to the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) as a police
contributor. Let me use this opportunity to also express
my appreciation of the work done by UNMIL in these
challenging days.

Germany fully subscribes to the Council's
declaration that the extent of the Ebola outbreak in
Africa constitutes a threat to international peace and
security. We are faced with a crisis that demands a
comprehensive, rapid and determined response from
the United Nations and all its Members. The Ebola
threat will therefore be a core issue for the Group of
Seven (G7) Foreign Ministers meeting in New York
next week and throughout the German G7 presidency.

Germany welcomes the initiative of the Secretary-
General to establish a United Nations Mission for Ebola
Emergency Response. A rapid response is crucial. The
German Air Force will airlift medical and humanitarian
goods and personnel into the region. The German armed
forces will provide material for an Ebola treatment
unit in Liberia with a capacity of up to 50 beds. We
are now looking for partner organizations that have the
expertise needed to upgrade the centre.

To date, Germany has pledged over $23 million
to combat the Ebola outbreak. Those funds have been
made available to the World Health Organization and
to humanitarian non-governmental organizations,
including Medecins Sans Frontieres. In addition,
Germany is providing funds to the Bernhard Nocht
Institute for Tropical Medicine and the Robert Koch
Institute for Disease Control and Prevention, which
are operating diagnostic facilities in West Africa and
have deployed 17 epidemiologists to the region. Today,
Foreign Minister Steinmeier has decided to allocate an
additional €5 million for humanitarian assistance. With
a View to a medium-term response, Germany is funding
the development of vaccines and new therapies against
Ebola and is providing up to €6 million for further
medical and other goods.

Finally, Germany, together with partner countries,
is examining the availability of appropriate medical
evacuation capabilities. That would certainly increase
the willingness of international health-care workers to
be deployed to the region affected by the Ebola virus.

Germany stands ready to be part ofthe international
response coalition against the Ebola virus.

