Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation is very seriously
concerned about the air strike made by the Israeli
armed forces during the night of 22 to 23 July on an
apartment building in Gaza, in which 12 people were
killed, including several women and children, and in
which more than 100 were wounded. We are
particularly alarmed by the fact that the action was
carried out against the backdrop of a renewed dialogue
on questions of security between officials of Israel and
of the Palestinian Authority. Such incidents, without
question, undermine the efforts of the international
community to break the impasse in the Palestinian-
Israeli crisis, to ease tension in the Middle East overall
and to create an environment for a renewal of the peace
process.

We vigorously reject any form of terror and
firmly condemn terrorist acts. At the same time, we
consider unacceptable the practice of extrajudicial
retaliations, especially since their victims are civilians,
including women and children, as was the case in the
recent Israeli strikes. That type of action does not
resolve the challenge of ensuring Israeli security and
can only help instigate a new round of violence. We are
convinced that, together with effective Palestinian
efforts to eliminate terrorist attacks, Israel must
abandon the aforementioned practices.

Russia vigorously appeals to both parties to the
conflict to show restraint and composure and to avoid
acts of force which could enable the extremist forces to
take the initiative, once again setting in motion a series
of events of confrontation and mutual hatred.
Simultaneously with an agreed decision on questions of
security and the fight against terrorism, it is essential to
find a way forward in other key areas: the reform of the
Palestinian Authority and a resumption of the political
process.

In this context, there is a vital need for
accommodation on the part of Israel, such as by
unfreezing financial assets destined for the Palestinian
Authority, lifting the restrictions on Palestinian
movement, reducing the number of roadblocks and
withdrawing Israeli troops from Palestinian towns.
Those steps could do a great deal to curb the activity of
extremist groups and to prevent the actions of suicide
bombers.

Russia is firm in its View that Security Council
resolutions adopted in recent months contain the
requisite political and legal basis both for lessening
confrontation and for initiating movement towards a
final settlement of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. We
believe that it is essential for us to focus our efforts on
implementing decisions already adopted, especially
since a broad-based international and regional
consensus has been forged on the fundamental
parameters for that effort.

For its part, Russia, together with the other
members of the "quartet" of international mediators
and other interested parties, will continue to make
active efforts to break the impasse in the Palestinian-
Israeli conflict and to proceed to a comprehensive and
just settlement in the Middle East.

