Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Stephen O'Brien, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, and Mr. Taye
Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for their briefings on the situation in the
Lake Chad region. I would particularly like to thank
Ms. Fatima Yerima Askira of the Borno Women
Development Initiative for her especially powerful
testimony, which is a source of inspiration for all of us.

As we have seen in recent weeks, Boko Haram,
while weakened, still has a real ability to conduct
targeted, lethal attacks, particularly in Borno state,
and, as we have just heard, the crisis it has provoked has
resulted in enormous humanitarian problems. Women
in particular have been targeted. This vulnerable
population is not safe anywhere, and we are well aware
of how difficult the situation in the camps for displaced
persons is. Too often, the Lake Chad basin is not on the
the major international media's radar screen, despite
the fact that it is one of the regions of the world most in
need of us and our engagement. In that regard, we are
actively encouraging the efforts of the countries of the
region and the United Nations and working with them
on three main fronts.

The first is military, with the goal of combating
Boko Haram with all the determination that requires
and weakening its ability to do harm. We know that
the military effort led by the countries of the region,
coordinated through a multinational hybrid force,
is a particularly difficult one both militarily and
financially. We are all united in the fight against
terrorism, whatever form it takes and wherever it
strikes. That is why France has expressed its solidarity
through its active support for the operations against
Boko Haram led by the countries of the region. In
particular, we have been supplying useful intelligence
to the countries involved as well as logistical support to
Chad and the Niger and training for the Cameroonian
forces. The current military operations have already
shown their effectiveness. Many soldiers have already
shed their blood in the regional offensive and we pay
them respectful tribute.

The second priority is the humanitarian one, for,
as we have said, the problems are huge. It is vital to
ensure that the United Nations focuses all its efforts,
in close collaboration with all its partners and the
local authorities, on responding to the people's needs.
In that regard, we hope that the humanitarian hubs
established by the United Nations in north-eastern
Nigeria as base camps for the humanitarian workers
will enable them to access the population more quickly
and will be operational as soon as possible. We are
especially grateful to Medecins Sans Frontieres and
all the humanitarian organizations that are working on
the ground. I should recall here that international law
applies to everyone and that all the parties are obliged to
allow the United Nations and its partners access to the
displaced. The countries involved in the crisis are on the
front lines when it comes to facilitating humanitarian
access, coordinating the various initiatives and ensuring
that aid for the displaced is not diverted. France will do
its full share in this collective effort. For 2017 alone
we have already contributed €l3.5 million in response
to the humanitarian needs of the countries affected by
Boko Haram.
The third priority is development in the regions
where Boko Haram has established itself. Without
that essential ingredient, this terrorist movement will
continue to prosper thanks to the poverty and sense of
exclusion that fuel it. That is why France has launched
the Lake Chad Initiative with funding amounting to
635 million. This major initiative seeks to promote the
economic recovery of the region and the creation of
employment, especially for young people, who are, it
should be remembered, the first target of Boko Haram.

In the context just referred to, the Lake Chad basin
region must be at the heart ofthe Council's priorities. As
the Secretary-General has urged, let us combine all the
military, humanitarian and development means at our
disposal in order to make a difference on the ground.
In that spirit, France strongly supports the plan for an
upcoming visit by the Security Council to the region.

