Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I want to thank
you, Mr. President, for having organized this open
meeting. We commend Japan's strong and constant
commitment to this crucial issue.

I shall deliver a condensed version of my
statement so that I can abide by the five-minute

recommendation. The full version will be distributed. I
will focus my remarks on the three areas identified in
the concept paper (S/2010/165): transparency,
interaction with non-members of the Council and
efficiency. But I will add what, in our view, is another
important aspect, that is, accountability, as enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations.

The note contained in document S/2006/507 was
not the end of the journey. Surely, we must build on
that important undertaking and acknowledge the fruits
that its implementation has generated so far, which are
rightly identified in the concept note. But we should
not lose our ambition. We should never give up efforts
to find further appropriate and effective ways to
improve the Security Council's working methods. In
that vein, I wish to recognize the important proposals
made by the delegations of the five small countries, as
well as to commend their continuous efforts and those
of other delegations in advancing this agenda at the
United Nations.

Elected members have historically been the ones
to push for change in the working methods of the
Council. We believe that they must build on available
experience, in particular that of other elected members,
to further this discussion and strengthen this agenda
when they serve in the Council.

Enhancing the transparency, efficiency and
accountability of the Council is the principal goal of
this exercise. It is a substantive concern, not a formal
one. The question is not just to open up the meetings of
the Security Council when the real decision-making
continues to be done behind closed doors. Nor is this a
matter of debating openly or interacting with the
general membership when decisions on matters
discussed have already been shaped. It is not a matter
of simply improving the image of the Security Council
before the general membership.

The real question is how to make the Council
more operational and efficient, with better use of time
and resources and the full engagement and
participation of all its members. How can we
strengthen its global influence as a body that acts on
behalf of all United Nations Members by bringing it
closer to them? The real question is, ultimately, how to
strengthen its authority through a more open and
participatory decision-making process, through a better
understanding of its decisions and through enhanced
accountability. In that regard, allow me to put forward
seven concrete proposals.

First and foremost, the Council and its members
must continuously strive to preserve the adequate
involvement of all Council members, improve
information exchange and promote participation and
initiative in its internal decision-making process.

Secondly, we should strive to revive fully rule 48.
The trend of meeting more and more often in public
should be continued and strengthened, while reducing
the number of informal consultations, which still today
represent half the number of meetings of the Security
Council.

Thirdly, direct dialogue with concerned States
and parties, including troop contributors, should be
increased. Enabling efficient interaction and
consultation to take place with those States and parties
in a formal setting of the Security Council or through
private consultations, Arria Formula meetings or other
creative formats, as appropriate, would immensely
assist the Council in the process leading to its
deliberations.

Fourthly, we must make sure that briefings by the
Secretariat on situations under its consideration are, as
a rule, delivered at Security Council meetings with the
participation of non-members of the Council, thus
avoiding, as much as possible, consultations of the
whole for that purpose.

Fifthly, we should value the participation of the
wider membership. That goal would be best served if,
in open thematic debates, Member States outside the
Security Council would speak first, and Security
Council members at the end, while allowing some time
between the meeting and the adoption of the possible
outcome, thus demonstrating that the Council is
listening and willing to incorporate valuable views
from the wider membership - which is precisely the
purpose of these open debates.

Sixthly, with regard to enhancing the role of
Council presidencies, the Council should encourage a
more active and substantive role in briefing delegations
outside the Council, in presenting personal assessments
on the work of the Council and in speaking to the press
as means of enhancing public visibility of Council's
work.

Finally, we believe it essential to give
accountability a fuller meaning. In that sense, we have
to identify practical ways of increasing the influence of
the general membership in determining the agenda of
the Security Council, just as we need to ensure better
and more transparent annual Council reporting to the
General Assembly. Reviving the former practice of
including monthly assessments by the Presidents that
reflect their perspectives on the substantive work of the
Security Council would contribute to that goal. In that
context, it is crucial to ensure that the Security Council
continues to hold open debates like this one to assess
regularly how its practice matches those aims and to
collect valuable inputs from the wider membership on
ways to improve it further.

My delegation is ready to cooperate with you,
Mr. President, with the Council and with all other
interested delegations to develop those and other
concrete ideas to further this agenda as our common
endeavour.

