The President:I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia,
Bangladesh, Canada, Colombia, Germany, India, Israel,
Italy, Liechtenstein, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Sierra
Leone, the Syrian Arab Republic, South Africa,
Switzerland, the United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda.

In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. John Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Holmes to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights.

It is so decided.
I invite Ms. Pillay to take a seat at the Council
table.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, in which he requests to be invited, in his
capacity as acting head of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
the consideration of the item on the Council's agenda.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Serrano.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I would like to welcome the presence of His
Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. I now
invite him to take the floor.


