Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
With the holding of the referendums in Southern Sudan
and Abyei on 9 January 2011, the Sudan will enter a
critical phase in its history. To reach that point,
numerous challenges must be overcome. The
atmosphere of trust between the parties must be
maintained and their commitment to respect the
timetable established by the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) must be upheld. A credible and
transparent vote must be guaranteed and negotiations
on post-referendum arrangements must be pushed
forward. Meanwhile, it is crucial to achieve a peace
agreement in Darfur by the end of this year.

Where are we now, two months before the date
planned for these referendums? At what stage is the
peace process in Darfur today? The detailed statements
just delivered by the Secretary-General, former
President Thabo Mbeki, Sudanese Minister for Foreign
Affairs Ahmed Karti and Secretary General of the
Sudan People's Liberation Movement Pagan Amum
were excellent, as they presented us with the real
situation on the ground. I would like to thank them for
this. Gabon's evaluation of the situation is along the
same lines.

With regard to the referendums in Southern
Sudan and Abyei, my delegation is glad to note that the
international community is increasingly mobilizing its
efforts to ensure that they go smoothly. This
mobilization strengthens the commitment of the parties
to spare no effort to ensure that the referendums take
place on the dates that have been set. Moreover, it also
serves to encourage the parties to engage in dialogue,
thus creating the climate of trust necessary for the
pursuit of the implementation of the CPA.

The statements just delivered by Minister Karti
and Secretary General Amum confirm the parties'
desire to reach an agreement. Gabon cannot fail to
welcome this, especially since the parties have also
undertaken, through a framework agreement, to
promote good neighbourly relations between the North
and the South whatever the outcome of the vote may
be. Gabon believes that this climate of trust would
benefit from being strengthened through the holding of
a meeting of the parties at the highest level, along with
international stakeholders, to reach agreement on all
points of disagreement, including the status of Abyei,
as planned by former President Mbeki.

The need for a credible and transparent vote in a
peaceful climate in Southern Sudan means that all the
electoral and security tools must be employed. From
this standpoint, the establishment of the Southern
Sudan Referendum Commission, despite some
difficulties, and the start, yesterday, of the voter
registration process, represent significant progress.
These two arrangements, which will enable the
referendum process to go smoothly, must be supported,
protected and monitored.

As indicated by the Secretary-General, it is
against that backdrop that efforts to support the smooth
running of the preparations are being carried out by the
United Nations Mission in Sudan (UNMIS) and the
United Nations Development Programme, in particular
in the logistical, technical and security areas. Those
efforts deserve our praise and support. Tensions that
may develop along the line of demarcation must be
controlled, as well those that may result from
population movements. Gabon calls on UNMIS and the
Joint Defence Board to be more vigilant and to explore
every possible measure in order to cope with any
eventuality.

At the second meeting of the Consultative Forum
on the Sudan, held in Addis-Ababa on 6 November, the
parties agreed to establish, by the end of the year,
working committees to finalize the preparations. That
decision can only reassure us with regard to the
ongoing process. In order to ensure the best
developments, we call on the parties to move forward
with the negotiations on post-referendum
arrangements, particularly the prominent issues of
border demarcation between North and South, freedom
of movement, resource sharing and problems of
citizenship.
Unlike the preparations in Southern Sudan, it
appears that those in Abyei, unfortunately, have made
but little progress. From the statements of Mr. Karti
and Mr. Amum, it appears there are some difficulties in
implementing the Abyei Protocol, and the parties have
not yet managed to define appropriate measures to
ensure peaceful coexistence between the main
communities living in the region. That is why Gabon
encourages the parties to do all they can to establish
the Abyei Referendum Commission. We also urge the
Abyei Joint Committee to speed up the talks on the
pending issues in order to reach an agreement between
the parties that will take into account the rights and
interests of the peoples living in the region.

The special attention the international community
has given the referendums in Southern Sudan and
Abyei should not distract us from the situation in
Darfur. Gabon deplores the fact that Darfur continues
to be the scene of violent armed combat, particularly
between the Government forces and the Justice and
Equality Movement. We encourage the various actors
in the peace process to unite their efforts to end the
fighting. We support the Sudanese Government's
efforts to promote peace in Darfur and reiterate our
support for the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur.

On a completely different level, it is crucial that
the peace process in Darfur be completed. From now
on the efforts of both Mr. Bassole, the Joint Mediator,
and the State of Qatar aimed at reaching an agreement
by the end of the year deserve our support. That
agreement should be as inclusive as possible.

In that connection, we are pleased that
negotiations with the Liberation and Justice Movement
are continuing. We call for the signing of a peace
agreement with the Government by December. We also
ask the Justice and Equality Movement, which has
already established contact with the mediation team, and
the Sudan Liberation Movement to join the negotiations.
Gabon hopes to see the Doha negotiations culminate in
an agreement in December - a critical milestone for
the launch at the beginning of 2011 of a Darfur-Darfur
conference, which should establish lasting peace in that
region via a global peace agreement.

The whole point of today's meeting - and I am
grateful to you for it, Mr. President - is to underscore
that the future of the Sudan hangs in the balance now
and that the peace process that began in 2005 with the

signing of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA)
has reached a critical juncture in its implementation.
Today the fears of the past must give way to the
aspirations for peace for the Sudan of tomorrow. I am
delighted to hear the parties say that the time for war is
past.

Gabon reiterates its faith in the ability of the
Sudanese authorities to rise to this challenge. We
remain confident in the commitment of the various
stakeholders in the peace process and the guarantor
countries of the CPA to work to ensure that the chain of
international solidarity with the Sudanese people
remains active despite the scale of the challenges to be
met.

