Mr. Skau (Sweden): Sweden voted in favour of
resolution 2351 (2017) because it represents a real
opportunity to resolve one of the most long-standing
disputes on the agenda of the United Nations. More
importantly it represents an opportunity to address the
plight of the people of Western Sahara. With today's
adoption, after a year that saw many challenges, we can
now turn the page. The resolution contains a number of
elements that we believe lay a path towards resolving
the issue of the status of Western Sahara.

First, today's resolution sends a strong, clear
and unified signal that the time has come to resume
negotiations that will lead to ajust, lasting and mutually
acceptable political solution that will provide for the
self-determination ofthe people ofWestern Sahara. The
resolution provides strong backing to the Secretary-
General and his proposal to relaunch the political
process with "a new dynamic and a new spirit". We
welcome the Secretary-General's direct engagement.
This is really diplomacy for peace in action with the
Secretary-General using his good offices to engage
actively with the parties and with the full support of the
Council. We fully agree with his view that a resumption
of the political process is urgently needed. In 2007 and
2008, four rounds of negotiations took place, but little
progress was made. Since then, the political process
has been at a standstill, despite the efforts of successive
Secretaries-General and Personal Envoys, to whom we
pay tribute.
Secondly, the resolution encourages a new Personal
Envoy of the Secretary-General to reinvigorate efforts
towards a political solution, and also calls upon the
parties and the neighbouring States to fully cooperate
with that envoy. We look forward to working together
with a new envoy once appointed.

Thirdly, the Council is also calling, for the first
time, for the meaningful participation of women in the
political process. The participation of women would
inject new energy into the political process.

Clearly, the resolution that we have just adopted
sends a strong signal to the parties that the time has come
to show renewed determination to engage in the political
process and for neighbouring States to contribute. As
the Secretary-General states in his report (S/2017/307),
difficult decisions will be required from all of us if the
current framework of negotiations is to achieve results.
While we all hope that these will be forthcoming, our
patience cannot last forever, and the Secretary-General
has noted that appropriate conclusions must be drawn
in the case of absence of progress. In that regard, we
note that all possible solutions, including the holding of
a referendum, must be kept on the table.

We also supported the resolution because it sent a
strong call to the parties that respecting the ceasefire
and related agreements is critical, and that violations
cannot be accepted. We welcome the fact that the
parties have now withdrawn from the buffer strip in
Guerguerat, thereby creating an environment conducive
to the relaunch ofa political process.

With this resolution, the Council also reiterates
its full support for the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO), which
plays a key role in a complex environment. The Mission
has gone through a challenging year, and we welcome
its return to full functionality. Equally important, the
resolution highlights the plight of Sahrawi refugees, the
deteriorating humanitarian situation and the potential
risk of reductions in food assistance given a lack of
funding. The Sahrawi refugees have lived for more
than 40 years under harsh conditions. This is one of
the Organization's oldest protracted refugee operations
and the second longest-running refugee situation
in the world. The resolution urges the international
community to provide new and additional voluntary
contributions to the humanitarian response.

We also supported the resolution because it
encourages the parties to respect and promote
human rights in Western Sahara and in the Tindouf
refugee camps. It also strongly encourages enhanced
cooperation with the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, including further visits to the region.

We had many reasons to support the resolution, but
that was the easy part. Without any doubt, we now have
a lot of work ahead of us. The resolution that we have
just adopted offers the best opportunity in a long time
to relaunch a political process that has been dormant
for almost a decade now. The path towards a mutually
acceptable political solution, which will provide for the
self-determination of the people of Western Sahara, is
now, with the adoption of this resolution, a little closer
in sight.

Finally - and like Uruguay - I would like to
commend the United States delegation, as penholder,
for their extraordinary leadership on this issue, as well
as their exemplary efforts in facilitating the negotiations
on this resolution.

