Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for informing us of that terrible incident.

I would like to begin by warmly thanking our
briefers, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Mr. Yury Fedotov
and Ambassador Van Bohemen and Ambassador Saikal.

France associates itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.

Two years since the establishment of the Government
of National Unity, it is important to underscore that
progress has been made. The Afghanistan National
Peace and Development Framework was adopted; a road
map that defines priority public policies for the years to
come was developed; and our dialogue aimed at halting
migration towards Europe resulted in the signing
of an agreement. Those efforts must be welcomed,
as they were recently at the Brussels Conference on
Afghanistan. France reiterates its full support for the
Afghan Government and encourages it to continue its
efforts to develop and stabilize the country.
The Afghan forces have also made considerable
progress. In that regard, I commend their commitment
and courage. However, the continuing deterioration
of the security situation is extremely worrying. In
addition to the almost daily confrontations, new attacks
by the Taliban and the Khorasan Islamic State - which
is to say, Da'esh - have served to confirm the
fragility of the situation since our previous debate in
September (see S/PV.7771). The recent deterioration
in the humanitarian situation, with the massive inflow
of refugees from Pakistan and Iran, also puts the
Afghan Government in a difficult position. In that
context, the first priority for Afghanistan is to have a
strong and united Government. That national unity is
the prerequisite for dealing effectively with security,
economic and development issues.

As Mr. Yamamoto said moments ago, the conflict
not only prevents Afghanistan from achieving its
economic potential, but it also bears an extremely high
a human cost, especially for children. That is why it is
urgent to relaunch discussions on a peace process led
by and for the Afghan people. France calls on all actors,
in particular the regional Powers, to use their influence
in order to make sure that the end of hostilities and
the resumption of peace negotiations become a reality.
We have a collective responsibility to actively support
the stabilization of Afghanistan and to contribute to
the establishment of lasting peace in the country, with
all the Afghan actors who have demonstrated their
serious commitment.

I would like to take advantage of the presence here
of the Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) to consider for a moment
the issue ofcombating drug trafficking. This is a subject,
as members are aware, which is of great concern to
France. As Mr. Fedotov said earlier, drug trafficking
fuels the illicit economy, corruption and the Taliban
insurgency, while also jeopardizing the health of many
Afghanis. The report prepared jointly by UNODC and
the Government of Afghanistan in October illustrates
the notable and worrying developments, which were
mentioned by Mr. Fedotov. As others mentioned before
me, France is concerned by the 43 per cent increase
in opium production and by the significant reduction
in the eradication of the areas where the opium poppy
is grown. There are enormous challenges in those
areas, whether related to the security situation or to
mobilizing the significant resources that those efforts
require. France therefore commends the technical
assistance provided by UNODC and encourages the
Afghan authorities to step up their efforts aimed at
reducing the production and trafficking of drugs.

United Nations support, through the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), remains
more essential than ever to accompany Afghanistan
in the search for greater peace and stability. Let me
conclude by reiterating my country's full support to
the Afghan Government and to the work of the United
Nations in support of its efforts. I would also like to pay
tribute to all of the UNAMA personnel for the work
they are undertaking in very difficult conditions.

