Ms. Lintonen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). Bulgaria,
Romania, Turkey, Croatia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia, Iceland, Norway,
Ukraine and Moldova align themselves with this
declaration.

The European Union welcomes today's open
debate, which is taking place at a time when the Great
Lakes region is at an important crossroads. The
European Union welcomes the positive outcome of the
Second Summit of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region, held at Nairobi last week. The
Pact on Security, Stability and Development in the
Great Lakes Region adopted at the Summit constitutes
a cornerstone for cooperation among the States of the
region.

The EU now looks forward to the implementation
of the protocols and programmes of action included in
the Pact through the regional follow-up mechanism. A
strong local commitment will be necessary, including
financial contributions and a sense of ownership by the
States of the region, notably in the areas of natural
resource management and regional cooperation.

The Summit and its positive outcome mark a new
beginning in Central Africa and build on the important
progress achieved in recent years. Starting more than a
decade ago, the crisis in the Great Lakes region, which
brought sorrow and suffering to millions of people,
overshadowed the whole of Africa. Today we are
witnessing a promising start towards a new and
positive dynamic, which will, hopefully, influence
Africa's overall development. We hope in particular
that the powerful lessons of partnership and conflict
resolution presented by the Nairobi Pact will inspire
efforts to resolve the remaining conflicts in the Great
Lakes region, including that in northern Uganda, which
has been of such great concern to so many in the
international community.

Trilateral cooperation between the United
Nations, the African Union and the European Union
has become a distinctive trait of conflict prevention in
Africa and in the Great Lakes in particular. Prior to the
Nairobi Summit, that cooperation had already
undergone significant tests, such as the birth of the
African mission in Burundi and its subsequent
transformation into a United Nations-led peacekeeping
mission, and the deployment, upon the request of the
United Nations, of an EU peacekeeping mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo during the electoral
period.

Last week's Conference was additional proof of
that cooperation and another important example of how
real progress can be achieved through effective
multilateralism. The EU would like once again to
express its special thanks to the Chairperson of the
African Union (AU) Commission and to the Secretary-
General of the United Nations and his Special
Representative, Ibrahima Fall, for their valuable efforts
to take the Conference forward.

The EU would like also to underline the role of
its own Special Representative for the Great Lakes,
Aldo Ajello, who was instrumental in bringing about
the idea of the Conference from its very inception.

Building on the Dar es Salaam Declaration of
2004, the Pact on Security, Stability and Development
rightly defines four major domains for future
cooperation in the Great Lakes region: peace and
security, development and good governance, economic
development and regional integration, as well as
humanitarian and social issues. Much has been
achieved since Dar es Salaam. From a European point
of view, let me recall in particular the following three
points.

First, there is the successful conclusion of the
transition process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Two weeks ago, we witnessed a historic
occasion: President Kabila's inauguration in Kinshasa,
an auspicious event that constituted the highlight of the
first democratic and transparent elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in more than
40 years.

There is truly a reason for congratulating the
Congolese people, and the parties and candidates who
participated in the elections, for having made this
landmark achievement possible. The assisting role of
the United Nations has been essential to this process.
The European Union, as well, supported the electoral
process and the Congolese people at this historic
juncture.

The transition in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo clearly shows that security and development are
inseparable. Inasmuch as one depends on the other,
governance is the key element that provides the basis
for progress in both fields. By taking the governance
agenda forward, the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the international
community are working closely together on developing
a shared governance vision, which may in time also
take the form of a governance compact.

Once again, we hope that our joint efforts in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will increase the
momentum for similar developments throughout the
entire region. Here, in the environment of a post-
conflict situation, security sector reform will always be
at the heart of governance initiatives. These challenges
are of high priority for future European Union
cooperation, and we are looking forward to engaging
soon in consultations with the new elected authorities
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Secondly, I would like to mention the successful
transition process in Burundi. The peace process
initiated in August 2000 with the Arusha Accord and
the political transition that followed it concluded
successfully with the installation of a democratically
elected Government of National Unity in August 2005.
Progress has been made in the political and security
situation, and military demobilization, supported by the
Multi-Country Demobilization and Reintegration
Programme funded by several European Union member
States, proceeded well. In order to consolidate the
demobilization achieved, a concerted effort is needed
to ensure that sustainable reintegration of ex-
combatants is prioritized in the period ahead in
Burundi and throughout the Great Lakes region.

The ceasefire agreement concluded with the
Forces nationales de liberation earlier this year opened
a window of opportunity for reaching a sustainable and
peaceful solution to this conflict. We are all aware of
the challenges linked to the implementation of this
agreement, and the European Union follows all
regional initiatives in this regard with great attention.

In consolidating these promising developments,
the European Union will remain a reliable partner,
fully committed to a constructive approach, including
in the fields of governance, rule of law and further
democratization of society.

Finally, let me underline the importance of the
improved regional dynamics, particularly in the Great
Lakes region proper. The successful transition in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has been possible
only thanks to the new dynamic of good-neighbourly
relations, which is increasingly visible at the regional
level. The remaining tensions and the violence in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic clearly reflect
the need to foster this development. In other regions,

we still face enormous challenges in cutting the supply
lines for armed rebel groups and in ending cross-border
violence. In the Great Lakes region, however, we have
seen that this plague of violence and impunity can be
reined in, provided that there is efficient and
trustworthy regional cooperation, which also includes
United Nations involvement.

The signing of the Pact on Security, Stability and
Development in the Great Lakes Region is a very
important step that consolidates the achievements made
in the areas of peace, democracy and development, not
only in the Great Lakes region but also for the whole of
Africa. The commitments for a policy of non-violence
and mutual defence in the resolution of conflicts, as
much as the emphasis on cooperation in democracy,
good governance, regional integration and the fight
against the illegal exploitation of natural resources,
define a clear way ahead.

On this encouraging path, the European Union
will continue to be an active partner supporting closer
cooperation and dialogue within the Great Lakes
region.

