Estonia recognizes the importance of United Nations peacekeeping operations and the crucial role that peacekeeping plays in achieving conditions for stability and lasting peace. I join others in expressing our gratitude to United Nations peacekeepers and honour the service of those who have made the ultimate sacrifice. In the middle of the ongoing pandemic, the responsibilities of United Nations peacekeeping missions have multiplied, as have the risks they are facing. Estonia, together with other European Union countries, has pledged its continued commitment to United Nations peacekeeping during the pandemic. Peacekeeping missions must be willing and able to continue to operate and deliver on their mandate, promote conflict resolutions, support host States and protect civilian populations. Estonia also continues to support the Action for Peacekeeping initiative and places high importance on its goals of strengthening protection of civilians, alongside advancing political solutions, promoting the women and peace and security agenda and improving effective the performance and accountability of peacekeeping. I have three questions. First, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) are mandated to monitor and document violations of international humanitarian law and violations and abuses of international human rights law. Information-gathering, analysis and early warning are crucial to the protection of civilians and peacekeepers alike. Could the briefers update us on recent developments in the implementation and strengthening of their mission-wide early warning strategies, including the establishment of the Information Acquisition Plan in UNMISS? Secondly, the MINUSMA and UNMISS mandates also include a sexual and gender-based violence dimension. How do the missions incorporate gender considerations into their operations? Perhaps the briefers could share good examples of how the force has responded to conflict-related sexual violence? I address my third question to all three missions. Host States must fulfil their obligations and facilitate access and freedom of movement for United Nations peacekeepers and their equipment, consistent with the mandate, including for medical evacuation, especially in the time of a health crisis. Violations of status-of-forces agreements are a serious problem that can disrupt mandate delivery and also threaten the safety and security of peacekeepers. The Security Council highlighted that issue recently in resolution 2518 (2020). How has COVID-19 impacted peacekeepers' freedom of movement and access, and the movement of the goods and equipment necessary for the fulfilment of their mandates?
