Mr. Cevik (Turkey): At the outset, I would like
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Kang and High
Commissioner Guterres for their briefings. Turkey
appreciates the tireless work of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
to alleviate the suffering of the millions of displaced
Syrians, as well as their advocacy in that regard.

I would like to share with the Security Council
what Turkey has been doing in response to the Syrian
crisis. The humanitarian operations of the Turkish
Government are carried out on three tracks. First, we
maintain an open border policy and comply with the
principle of non-refoulement. More than 1.6 million
Syrians are now living in Turkey. More than 239,000
Syrians are registered in 25 shelters. All their needs,
including food, non-food items, health and education
services as well as psychological assistance, vocational
training and social activities, are provided by the
Turkish Government.

Secondly, to assist Syrians who live in various
towns outside the shelters, we are taking measures
to provide them with basic services, including free
health care. In that respect, as a reflection of our strong
commitment to humanitarian values and principles, the
law on foreigners and international protection came
into force in April 2014. Furthermore, the temporary
protection regulation for Syrians came into force on
22 October 2014.

The third track pertains to extending humanitarian
relief items to the northern parts of Syria. Turkey has
continued to ensure that humanitarian relief reaches the
northern parts of the country through the border's zero
point, in conformity with its international obligations
and in support of the United Nations campaign. The
total value of the aid channelled to Syria through this
type of operation is in the range of $365 million.

Lastly, as the Secretary-General's monthly
reports have repeatedly stated, Turkey is also closely
cooperating with the United Nations to enable the
Organization's cross-border humanitarian operations
to succeed in northern Syria.

As resolution 2191 (2014) and numerous monthly
reports to the Council have suggested, the humanitarian
needs in Syria remain enormous, and much more needs
be done, especially in terms of scaling up cross-border
and cross-line humanitarian assistance. Turkey will
remain committed to continuing its contributions.
However, we also need to be on the receiving side
through burden sharing. The financial burden on the
Government is currently almost $6 billion, whereas
the total contributions we have received bilaterally and
multilaterally so far stand at $300 million.

I must stress that the current situation is not
sustainable, neither for Turkey nor for any other country
in the region. Syria's neighbouring countries, including
Turkey, have so far assumed an unfair share of the
humanitarian burden of the Syrian crisis. They should
not be left alone in coping with this humanitarian
tragedy, which requires a genuine partnership among
all members of the international community. That
partnership has to include addressing the needs of
Syrians who have been forcefully displaced, building
the resilience of host communities and increasing
resettlement efforts, while at the same time bearing
in mind the future human resources needs of Syrian
society for the sustainable development ofpost-conflict
Syria.

We are gravely concerned by the continuing
deterioration of the situation in Syria and increasingly
feel the strain of the current state of chaos. Instability
in the region - and the terrorist organization Daesh
in particular - represents a threat to international
peace and security. On this occasion, let me express
our strongest condemnation on the recent abduction
of Syrian Christians, as well as other barbaric acts
committed by Daesh.

In that regard, the international community needs a
comprehensive and coordinated strategy with political,
security and humanitarian pillars. The international
community has to make the crisis in Syria a shared
priority and address the root causes of the problem
in order to bring about a genuine political transition
based on the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex)
through the establishment of a transitional governing
body with authority to exercise full executive powers.
On 15 March we will mark the fifth year of this crisis.
It is high time for the international community to act.

I will refrain from taking Council members'
valuable time by responding to some of the accusations
and statements made against us. As we have done in the
past, we will continue to stand by the Syrian people in
these difficult times.

