Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to welcome the Prime
Minister of Ukraine, Mr. Arseniy Yatsenyuk, and thank
him for his clear briefing to the Security Council. The
implications of the events in Ukraine, particularly in the
region of Crimea, have reached a critical turning point,
which requires concerted efforts to defuse the crisis,
give precedence to the language of reason, and begin a
direct dialogue between the parties concerned in order
to end the crisis and prevent any further escalation.
That will require urgent action on the part of the
international community through the United Nations
and other international organizations, and bilateral
contacts aimed at creating an atmosphere conducive to
enabling the parties to overcome the causes ofthe crisis
and find a mechanism for the dialogue and negotiation
necessary to achieve solutions that will preserve the
interests of all parties concerned.

In this regard, Jordan welcomes the efforts of the
Secretary General of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the proposals
of its presidency, including on the establishment of an
international contact mechanism to facilitate dialogue
among the parties and the despach of a fact-finding
mission to Ukraine to gather information and evaluate
the security situation. We also support efforts to
implement these proposals as soon as possible, given
the current situation.

Jordan stresses the need to respect Ukraine's
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political, and
not to interference in its internal affairs. We also call
for compliance with the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, and the settlement
of disputes by peaceful means. Jordan stresses the
territorial integrity of Ukraine, all regions of which,
including Crimea, are subject to Ukrainian sovereignty,
in accordance with the provisions of international law
and the relevant international conventions, including
the 1994 Budapest Memorandum and the 1997 Treaty
on Friendship, Cooperation and Partnership between
the Russian Federation and Ukraine.

We also affirm that the international community
should help launch a political process in Ukraine that
will include all parties and communities, including
minorities, with a View to restoring peace, security and
the rule oflaw in Ukraine. Such a political process must
ensure the rights of all citizens of Ukraine and pave the
way for presidential elections in May.

Diffusing the crisis in Ukraine * particularly
the region of Crimea - and ensuring respect for its
Constitution and territorial integrity will prevent
a further escalation of the crisis and avert threats to
international peace and security. Jordan calls on all the
parties concerned to create an environment conducive
to resolving the crisis, refrain from escalation, and
keep all options open for solutions aimed at preserving
the rights and interests of all and restoring peace and
security in the region.

