Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for
convening the Force Commanders here this week.
We think that it is an extremely valuable event when
Force Commanders have a chance to come together and
discuss the common challenges they face in today's
environment. As missions deal with ever-greater
challenges, it is important for them to share experiences
and best practices. I also thank the Polish presidency
for convening today's meeting, in which we were able
to hear briefings from three great Force Commanders.
Not only are their briefings very important, but I
would like them and their colleagues in the Chamber to
convey how much the Council, and the United States,
appreciates everything that the troops under their
command do, all the sacrifices they make and their
dedication to duty.

As the challenges that we ask peacekeeping to
address have grown and the rate ofpeacekeeper fatalities
is on the rise, it is now more important than ever to
assess whether a peacekeeping mission is the right tool
at any given time for confronting specific challenges
to international peace and security. The United States
has expressed its strong support for seeing the United
Nations raise the bar for the performance of United
Nations peacekeeping by institutionalizing a culture
of performance, starting with the development and
implementation of a comprehensive performance policy
that identifies transparent standards for performance
and detailed measures to hold underperformers
accountable. But performance alone is not sufficient.

In April of last year, Ambassador Haley articulated
a set ofprinciples to the Council (see S/PV.7918) to guide
our review of peacekeeping missions as their mandates
come up for renewal. I believe that those principles
are a good prism through which to review mandates,
as well as a reflection of our collective discussions in
the Council. Much of what I have heard from Council
members here today is also reflected in those principles,
which are that peacekeeping missions must support the
achievement of political solutions; missions must have
the cooperation of host countries; exit strategies must
be clearly articulated and mandates must be realistic
and achievable. Where such conditions are not present,
we must carefully consider whether or not the current
mandates continue to make sense, how the Council
should adjust them and whether there are alternative
and more appropriate conflict-resolution tools.

Ihave just a few questions for the Force Commanders
who briefed us today, keeping those principles in
mind and articulating a larger philosophical view of
peacekeeping and how their missions fit into that prism.
With regard to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, is its
mandate realistic and achievable? It has a particularly
difficult mission. If not, bearing in mind that the Force
Commander will endeavour to carry out whatever
tasks we entrust to him, which tasks does he feel are
really unachievable?

With regard to the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, does the Force Commander believe
that the Mission's peacekeepers are operationally
prepared to meet its requirements, particularly where
the protection of civilians is concerned? What does he
think the Mission would need to achieve operational
readiness? The question of operational readiness is one
we could perhaps ask all missions. I welcome the Force
Commanders' comments on what is needed to achieve
full operational readiness.
Lastly, does the security situation in Darfur require
a strong military force presence or could police, for
example, assume a more robust role?

I would once again like to thank the presidency for
convening today's meeting.

