Mr. Morales Moscoso (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation thanks the Secretary-General
ofthe United Nations, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his detailed
briefing and the delegation of Japan for coordinating
today's open debate in the framework of its presidency
of the Security Council.

Guatemala aligns itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

We view with great concern the recent acts of
violence and terrorism that have occurred in the past
few weeks in the Middle East, including in Israel and
Palestine, which is why we consider today's open debate
as timely. We wish to take this opportunity to reject
and vigorously condemn the attack on the shopping
and amusement mall in Baghdad, reiterating our
firm repudiation of all forms of terrorism. Guatemala
expresses the deepest solidarity with the people and
the Government of Iraq for these reprehensible attacks
in which men, women and children were killed.
Furthermore, we are concerned at the remark made by
Mr. Jan Kubis, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Iraq, that attacks on shrines have the
objective of igniting sectarian tensions in the country.
This could have devastating effects, with a return to the
dark days of sectarian conflict in Iraq.

Guatemala rejects and strongly condemns the
attack that occurred on 28 June at the Atatiirk Airport,
in Istanbul, in which numerous deaths and wounded
were reported. We express the deepest solidarity with
the people and the Government of Turkey for such a
reprehensible attack aimed at civilians.

With respect to the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic, we welcome all efforts to achieve the
keenly awaited peace in the country, in particular the
efforts of the International Syria Support Group to
hold meaningful negotiations with a view to finding
a political solution to the conflict. Since March 2011,
more than a quarter ofa million Syrians have died, more
than 1 million have been injured, and 4.8 million have
been forced to leave the country, while 6.5 million have
been internally displaced, making the Syrian situation
the largest displacement crisis in the world.
In that regard, we share the concern expressed by
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
with respect to the unfolding situation in Aleppo, in
particular that of the approximately 300,000 people
trapped in the eastern part of the city, as a result of
heavy fighting along the Castello road, the only road in
or out of that part of the city. Heavy fighting in recent
days has continuously exposed civilians to the risk of
death and injury and prevented humanitarian access
to people in need of assistance. Air strikes, shelling
and heavy fighting have caused many deaths and
wounded as well as damage to schools, hospitals and
other civilian infrastructure. It has also hampered relief
operations. All of the foregoing is in clear violation
of human rights, international law and international
humanitarian law.

On the issue of Israel and Palestine, Guatemala
strongly condemns the murder of the 13-year-old girl
stabbed to death in her home in the settlement of Kiryat
Arba and the murder of a 48-year-old rabbi, shot by a
Palestinian commando. These are deplorable events
that should not recur. At the same time, Guatemala
shares the Secretary-General's concern at the decision
by the Israeli authorities to move forward with its
plans to build in the West Bank settlement of Ma'ale
Adumim and in East Jerusalem. This affects the faith of
the parties in negotiations and the vision of two States
living side by side in peace and generating stability in
the region.

The international community should not lose hope
that an agreement between Israel and Palestine could be
negotiated. For that to happen, however, the necessary
political will is required. Accordingly, I would like to
echo the words of the Secretary-General delivered at
Tel Aviv University on 27 June. He said that

"responsibility is more than taking ownership for
one's actions - it is about seeing your actions
through the prism of other's concerns - and
seeking to understand their needs as your own. This
wisdom teaches us that we cannot be a world of 'us
and them'. We must be a world of 'we the peoples'
as the Charter of the United Nations describes".

All of us have a responsibility to build that future
in harmony.

