Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): It is an honour
to participate in this open debate on countering the
narratives and ideologies of terrorism. I would like,
on behalf of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Haiti, to welcome this timely initiative of
the Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt.

The Government of the Republic of Haiti has always
vigorously condemned terrorism, which can never be
justified, whatever its motivation or origin may be. We
are therefore pleased to participate in this discussion on
the terrorist threat, the attraction of terrorism's hateful
and intolerant ideologies, and the measures to be taken
to counterbalance the ideological weight of the terrorist
discourse, with a View to defeating the terrorist network,
including global Islam-inspired terrorism.

Never has the threat been so formidable. It has
steadily grown in scope and severity, as evidenced by
the list of the major attacks and bloodshed that have
been encountered in several capitals in recent years:
New York, Madrid, Bamako, Tunis, London, Istanbul,
Paris and Brussels, to name a few. No region, no
country is safe from extremist violence. It undermines
political stability, national cohesion, prospects for
development and indeed the very foundations of some
Member States. That is why this global threat requires
a global response.

In adopting the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy a decade ago, the United Nations
adopted an action plan that, in order to be effective in
the long term, requires that each State understand this
global threat better and implement a response strategy
that is adapted and constantly updated.

The State has a major role to play in the unstinting
fight that must be waged against terrorism, which, today,
has resources, networks, affiliates and unprecedented
means of destruction. This combat should, of course,
be conducted in compliance with the rule of law.
Strengthening security must be done through the
mechanisms of the rule of law. We believe that effective
counter-terrorism should not be achieved at the expense
of distorting the balance between security and freedom.

The experience of recent years has shown that the
strategies to meet the challenge of terrorism simply
through a military or police approach are limited. In
considering the results of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, the Secretary-General rightly underscored
that the international community has been too inclined
to prioritize the military and police pillars of action. It
is fitting, of course, to welcome the results achieved in
the military response, which made it possible for the
international coalition to halt the galloping territorial
expansion of the jihadist terrorist movement in
Iraq and Syria, but that approach is far from having
definitively slowed its growth. Given the developments
related to this new type of terrorism, which attacks
nations without distinction, it is clear that a response
to terrorism cannot lie solely in repression. Repressive
action, as indispensable as it may be, must be
underpinned by prevention. That is why we support the
Secretary-General's Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism, which appropriately stressed the need to
refocus priorities and focus more on the reasons why
violent extremist groups are attractive.

Extremist political violence is often perpetrated
by ideologically motivated individuals. Based on
ideologies of hatred and intolerance, those groups
distort and exploit religion. They trample on basic
human rights, attack universal democratic values and
the very principles on which international peace and
security are based. The international community must,
therefore, carry the fight against terrorism into the
battlefield of ideas.

For that reason, the Republic of Haiti attaches the
utmost importance to the establishment of international
mechanisms, complete with resources and appropriate
cooperation mechanisms, to counter ideological
discourses that may lead to radicalization. It is
crucial to significantly reduce terrorism's ideological
appeal, because, to a large degree, that is what gives
it its power. Strengthening international, regional and
subregional cooperation in that regard is vital. It is to
be hoped that the United Nations and its institutions
and specialized agencies, including UNESCO, will
support education and awareness programmes initiated
by States, including in the developing countries, with
the aim ofraising consciousness of the risks and threats
posed by terrorist ideologies.

For its part, the Government of the Republic of
Haiti, which fully supports the fight against terrorism
within the framework of the rule of law, is working
to modernize its judicial system by strengthening the
provisions thatwill enable it to punish not only incitement
to acts to terrorism and their glorification, but also
the propagation of extremist ideas, the dissemination
of ideologically driven violence, and narratives of
religious intolerance and incitement to racial hatred.
Together with the State, all our social stakeholders will
be part of that strategy, including schools.

Lastly, we cannot ignore the close relationship
between the fight against terrorist ideologies and the
fight to eliminate the conditions that allow extremism
to thrive. The international community must be aware
that keeping terrorism and its supporting ideologies
in check also demands the settlement of protracted
regional conflicts and eliminating the sources oftension
that terrorist movements shrewdly exploit. Similarly,
persistent, even increasing, poverty, inequality and
social and economic difficulties, and the feelings of
exclusion and marginalization among peoples and
disadvantaged groups are all vulnerability factors,
particularly in societies in developing countries,
especially in fragile States. They cannot be ignored
in the ideological battle against the proponents of
violent extremism.

The United Nations as a whole, and the Security
Council in particular, must continue to play their
driving role in this fight, because terrorism is primarily
a threat to international peace and security. But we must
not lose sight of the fact that the threat is global and
that the struggle must be for the long haul, based on a
multidimensional strategy, not the least part of which is
its ideological aspect. This fight is everyone's business.

The Republic of Haiti believes firmly that
success in this fight will depend in large part on our
collective ability to build open, equitable, inclusive and
pluralistic societies, based on full respect for human
rights and offering economic opportunities for all,
as the Secretary-General has rightly reminded us. In
that spirit, the Government of Haiti will continue to
support all United Nations initiatives that seek to boost
international mobilization aimed at finding effective
solutions to the problems that fuel terrorism and
especially to reduce the attraction of the ideologies that
underpin it.

