Mr. Diallo (spoke in French): I thank you, Madam,
for your leadership of the Council this month. I also
thank Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Process, for his comprehensive briefing.

The volatile regional environment should not
deflect our attention from the Israeli-Palestinian track.
Finding a durable and just solution to this conflict is no
less important. The relative calm that prevails for now
could signal more turbulence.

We welcome the announcement in Amman with
regard to the conclusion of an agreement setting the
bases for the resumption of talks between Israelis and
Palestinians. The Committee appreciates the intense
diplomatic activity of the American Secretary of State,
John Kerry, who enjoys the support of the Arab League
follow-up committee, as well as of many heads of State.

It is imperative for the international community
to pursue its commitment in order to ensure that the
parties live up to their promises, negotiate in good faith
and refrain from any action that could jeopardize the
negotiation process. Just last month, the Committee
convened in Beijing an international meeting on the
Israeli-Palestinian peace talks. The large number of
participants and the extensive media coverage showed
that the international community sees this as a priority
issue. The Committee sincerely thanks the Chinese
Government for hosting thr event and is grateful to the
Chinese experts for their active participation.

The need to redouble longstanding efforts to
reach a negotiated two-State settlement was widely
recognized among participants at the conference.
Speakers appreciated the renewed engagement of the
United States and believed that the energetic diplomatic
efforts of Secretary of State John Kerry should be given
a chance to show results. They appreciated China's
efforts and initiatives and welcomed the dynamic role
played by the League of Arab States. Nonetheless, they
regretted that other key stakeholders, such as the Council
and the Quartet, remained on the sidelines. They were
also deeply troubled by Israel's refusal to abide by
its legal obligation to halt all settlement activities, to
respect the 1967 borders and to free prisoners, which
blocks any progress.

July marks nine years since the issuance of the
International Court of Justice advisory opinion (see A/ES-10/273)that reaffirmed the illegal nature of
all settlements and called on Israel to dismantle the
separation wall and compensate Palestinians for all
damages. It has been 34 years since the adoption of
resolution 446 (1979), in which the Security Council
called on Israel to stop transferring settlers to
occupied territories. Both texts remain dead letters.
The construction of the wall continues, causing grave
humanitarian hardship. The first quarter of 2013 saw
an alarming rise in settlement activity, as compared to
2012.

The recent European Commission directive that
bans all European Union funding for Israeli projects
in the settlements is a first concrete step towards
preventing the development of those settlements.
We welcome it and hope it will be followed by other
measures. It sends a strong message and shows that the
international community has ran out of patience with
regard to Israeli settlements. The Israeli leadership
should pay heed and act wisely if they do not wish
to irreparably harm the efforts being made to restart
negotiations.

The Committee will continue to remind States
Members of the United Nations of their obligation to
ensure Israel's compliance with international law. It
will keep calling for the lifting of the siege on Gaza, in
line with resolution 1860 (2009). We hope that, despite
regional upheavals, Palestinians will not lose sight of
the goal of reconciliation, without which there can be
no two-State solution, as the deadline for elections
and for constituting a Government of national unity
approaches.We will continue to mobilize assistance for
Palestinian State institutions. The Committee can be
relied upon to support all efforts to relaunch good-faith
negotiations.

