At the outset, I wish to congratulate the Russian Federation on its presidency of the Security Council this month, and I thank you, Sir, for convening this important debate. I also thank the Secretary-General for his valuable briefing and the Executive Director of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) for her briefing, as well as all those who have taken the floor. The twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) is being commemorated against the backdrop of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which has had a negative impact on women and girls. The occasion provides an important opportunity to intensify efforts to implement the women and peace and security agenda. There is no doubt that the best way out of this global health crisis is to intensify our joint efforts in a spirit of cooperation and international solidarity to overcome this turbulent time. In line with the women and peace and security agenda, we stress that it is vital for women to participate fully and meaningfully in preventing conflicts and crises and in devising strategies for conflict resolution and post-conflict recovery. We must use women's strengths in order to address challenges to international peace and security, including by increasing the number of women involved in peace processes. To that end, Qatar supports the Secretary-General's system-wide strategy on gender parity in all areas, including peace and security. Qatar has supported and implemented the women and peace and security agenda since its adoption, upholding its commitment to the principle of gender equality, the promotion and protection of the human rights of women and the maintenance of international peace and security. Qatar co-chairs, with Ghana, the Group of Friends for Gender Parity at the United Nations and has supported the global study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2005) on women and peace and security. Aware of the need to strengthen the role of women in peacemaking, Qatar strives to ensure that women are involved in the peace processes for which it serves as mediator. In that connection, Qatar strived to ensure that women were fully represented at the Afghan peace talks held in Doha in September 2020. Three Afghan women members of the negotiating team of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan participated in the negotiations. Similarly, participation by women in the negotiations held in Doha in July 2019 was exemplary. Afghan women played an important role in the negotiations and had a significant impact in promoting a productive environment for dialogue. Qatar continues to support Afghan peace negotiations and remains convinced that the involvement of women helps to ensure the success of mediation processes, guarantee the rights of women and girls, and promote the advancement of women and their active participation in society, as that is an integral part of any agreements that are negotiated and reached. As part of our ongoing contribution to multilateral international action, and on the occasion of the fifth anniversary of the youth, peace and security agenda, Qatar will host the High-Level Global Conference on Comprehensive Peace Paths for Youth in May 2021 in Doha. The Conference will focus on the participation of young women in peace processes. We have taken pains to ensure gender equality at all stages of the Conference, from the preparatory stages to the Conference itself to the follow-up of its outcomes. It is our great pleasure to hold this conference in cooperation with our partners from Finland and Colombia, the Office of the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth and the Education Above All Foundation in Qatar. In conclusion, Qatar renews its commitment to continuing to cooperate with all stakeholders in the women and peace and security agenda and providing the support needed to ensure its implementation, thereby contributing to international peace and sustainable security.
