Mr. Anjo (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate the United States of America
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, and to thank the delegation for
its work in organizing the Security Council activities
designed to coincide with the start of the sixty-ninth
session of the General Assembly. We are also grateful
to the delegation of the United Kingdom for its work
in leading the Council last month. My delegation also
commends the Secretary-General's report submitted
to the Council on children and armed conflict for the
period from January to December 2013 (S/2014/339)
and the important role played by the Office of the
Secretary-General in the issue of children and armed
conflict and in monitoring children's situations and
their protection.

Iraq is confronting enormous challenges resulting
from the vicious attacks aimed at crippling its transition
to democracy and our Government's efforts to establish
order and stability throughout the country, and
derailing Iraq's ability to enjoy its economic, social and
political human rights. At this point, we would like to
comment on the section on Iraq in the report. We agree
with the observation in paragraph 70 on the increase
in the number of security incidents in 2013. These are
the result of terrorist organizations' direct targeting of
residential areas where there are markets, schools and
hospitals, killing and injuring thousands of innocent
civilians, including children. Neither Al-Qaida nor the
Islamic State in Iraq has hesitated to cold-bloodedly
declare their responsibility for these attacks.

Regarding paragraph 71 of the report, on the
association of children with armed groups, we would
like to point out that this phenomenon contravenes
our military service law, which prohibits military
service for those under 18. My Government is also
continuing to take every possible measure to prevent
the recruitment of children by armed groups, through
efforts to eliminate all circumstances that might be
conducive to such recruitment. In recent years many
armed groups using terrorism to achieve their goals
have worked to recruit scores of children and exploit
their innocence by using them to plant explosives or
assist others in doing so. The Iraqi Government has
taken various steps to combat such acts, including
developing programmes and enacting legislation aimed
at preventing the exploitation of children, and providing
the financial resources needed for this. Iraq's penal code
and counter-terrorism laws have established basic rules
designed to punish those recruiting anyone, including
children, into such criminal terrorist activities.
The Government of Iraq has continued to protect
its citizens in general, and in particular to address the
negative effects of terrorism on children and provide
them with protection from its attacks. We have worked
to encourage a culture that promotes and protects
human rights, based on international standards. Within
the framework of the United Nations, the Government
is working relentlessly to draft and endorse resolutions
on counter-terrorism, as well as working with its
international partners on providing security to the
Iraqi people and protecting our children from terrorist
attacks.

