Mr. Reynders (Belgium) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank the Dominican Republic
for convening today's meeting. Belgium welcomes the
role of the Security Council in addressing the impacts
of climate change on international peace and security.
I also thank those who spoke at the beginning of the
meeting for setting the stage for today's debate.

Today we are seeing mounting evidence of how
climate change increases instability and insecurity
in places as diverse as the Sahel, the Middle East,
Central Asia and the Caribbean and Pacific island
States. More frequent and intense extreme weather
events, such as hurricanes and droughts, as well as sea-
level rise, exacerbate sociopolitical tensions around
the world. Given the growing scientific evidence of
the disastrous consequences of climate change, there
should no longer be any doubt as to the relevance of
the issue to the Security Council. The international
community must come together to urgently find an
ambitious common response. As policymakers, we
have a tremendous responsibility. We must heed the
call of future generations.

I would like to address the following three issues:
the importance of a preventive approach, ways for the
Council to better take into account the link between
climate change and security, and the response of the
United Nations system as a whole.

First, in order to effectively discharge the mandate
set out in the Charter of the United Nations, the Council
must pay attention to early warning signs and develop
greater sensitivity to situations that could lead to
conflict, including climate-related situations. Conflict
prevention is not only a virtuous policy; it is also a
profitable strategy on many levels. In particular, it
makes it possible to invest resources in positive and
forward-looking actions, rather than having to intervene
later through peacekeeping operations, which are more
costly and less effective.

Secondly, as to how the Council should approach
the problem, it is high time for climate-related risks
to be reflected in its regular work. Belgium attaches
great importance to the integration of climate risks into
country or regional discussions, including with regard
to the renewal of peacekeeping mandates. I welcome the
recent resolutions that have already taken that factor into
account. I am thinking in particular of the Sahel, where
conflicts between herders and farmers have broken out
because of the lack of water, and Afghanistan, where
drought is causing destabilizing migration flows. It is
clear that taking climate risks into account is no longer
an option but a necessity, if the Council is to assume
its full responsibility and strengthen its capacity to
prevent conflicts.

Thirdly, for Belgium, the time has come to further
organize around that issue within the United Nations
system by bringing together expertise from the various
United Nations agencies and departments in order
to cross-reference existing knowledge and make it
operational. An institutional focal point - a clearing
house - would respond to the urgent need to provide the
Council with adequate risk analysis and management
strategies for countries and regions where that is
relevant. That could be done within the Secretariat or
through a format that also involves Member States, as
is the case with subsidiary bodies.

An annual thematic briefing would be a good point
of departure. Detailed analyses and regular reporting
by the Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General and peace operations in the regions concerned
would also be useful, and Belgium welcomes cases
where that is already being implemented. But let us be
clear - it is a question not of unnecessarily burdening
the institutional machinery, but of finding ways to
bring together the available know-how, in accordance
with a unique and integrated United Nations approach.

In the run-up to the Secretary-General's summit
on climate change in September 2019 will again be
a pivotal year for our response to climate change. Its
consequences will be all the more catastrophic if our
actions lack ambition. We must do more to mitigate
catastrophic climate change and fully implement the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change, but we must also
adapt to a warming world.

The results of the twenty-fourth Conference of the
Parties in Katowice, Poland, are an important step in
building adaptive capacity, increasing resilience to
climate change and reducing vulnerability to climate
change. Our Council must also contribute to that effort
by taking a greater interest in the link between climate
and security and more closely involving the United
Nations system as a whole. That is why today's debate
is crucial. I am convinced that it will continue here
and elsewhere.
