Mr. Vieira (Brazil): Let me first commend Belgium for having organized this open debate and the briefers for their insightful presentations. Coming to terms with the past to work towards a just and peaceful future is at the core of transitional justice strategies and should inform the Security Council's discussions on post- conflict strategies. Brazil would like to highlight four main points in today's debate. First, there are no universal recipes for transitional justice processes. In order to be effective, transitional justice strategies should not only take into account the local context, but also be based on widespread consultations among different sectors of societies emerging from armed conflict. Moreover, national and local actors, especially women and _ youth, should be directly involved in the implementation of transitional justice programmes in order to ensure their sustainability. Developing an approach that is sensitive to the situation of the most vulnerable groups in post-conflict settings is crucial to guaranteeing an inclusive, locally owned transitional process while avoiding stigmatization. In that regard, international efforts should aim at assisting countries to develop the necessary national capacity to spearhead the process. Secondly, despite the uniqueness of each process, they all share basic values. Aspirational goals from early experiences gradually moved into binding legal rules, consolidating the parameters for current and future exercises. As the guidance note of the Secretary- General on the United Nations approach to transitional justice of March 2010 points out, international legal obligations frame transitional justice measures. International law envisages guarantees of the non-repetition of violations and sets the basis to fight impunity for international crimes, even in times of political transition. Most important, the axiological foundations and legal grounds of transitional justice make it not a matter of whether but of how and when to implement it, which leads to our third point. Transitional justice is a constant balancing exercise. The imperatives of peace, justice, law and politics may be hard to reconcile in practice. The common answer that they are complementary to one another is a useful guideline, although not a concrete or detailed one. Transitional justice strategies should encompass potential tensions between peace and justice and find ways to overcome them. Criminal prosecution for the most serious crimes can be combined with acts of reconciliation by the perpetrators of minor offenses and a fair programme of reparations for the victims. Calibrating the variety of transitional justice mechanisms is key to achieving balance among seemingly contradictory goals. Fourthly, the combination of different mechanisms only partially addresses the challenges of building peace. Transitional justice should be integrated into broader peacebuilding efforts. Both security- sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes may benefit from well-planned transitional justice strategies. Vettingprogrammes may gather information and, at the same time, contribute to non-recurrence. However, if poorly designed, those tools may undermine one another. The prospect of criminal prosecution might negatively impact DDR, whereas reintegration might generate resentment if not accompanied by reparations for victims. All those initiatives must be mutually supportive in order to build resilient, peaceful and just societies. Transitional justice is a multidimensional endeavour. Significant aspects of the matter fall outside the mandate of the Security Council, particularly in situations that do not amount to armed conflict. While recognizing the limitations of the Council with regard to this particular issue, we consider that it can make an important contribution to transitional justice processes in post-conflict societies, including by encouraging the incorporation of transitional justice mechanisms into peace agreements and designing the mandate of United Nations missions in support of the implementation of transitional justice processes.
