Mr. Prosor (Israel): Mr. President, I would like
to congratulate you on your stewardship of the Security
Council this month and your able guidance of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.

Allow me to begin on a personal note. I speak
before this Council not only as the Permanent
Representative of the State of Israel, but also as a
father. I am deeply proud that I raised my three
children - Lior, Tourer and Oren - in Jerusalem.
However, my children grew up in a reality where
abnormality had become the norm. From infancy, they
saw that every educational institution had to be
protected with an armed guard, from preschools to
kindergartens to high schools. The international
community cannot accept this abnormality as a normal
way of life. No family, no child should live under those
circumstances.

Children are the primary victims in armed
conflict. They are its targets and, increasingly, its
instruments. Thousands have been subjected to sexual
exploitation, prostitution, rape and sexual violence.
More than a quarter of a million minors are currently
being exploited as child soldiers, recruited at such a
young age that they are robbed of their schooling and
their youth.

Israel assigns great importance to protecting
children in armed conflict and is a party to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocol on the involvement of children in armed
conflict. Israel is proud to have co-sponsored today's
resolution and commends Germany for initiating it.

We are encouraged by the progress that has been
made on this issue, as is highlighted in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2011/250). Thousands of children
conscripted into armed groups have been released in
conflict zones around the world. To that effect, the
United Nations has signed new action plans over the
past year in the Philippines, Afghanistan and Chad. We
welcome those developments and call for the
agreements to be implemented without delay. However,
releasing those children is not enough. The
international community must make special efforts to
reintegrate them into society so that they can hope for a
future outside of combat.

I would like to extend Israel's appreciation to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Radhika
Coomaraswamy, for her significant role in carrying out
these efforts. We sometimes find that her reports could
benefit from a wider range of resources. However, we
salute Special Representative Coomaraswamy's
professionalism and dedication to protecting children
in conflict around the world.

My statement would not be complete without
reiterating the pressing need to protect children in the
face of terrorism and extremism. While this is a global
concern, the situation in our region provides a clear
picture of this multifaceted challenge.

In the Middle East, terrorists continue to single
out children in their attacks. My country was numb
with horror last March when Palestinian terrorists
brutally murdered five members of an Israeli family in
Itamar as they slept in their home. The terrorists went
from room to room, using knives to carry out their
appalling crime. They killed both parents; they killed
their two children, ages 4 and 11; and, in an act of
unspeakable cruelty, they murdered the youngest
member of the family, a three-month old baby girl.

That is just one of many attacks that terrorists
have launched against Israeli children. Last April,
Hamas deliberately targeted a yellow school bus in
southern Israel. They struck the bus using an anti-tank
missile, completely destroying it and killing a 16-year
old boy. That attack underscores the daily reality facing
children throughout much of southern Israel, where the
threat of rocket fire is ever present. Since the
beginning of the year, some 290 rockets and mortars
have been fired into Israel - an average of nearly two
attacks every single day. This alters the fabric of life.
In the past six months, more than 100,000 Israeli
children have been kept out of school on numerous
occasions to avoid the danger of rockets.

There is no monopoly on the suffering caused by
terrorism. All children in our region suffer. Hamas and
other terrorist groups deploy minors as suicide
bombers and recruit them to carry out attacks against
Israeli civilians and soldiers. They use children as
human shields; they place children in harm's way by
using schools, hospitals and civilian neighbourhoods as
a base for their activity.

The Council has a responsibility to address the
broader context in which children are used and abused
in armed conflict. In schools, camps and mosques and
through the media, generation after generation of
children across the Middle East have been taught to
hate, vilify and dehumanize Israelis and Jews. This
prevents them from becoming contributing members of
a global, tolerant society. For the sake of those children
and for the future of our region, the international
community has a duty to end this culture of incitement.
We need education that promotes peace instead of hate,
tolerance instead of violence and mutual understanding
instead of martyrdom.

The child victims of terrorism are real. Each one
has a name and a family; each one has their own
dreams and aspirations. The international community
cannot accept the perpetuation or justification of
terrorism in the Middle East or anywhere else. The
next generation of children in our region will deserve a
brighter future without conflict, without terror and
without hate.

