Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month, and to thank you for all the
meetings that you have organized, especially those
pertaining to Africa. We meet once again here in this
Chamber to discuss an African topic, which is how to
silence the guns and put an end to conflicts and civil
wars in Africa?

I would like to touch upon a number of points.

The first pertains to the nation State. All social,
ethnic and religious groups merge in a nation State to
become a single nation of citizens with equal rights and
responsibilities. A nation State is based on transparent
and robust administration, with independent
accountability mechanisms, an active security and
military architecture, a strong army subject to strict
military law and a strong economy. Those are all
conditions for the peaceful coexistence of nations
around the world. The nation State is the basis for
stability and could put an end to all the root causes of
conflicts and civil wars.

The lack of a nation State poses a threat to stability
and peace, even more than international conflicts
themselves. The alternative to the nation State is
fragmented ethnic or religious factions that strive to
survive through distorted economies based on conflict
and ambiguous goals. There are numerous examples of
the fact that States and nations cannot be built that way.
Those who call for the fragmentation of nation States
will reap what they sow.

My second point concerns national reconciliation.
Individuals and groups can achieve reconciliation within
a nation State. Reconciliation requires compromise
and mutual concessions to tackle the root causes of a
specific conflict or dispute. It is certainly important
to achieve national compromise through a clear road
map based on national interests, rather than foreign
intervention. Reconciliation should take place at the
social level first, and then move to the political level.
Reconciliation rejects intolerance and hatred and calls
for tolerance and peaceful coexistence in the interest
of future generations based on fair foundations. It is
not enough to have peace and security; the groundwork
must be laid for the modern State.

Thirdly, with regard to foreign interference, guns
will not be silenced by foreign intervention and we
will never be able to silence guns if there is foreign
intervention in domestic conflicts. Any kind of foreign
intervention only complicates matters further. Foreign
Powers often usurp and exploit the complexities
of the social fabric, exacerbate domestic conflicts
and aggravate historical disputes between various
religious or ethnic groups within a specific nation. The
outcome is therefore a conflation of priorities and a
prolongation of conflicts. External players, including
non-State actors, have always played a negative role
in the escalation of conflicts and their evolution into
international conflicts, rather than promoting the quest
for solutions, due to competition among the various
foreign players with diverging interests.

Fourthly, as to development and its political effects,
Africa has an important global stature and history. It is
rich in natural resources, people and heritage. However,
many of its countries are facing conflicts, civil wars
and acute divisions. That demonstrates the agency of
historical, political and human flaws, in addition to
the old and new versions of colonialism, which is also
playing a role in that dynamic.

We would like to stress the following. We must
recognize that Africa is not immature. It is not possessed
by foreign Powers that dictate African policies. There
should be a genuine will to stop conflicts and wars
in Africa by enhancing the human, historic and legal
responsibility of parties to a conflict. In that regard,
civil society's capacities must also be strengthened,
which is key to creating conditions that are conducive
to reconciliation.

The economic downturn and climate change are
also considered to be main causes of the outbreak of
conflicts. Real development in Africa must take into
account the specific features and characteristics of each
country, leading to economic integration among the
countries ofthe continent. It is also important to simplify
bureaucratic complexities and provide administrative
services throughout the African States with a view
to achieving horizontal development, including the
development of cities and villages, while supporting
their capacities to achieve fair development. We also
need to provide job opportunities dignified lives to
the people for them to contribute to the development
process. In addition, it is necessary to eliminate the
phenomenon of corruption, promote good governance
and achieve political and economic reform.

In conclusion, we would like to emphasize that the
topic of today's debate, silencing the guns in Africa,
touches on the situation in Libya. We underscore the
importance of the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union to coordinate efforts in
many areas, especially with regard to peace, security
and stability. The African declaration to achieve the
noble objective of a conflict-free Africa and make
peace and security a reality, rather than an aspiration,
is a step in that direction. We call on the international
community to sincerely help without any hidden or
overt agendas to find real solutions that tackle the root
causes of conflicts before they escalate.

We also call on the international community to
contribute effectively to the elimination of outlaw
groups, organized crime networks and terrorist groups,
especially in border areas. We stress the importance of
implementing security agreements with neighbouring
countries, particularly with regard to the Libya quartet
border control and protection force. In that context, the
efforts of the Libyan National Army in the south of the
country will contribute immensely to implementing
those security agreements with neighbouring countries
and putting an end to the spread of transnational
organized crime, such as trafficking in human beings
and weapons, as well as to activities of terrorist groups.
The Libyan National Army is working to impose
State authority across the entire Libyan territory to
achieve security and stability in the border areas with
neighbouring countries and in the Sahel region as
a whole.

