Mr. Laher (South Africa): We wish tojoin others in
thanking Under-Secretary-General Ladsous, as well as
the Force Commanders present with us today, for their
respective briefings. The themes that were identified for
today's meeting clearly reflect the diverse challenges
that confront modern United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

We always speak of United Nations peacekeeping
as the flagship activity of the United Nations - and
rightfully so. We therefore find it very appropriate for
the Council to set aside time each year for an exchange
of views with the heads of the military components
of United Nations-mandated peacekeeping missions.
We know that peacekeepers are often the first United
Nations presence on the ground to bolster post-conflict
situations, in most cases following delicate and fragile
peace agreements. Therefore, the expectations of the
military in such cases are, indeed, high.

While recognizing that, we must remain cognizant
thatpeacekeeping is only a supportive mechanism, not an
alternative to political strategies adopted by the Council
to address post-conflict situations. Therefore, while
peacekeeping missions, of which the military aspect is
but one component, are being made to take on complex
and multidimensional tasks, there remains a tendency to
associate most tasks of the peacekeeping mission with
the military component. We must be mindful of such
pitfalls and ensure that multidimensional peacekeeping
operations live up to what they are designed for, that
is, an integrated, cohesive and coordinated unit that is
able to meet the common objective mandated for it by
the Council.

We therefore welcome this opportunity for the
Council to hear directly from the leadership in the field,
and would urge that such a practice, now being held for
the third consecutive year, become an institutionalized
and annual practice of the Council.

From the briefings that we have received, we
recognize the imperative for us in the Council,
together with the United Nations political and military
leadership on the ground, to be continuously seized
with mobilizing and maintaining the political support
of all stakeholders in a post-conflict situation. While
peacekeepers must preserve the window of stability
that has been secured through a peace agreement, we
note the additional challenges that they must endure
in balancing operational effectiveness with political
and developmental coherence. Needless to say, we
must safeguard the military component from being
overstretched and burdened with tasks that are not
normally within their military ambit.

The Council also has a particularly important
role, throughout a mission's life, to support efforts to
improve cooperation and coordination with regional
and subregional organizations and other partners. The
African Union and the United Nations have been working
closely together in Darfur and Somalia, which is a clear
manifestation of innovative and smart partnerships.
As the Secretary-General put it earlier this year at the
International Day of United Nations Peacekeepers, such
partnerships help give United Nations peacekeeping the
flexibility that it needs to address today's wide-ranging
challenges to international peace and security.

We should also not miss this opportunity to reflect
on issues that are pertinent to, and impact upon, troops
on the ground. Among others, such issues include our
ability to optimally leverage the security umbrella
provided by peacekeeping operations in the field in
order to find political solutions to conflicts. The Council
must adopt coherent and comprehensive strategies that
effectively translate peacekeeping operation mandates
into clear, credible and achievable outcomes.

In addition, it is necessary to ensure that operations
are sufficiently matched with appropriate resources,
and that the United Nations is adequately prepared and
capable of timely deployment at the desired operational
strength and capacity. It is also necessary to ensure
adequate monitoring and evaluation mechanisms
for peacekeeping operations, and that the Council is
sufficiently aware of the resource and field support
implications of its decisions.

Many of those issues were highlighted in the
briefings that we received today from the Force
Commanders. The high expectations that come with
United Nations peacekeeping deployments were
sufficiently stressed, as was the need for greater
standardization. Also highlighted was the need for
sufficient resources and a good and cooperative working
relationship with the host Government. We listened,
with great interest, to how peacekeepers could play
a practical role as peacebuilders, as illustrated in the
case of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
example.

The importance of early-warning systems and
cooperation with host Government security forces was
further highlighted in the case of the United Nations
Mission in the Republic of South Sudan. Lastly, the
need for United Nations missions to invest in building
national security in order to avoid a security vacuum
upon their withdrawal was also amplified as an
important contribution to the protection of civilians.

It is important that, in its future deliberations, the
Council consider those and other challenges highlighted
by the Force Commanders today. More important, we
must consider most carefully the recommendations that
emanate from their briefings.

In conclusion, we recognize that United Nations
peacekeepers are often sent to some of the world's
most dangerous and unstable environments. As a
consequence, those brave men and women come face to
face with life-threatening situations and put their lives
at risk so that others may be saved. We therefore pay
tribute to those fallen peacekeepers.

