Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank Prosecutor Bensouda
for her briefing. Nigeria notes the concerns ofthe Office
of the Prosecutor about the recent allegations of the
manipulation of reporting by the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and
of the cover-up of crimes committed against civilians
and peacekeepers. We share those concerns and urge
the Secretary-General to look into the allegations with
a view to determining the truth. It is essential that the
United Nations report on UNAMID convey the truth
about the situation on the ground. That is crucial to
maintaining the integrity not only of United Nations
reporting but also of the United Nations itself.

We are greatly concerned about the increase in
violence in Darfur, which has had a negative impact
on the humanitarian situation. The displacement of
more than 200,000 persons in the first three months of
2014 alone underscores the magnitude of the problem.
We are deeply disturbed by the difficulty experienced
by humanitarian actors, including the United Nations,
in terms of access to those in need. We deplore the
restrictions placed on humanitarian agencies, which
have made it increasingly challenging for them to
monitor the number of people displaced from their
homes.

The report indicates that the Office of the
Prosecutor is currently monitoring several trends that
could constitute crimes under the Rome Statute. Those
include alleged attacks by rebel groups on civilians, as
well as alleged attacks on humanitarian aid workers and
peacekeepers. The dangers to humanitarian workers
and peacekeepers in Darfur are real. Only last month,
a Rwandan peacekeeper tragically lost his life while
mediating a peace meeting in the village of Kabkabiya.
Three other peacekeepers were wounded on the same
occasion. The picture is the same for humanitarian
workers, who work in extremely challenging
circumstances and at great risk to their safety.

We look forward to seeing the outcome of the
monitoring activities of the Office of the Prosecutor in
Darfur.

