Ms. Ibrahim: Anyone who believes in peace and
security and sits in this Security Council Chamber
has to consider climate change as a security risk. I
know that many people here today read the reports
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,
but it is my duty to tell the Security Council that my
community - nomadic pastoralists moving from one
place to another in search of water and pastures for
our survival - knows nothing at all about the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.

My people do not know that there is such a thing
as a Security Council where a group of people sits and
thinks about peace around the world. My people are
living climate change. Climate change has an impact
on their daily lives and gives them insecurity. When
they sleep at night, they dream that they will wake up
the next day and be able to get food or water for their
children. They also dream that if someone gets to the
resources before they do they will have to fight for
them. My people do not sit in offices all day and wait
for their salaries to be paid at the end of the month so
they can feed their families.

More than 80 per cent of the communities in my
region of the Sahel depend on the environment - on
agriculture, fishing and the raising of livestock - for
their livelihoods. On a daily basis they have to go out
and fight to feed their families. Practically speaking,
because we are nomadic we have to follow the changing
patterns of water and pasture. In the past decade,
however, we have been forced to experience the impact
a changing climate has had on all our resources.

Natural resources are indeed shrinking. Council
members have of course already heard about what is
happening to Lake Chad, but there are many other
places where water is now disappearing forever. People
have to fight to gain access to these shrinking natural
resources, resulting in local conflicts that are spreading
every day. These local conflicts grow into national
conflicts and then become regional conflicts. Even
worse, these places where these people live become a
fertile place for terror. All around these places, terrorist
groups are growing. Why are they growing? Perhaps it
is because oftheir ideologies, but it may also be because
the opportunity to take advantage of people who are
becoming poorer and poorer every day is also growing.

In my region, men and women have different
responsibilities. Men are responsible for feeding
their families. If a man cannot do that, it is a great
humiliation. He will lose his dignity. To preserve
that dignity, he has only two choices - he can join a
terrorist group because, as a human being, he needs to
feed his family, or leave the place where he is. If he
does that, he joins the internal migration that creates
conflict in his region. There is also external migration,
which also occurs because people have no other choice.
We have all heard the sad story about how migrants are
being treated in Libya in this, the twenty-first century.
But people continue to go because they have no choice.
Either they go there and jump into the sea to save their
human dignity or they stay home to fight and die.

For me, as one who comes from these communities,
I see babies and young people growing up in this area
and think about them in the next decade or the next 20
years. What will their futures be like? Are they also
going to jump in the sea? Are they also going to join
terrorist groups? Or are they just going to kill each
other because, in order to survive, they have to eat?

Council members have to go beyond the Paris
Agreement and the United Nations agency fighting
climate change. The fight has to be a global one. It has
to be a global fight because globalization can be a curse
or an opportunity. In my community, where a radio
is hard to come by, it is easy to find a bottle of Coca
Cola. This makes us wonder why we get useless things,
instead of a great solution, access to energy, help in
getting to school or to health services, or support for
finding other alternatives in life, leading to a peace and
a prosperous future for all.

Most development aid goes to cities, but because
the problems are all in the rural areas, the solution must
also come from there. My people are always fighting
for peace - to combat climate change - but we
cannot do that alone, because resources are not always
available. We need both tools and capacity. Members of
the Council need to come to our countries to see how
we are living. Our way of life needs to be observed.
Solutions need to be found. These solutions could be
very inexpensive because they could be derived from
the traditional knowledge we already have.

I would like to conclude by saying that my people do
not have a choice. We do not have a choice, but members
of the Security Council do have a choice. They choose
to sit in the Council. They choose to fight for peace
and security around the world. I therefore urge them
consider climate change to be a security risk. Council
members must give my people - men, women, young
people - hope. In fact, the Security Council should
give my people something greater than hope because
we deserve something more than mere survival: we
deserve a life like everyone else's.
