Mr. Hamer (Netherlands): I would like at the outset
to thank Mr. Annabi for his very comprehensive briefing on
the situation in East Timor. While the problems remain
enormous, we welcome the positive development and join
those who have paid tribute to Mr. Vieira de Mello for his
contribution to that end.

The visit of President Wahid to East Timor on 29
February was an important step towards normalization of
the relations between Jakarta and Dili. Not only did the
President's visit send an important political signal, it led
also to concrete results such as the establishment of an
Indonesian consulate and the opening of the air route to
Kupang, as well as to measures to activate cross-border
trade.

At the same time, major worries remain. The situation
of the internally displaced persons in West Timor remains
critical, and their safe and voluntary return is still
insufficiently guaranteed. Intimidation and disinformation
by militia members are still occurring. Under these
circumstances, it is uncertain whether refugees will truly
be in a position to decide, before the 10 April deadline,
on whether and when to return to East Timor. It is clear
that the Indonesian authorities' responsibility for their
continued well-being and rights will not end as of that
date.

But in East Timor itself there are serious security
concerns as well. In the absence of a legal system, there
are reports of vigilante justice spreading. Particularly
serious is the increasing number of border incidents. We
expect from the Government of Indonesia more
determined efforts to bring the militias operating from
West Timor, often with the connivance of the Indonesian
armed forces (TNI), under its control.

With respect to the general issue of security, I was
wondering if Mr. Annabi could tell us what has become
of FALINTIL and what the current thinking is regarding
the need, or the absence of the need, for future armed
forces in East Timor.

In his briefing on 29 February, the Secretary-General
stressed the need for greater momentum in the
reconstruction efforts by the international community to
avoid dependency and social unrest. In a situation where
all institutions need building or rebuilding, it will not be
easy to instil in the East T imorese a sense of ownership.
We hope that the community empowerment projects being
developed by the World Bank and others will succeed in
including the East Timorese and convincing them that the
ownership is theirs.

On this point, I have some further questions of
Mr. Annabi. I was wondering if Mr. Annabi could tell us
more about efforts to attract members of the East Timor
diaspora to lend their skills and support to the
reconstruction of their country, as referred to by the
Secretary-General. What can be done to develop a private
sector, alongside the setting up of a civil service to which
Mr. Annabi referred? I would also be interested to know
if Mr. Annabi can tell us a little more about the
interlocutors of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) and about the
leadership that East Timor must develop to guide it
through the enormous challenges on its path.

Finally, we are encouraged by the agreement
between UNTAET and the Indonesian authorities on the
exchange of information for the purposes of criminal
investigation. The investigation into the murder of Dutch
journalist Sander Thoenes has shown just how important

 

such international cooperation is, in particular in the area of
human rights abuses.

