The President (Spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 37 of its provisional rules of
procedure to His Excellency Mr. Seydou Elimane
Diarra, Prime Minister of the National Reconciliation
Government of Cote d'Ivoire.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

Mr. Seydou Elimane Diarra (Cete d'Ivoire) was
escorted to a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Seydou Elimane Diarra, Prime Minister
of the National Reconciliation Government of C6te
d'Ivoire.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan, at this meeting.

As this is the last time that Ambassador Jeremy
Greenstock will participate in the Council's
deliberations in his current capacity as Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, I wish to take
this opportunity to express to him, on behalf of the
members of the Council, our appreciation of him as a
colleague and friend. We shall remember him for his
clarity and eloquence in his presentations and for his
readiness to search for compromise. His unfailing
eagerness to assist Council members in finding
consensus language has often helped the Council to
reach agreement on difficult issues. Aside from his
ability to articulate and to persuade, he has also
provided effective leadership to two Security Council
missions to West Africa. Upon his departure from New
York, Sir Jeremy will take up another delicate task as
the United Kingdom's Special Representative in Iraq. I
am sure that he will make use of his abundant
professional expertise and his diplomatic skills to meet
the challenges of that assignment. In bidding him a
fond farewell, the other members of the Council and I
wish him every success in his new endeavours.

I give the floor to Ambassador Greenstock.


