Mr. Diab (Lebanon)(spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to associate itself with the
statement made by the Permanent Representative of
Tunisia as Chairman of the Arab Group.
It gives us pleasure, Sir, to see you presiding over
the Security Council this month; we are confident that
your wise leadership will guide the Council to the best
possible results. We would also like to express our
thanks to Ambassador Kolby for the strenuous efforts
he made as President last month. My delegation would
further like to express to you our utmost appreciation
for your prompt response to the request to hold this
emergency meeting of the Security Council to consider
the extremely serious situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories.

The current serious deterioration in the occupied
Arab territories and the abhorrent escalation of
aggression by Israel against the Palestinian people and
its National Authority represent a flagrant violation of
international law and international humanitarian law,
particularly the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 1949.
What is more dangerous than all that is that Israel
exercises this State terrorism and commits war crimes
against a people whose land it occupies in blatant
violation and defiance of the resolutions of this
Council, which has repeatedly called upon Israel to
implement its resolutions.

This series of criminal actions by Israel against
the Palestinian people has led, since the beginning of
the intifada, to the death of more than 1,500 martyrs
and to thousands of injured people among the
Palestinians, the overwhelming majority of whom are
civilians, particularly children. Human rights
associations and organizations have reflected these
facts in their reports and have exposed the criminal
practices to which the Palestinians are subjected every
day. They have repeatedly called for intervention by
the international community with a View to putting an
end to these practices. The situation is becoming more
serious every day, a fact that has been recalled by the
Secretary-General on more than one occasion.

In light of the escalation of acts of destruction
and murder of the Palestinians, the cadres of the
Palestinian resistance and its leadership, the Security
Council is duty-bound to fulfil its mandate in
accordance with the Charter to intervene to preserve
peace and security and prevent further escalation of the
situation in the region. In this context, the Council is
called upon to force Israel immediately to end its acts
of aggression in the occupied territories and to abandon
its policy of siege, starvation and assassination against
the Palestinian people. It should also show respect for
the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, being the
occupying force in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem.

The Security Council should demand that Israel
immediately implement its relevant resolutions,
withdraw from Palestinian territories under occupation
and end the siege against the Palestinian Authority. The
Council is also duty-bound to dispatch an international
protection force and to provide adequate and prompt
assistance to alleviate the suffering of the Palestinian
people under occupation and put an end to the siege
imposed upon them.

The League of Arab States held a summit meeting
in Beirut on 27 and 28 March. It adopted an historic
resolution that was welcomed by the entire
international community, with the exception of Israel.
The Arab leaders adopted the initiative by His Royal
Highness Crown Prince Abdullah ibn Abdul Aziz as an
Arab peace initiative. The Arab leaders, by their
resolution, have opted once again for a just and
comprehensive peace as a strategic option. It was based
on their conviction that a military solution to the
conflict has not and will not achieve peace and security
in the region.

In spite of the call by the Arab leaders to Israel to
follow their suit and opt for peace, Israel has rejected
that Arab peace initiative and has responded to it with
gunfire, a total occupation of the Palestinian territories
and a siege of the Palestinian people and its leadership.

The root cause of the conflict is Israel's
continuation of its policy of occupying other people' s
land. Israel must realize that the policy of violence and
destruction can only lead to counter-violence and
destruction and that peace and security will not be
achieved unless a comprehensive and just peace based
on relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly
242 (1967) and 338 (1973), and the principle of land
for peace are complied with.

