Mr. Berruga (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): First,
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jan
Egeland and the Vice President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their presentations and
thank the presidency of the Council for the timely
invitation to attend this meeting.

The protection of civilians is a growing challenge
in the implementation of international law, human
rights law and international humanitarian law. This is a
timely debate, both in terms of taking stock of progress
achieved since the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999),
and in terms of identifying the measures required to
improve the level of protection of civilians in armed
conflict.

Over the past 10 years, we have seen a marked
increase in the number of armed conflicts with an
unprecedented degree of violence and cruelty. For
instance, the military command and control of armed
groups and dissident forces has broken down to such
an extent that identifying the parties to a conflict has
become extremely complex, adding to the difficulty of
achieving any implementation of the rules of armed
conflict.

As a consequence, violence has reached further
afield, making the civilian population - formerly a
collateral victim - the main target. That gives us an
idea of the scope of the challenges before us. For that
reason, the implementation of international agreements
on the topic is becoming increasingly urgent.

Making those agreements operational is the
shared responsibility of all - Governments,
international organizations and civil society. It is also
imperative that the Security Council, as well as
regional organs that are competent in the area of peace
and security, take measures to compel the parties to
conflicts to conduct hostilities in a manner respecting
humanitarian standards, and to facilitate the delivery of
assistance to the civil population whenever it is
affected.

Similarly, when hostilities are suspended,
disarmament and the reintegration of armed groups
within society - in addition to the establishment of
mechanisms for accountability and the search for and
identification of the victims of forced
disappearances- are indispensable prerequisites for
repairing the fabric of society.

Civilians are the victims of conflicts, not only
during conflicts but also afterwards. To that extent, the
linkage between the protection of civilians and the
dispensation of justice is of vital importance.
International and national efforts must be accompanied
by measures, in accordance with national legislation
and international law, to bring to justice those
responsible for violations of international humanitarian
law.

The International Criminal Court (ICC) is a
fundamental tool for eradicating the culture of
impunity, including cases of sexual exploitation and
deliberate attacks on humanitarian personnel. The
existence of the Court should be not only an incentive
to strengthen national legal systems, but also an
efficient mechanism to deal with crimes when national
judicial structures have disappeared as a result of
conflict. For that reason, Mexico recently ratified the
Rome Statute.

We must be certain that the agencies and
programmes of the United Nations, as well as the
relevant regional organs, are given mandates that
promote the adoption of measures to properly
implement international law and that they be backed by
political and financial resources that would make it
possible for them to work closely with States.

Experience has taught us that the identification of
vulnerable populations is initially carried out by
humanitarian organizations in the field. For that reason,
when Mexico was a member of the Security Council,
we promoted expanded communication between the
Council and non-governmental organizations in the
field, in order to find better ways of working together
to protect vulnerable populations.

Similarly, Mexico has defended and supported the
creation of channels to make it possible to offer safe
and unrestricted access for humanitarian organizations
to suffering populations. Resolution 1502 (2003) is a
step forward in the creation of a framework of
protection for such organizations, as it contains a new
regime of sanctions to be applied to parties to a
conflict that resort to violence against humanitarian
personnel. We hope to create a greater awareness of the
fact that breaching the security of those organizations
makes conflicts worse and violates respect for human
rights and the basic rights of the civilian population.

When we speak of the civilian victims of armed
conflicts, including refugees and internally displaced
persons, we are mainly and essentially speaking of
women, children and older people. We are talking
about violent rapes and abuse, sexual exploitation and
violence against women and the forced recruitment of
children. Such acts must no longer be viewed with
indifference by the international community. Mexico is
convinced, therefore, that once peaceful solutions have
been exhausted - and acting exclusively under the
authority of the Security Council - the international
community must take all measures that are necessary to
protect civilians from genocide and crimes against
humanity including - among others - serious
violations of international law, human rights and
international humanitarian law.

For that reason, we are gratified by the
meaningful progress achieved in the context of the
2005 world summit and we are prepared to continue
the discussion on implementation within the General
Assembly, as the Assembly is the best forum to
promote codification and further development.

