Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Croatia aligns itself with
the statement just delivered by the observer of the
European Union.

I shall now make a statement in my national capacity.

As a signatory to the Dayton Peace Agreement,
Croatia bears special responsibility for the stability
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia is Bosnia and
Herzegovina's first European Union (EU) neighbour and
trade partner. Relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina
are therefore one of Croatia's foreign-policy priorities
and its integration into the European Union and NATO
our strategic goal.

A stable, peaceful and prosperous Bosnia and
Herzegovina where genuine institutional equality
among the three constituent peoples and all citizens is
guaranteed should play a valuable role as a generator of
stability in south-eastern Europe as well as a contributor
to the stability of the European Union as a whole.

The European and Euro-Atlantic perspective of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and its consequent EU and
NATO membership is a goal that Croatia will continue
to staunchly support. We see this as the best catalyst
for addressing outstanding internal issues as well as a
safeguard for further democratization, the strengthening
of institutions, and ensuring freedom of the media and
an independent judiciary. The implementation of the
reform agenda is also vital to achieving this goal.

We have supported the application of Boston and
Herzegovina for membership in the European Union.
We want to encourage the authorities at all levels of
Government to redouble their efforts to submit credible,
well-prepared answers to the European Commission's
questionnaire, so that we can discuss the candidate
status for Bosnia and Herzegovina as soon as possible.
We would like to see Bosnia and Herzegovina catch
up with its neighbours in the field of the European
integration, and in pursuit of this pivotal goal we
shall continue to extend our political, technical and
expert support.

In addition, Croatia would like to stimulate
greater cross-border cooperation on the part of local
and regional self-government units on both sides of
the border, which should result in the implementation
ofjoint projects and better use of EU funds. Flexible
cross-border cooperation and tangible benefits from
EU funds enable people at the local level to feel closer
to the EU.

On the Euro-Atlantic front, Bosnia and Herzegovina
has achieved concrete results, namely, the adoption of
the defence review and a solid record in the registration
of defence property, making the activation of the NATO
membership action plan plausible and justified.

While progress has been achieved in a number of
fields, including the economy, political crises, often
repetitive in nature and substance, continue to plague
the political landscape ofBosnia and Herzegovina. This
has a negative impact on reform-oriented processes and
is preventing Bosnia and Herzegovina from moving
forward and unleashing all of its potential. The political
impasse and divisive rhetoric pose the risk of derailing
Bosnia and Herzegovina from the path of much-needed
reforms and undermining the very functionality and
stability of the country.

Furthermore, we are deeply concerned at the fact
that political polarization, intensified by years of
economic hardship, is increasing radicalization and
extremism within Bosnia and Herzegovina, especially
among the younger population. This deterioration fits
within the wider context of the challenges facing south-
eastern Europe. In that context, we have to put all the
tools at our disposal to good use.

Besides socioeconomic reforms and the implementation
of the reform agenda, it is of the utmost importance
not to lose sight of the political issues in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. As shown by the recent institutional
crisis caused by the application for revision of the
judgment in the genocide case against Serbia, focus
must be maintained, as well, on urgent political
questions so as to achieve stability and prevent future
internal destabilization.

The most urgent political question is the reform
of the Election Law, especially in the light of the
decision of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina dated 1 December 2016 and the decision
of the Constitutional Court on the city of Mostar.
The former decision states that certain provisions of
the Election Law of Bosnia and Herzegovina are in
contravention to the Bosnian Constitution, since they
breach the constitutional principle of the equality of
the three constituent peoples - Bosniaks, Croats and
Serbs - and their right to legitimate representation.

The reform of the Election Law therefore presents
a welcome opportunity to ensure the institutional
equality of the three peoples and all citizens, and a
chance to leap forward towards political stability and a
more integrated country. The refusal to implement the
decision of the Constitutional Court on the reform of the
Election Law further jeopardizes the fragile stability
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, thereby leaving open the
space for further political manipulations, which have,
as witnessed in the recent past, a destructive impact
on the equality of the smallest in number of the three
constituent peoples.

Politically dominant actors in Bosnia and
Herzegovina continue to reject the implementation
of the aforementioned decision of the Constitutional
Court, thereby demonstrating their determination
and persistence in opposing the realization of the
constitutional principle of the equality of the three
constituent peoples. We recall that the enjoyment of
rights emanating from that principle represents the
very foundation on which Bosnia and Herzegovina is
built as a State and therefore should be seen as conditio
sine qua non.

In accordance with its responsibilities and
obligations as a signatory to the Dayton Agreement and
as a country that shares a 1,000-kilometre land border
with Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia cannot remain
silent and inert while witnessing the continuation ofsuch
destabilizing policies. We urge all who are genuinely
interested in the democratic stability of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to take action on the prolongation of a
situation in which decisions of the central judicial body
are not obeyed or implemented.

The question of institutional stability is crucial to
the capability of Bosnia and Herzegovina to efficiently
and promptly fulfil its obligations arising from the
process of European integration and to fight political
radicalism and elements ofreligious extremism. Croatia

is ready to assist Bosnia and Herzegovina in improving
its institutional and administrative capacity and in
meeting the requirements on the path to the integration
in the EU. Furthermore, we encourage our neighbour to
proceed without delay with the reform of the judiciary in
order to strengthen its independence, professionalism,
accountability and impartiality. It is also important
that Bosnia and Herzegovina assume ownership of
its judiciary institutions. The implementation of all
outlined and much-needed reforms will strengthen the
country from within and give impetus to everybody in
Bosnia and Herzegovina - all constituent peoples and
all citizens - to move forward on the European and
Euro-Atlantic path.

Let me finish by quoting from the recent joint
statement of the Justice and Peace Commissions
(Justitia et Pax) of the Bishops Conferences and Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Croatia and Slovenia, which took
place earlier this month:

"Today the Catholics in Bosnia and Herzegovina
are the most endangered part of the Catholic Church
on the entire European continent".

The Commissions appealed to the international
community to extend more efficient assistance to the
country as to ensure that genuine and real equality of
the three constituent peoples - Bosniaks, Croats and
Serbs - and all other citizens is achieved in the whole
territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina. As a supporter
and advocate of Bosnia and Herzegovina's stability,
prosperity and territorial integrity, Croatia echoes
this appeal.

