The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

At the outset, I should like to thank Mr. Wane for
his important briefing. I should like also to express
our condolences to the Government and the people of
Burkina Faso in connection with yesterday's terrorist
attack, and to the Government and the people of Mali,
as well as to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, for the victims
of the attacks that took place yesterday.

Egypt believes that adoption of resolution 2359
(2017) represents a necessary message of support to the
regional efforts of the countries of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to address the phenomena of
terrorism and organized crime, even though the content
of the resolution did not meet the aspirations of those
States in terms of going beyond statements of political
support and making an international commitment to
providing effective assistance for the efforts of the G-5
Sahel joint force on the ground. However, we joined the
consensus since the resolution represents a step forward
on which we can build in future.

The briefing given by Mr. Wane and the facts on the
ground have served to highlight the scope and magnitude
of the challenges and risks confronting the States of the
G-5 Sahel and ofthe Sahel as a whole. Those risks extend
to neighbouring regions. It is important to address this
matter in a realistic way that recognizes the threat and
works to provide real and appropriate solutions that
are commensurate with the scope of the threat. The
diverging views on the role of the Security Council and
the United Nations in providing such support must not
prevent the drawing up of a comprehensive approach
that takes into consideration the fact that a failure to
provide sustainable and practical support could double
the humanitarian, economic and military cost of any
attempt to contain the deterioration of the situation
in future.

Egypt therefore believes that supporting African
solutions to African problems is the optimal and
highest-yielding investment. Supporting regional
initiatives is the only way to reach sustainable solutions.
Failure to do so would send the wrong message about
the credibility of repeated statements concerning the
importance of cooperation and partnership with the
African Union. Egypt also stresses that we need to find
comprehensive solutions to the challenges confronting
the Sahel region, and therefore stresses yet again the
need to revitalize the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.

In conclusion, Egypt stresses that it will spare no
effort to support its brothers and sisters in the G-5 Sahel
States, be it through its contribution to Security Council
discussions of the situation in Mali and the Sahel in
general or by enhancing current joint cooperation
programmes at the bilateral and regional levels. Such
programmes are subject to ongoing improvement in
accordance with stated needs and in consultation with
the States of the region. Egypt recently pledged to
allocate 1,000 military scholarships to commissioned
and non-commissioned officers of the Sahel and
Sahara States.

I new resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Mali.

