The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a brief statement in my capacity as representative
of France. I shall limit myself to just a few comments.

In the course of our discussion, the representative
of Portugal will in the course of our discussion, make a
statement on behalf of the European Union, to which
my delegation subscribes fully.

My comments will bear on three points. Firstly, I
would like to recall France's extremely positive
assessment of the considerable work carried out by Mr.
Vieira de Mello and his team in East Timor since the
establishment of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET). Thanks to
the United Nations, the situation in East Timor is now
stable; progress has been made in the building of the
Timorese administration; the national reconciliation
process has begun. France unreservedly supports the
continuation of these activities.

In this otherwise positive context, the main cause
for concern, which is not directly linked to UNTAET
activities, is the refugee populations in West Timor. We
must allow those who wish to return to East Timor to
do so in full freedom. For that reason, it is vital that the
Indonesian authorities put an end, as they have
committed themselves to do so, to militia activity and
perhaps make it possible for those who do not wish to
return to East Timor to be able to settle in other parts
of Indonesia.

Secondly, I wish to point out how important it is
to involve the Timorese as much as possible in the
ongoing transition process. Steps have already been
taken to this end, including the establishment of a
National Consultative Committee. Now we must go
even further. We welcome the fact that Mr. Vieira de
Mello has been able to continue negotiations with all
Timorese political leaders so as to establish in the near
future an exemplary transition towards a normal system
of government. The establishment of a coalition
Government and of a genuine legislative body, as well
as the organization of elections before the end of next
year, will be milestones in that transition.

In that context, Mr. Vieira de Mello could perhaps
inform us, having had consultations with Timorese
political officials, of the choice of a target date for
independence. Like others, I wish to emphasize that
independence will in no way mean the end of the
United Nations family's presence in Timor. It will
mean that this will be maintained in other forms. In this
spirit, we welcome the initial reduction of personnel in
UNTAET, confirmed by Mr. Vieira de Mello. We
believe the calming of the local situation allows a
substantial and gradual reduction of military personnel
by the end of the year, and then in the first half of the
year 2001- without, of course, jeopardizing the
security arrangements on the border.

We believe the speedy training and the
strengthening of an effective and competent local
police force is a matter of priority in order to ensure a
smooth transition. UNTAET's abrupt departure at the
end of its mandate could be a major destabilizing factor
for the newly independent country. We must plan and
organize a downsizing of the force over time.

The third and last point, but not the least one, is
to ensure that East Timor, by the end of the current
transition process, can be a viable State, capable, inter
alia, of achieving self-sufficiency in agriculture and of
developing a number of exports, such as coffee and oil.
In this regard, I would like to ask Mr. Vieira de Mello
about the state of discussions under way between
UNTAET and Australia on the treaty on the Timor
Gap.

I would also like to ask him about assistance
measures to develop the private sector. Does he believe
that these measures are adequate? Has specific
financing for small and medium-sized enterprises and
industries been set up by the major development banks,
in particular the World Bank and the Asian
Development Bank?

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker on my list is the Permanent
Representative of Japan. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

