Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I wish, Sir, to welcome
you and to congratulate you upon assuming the post of
Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab
J amahiriya and the presidency of the Security Council.
I also wish to thank you for organizing this important
debate, which has given the wider United Nations
membership an opportunity to contribute to a
discussion on peace and security in Africa.

I wish to welcome Ms. Dlamini Zuma, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa, whose
presence here is a fitting tribute to the important role
that South Africa played while on the Security Council
in having the discussion on modalities for supporting
peacekeeping operations on the Council's agenda. I
also wish to welcome the Chairman of the African
Union-United Nations panel, Mr. Romano Prodi, and
thank him and other members of the panel for the good
work they have done. Let me also recognize the
presence of Ambassador Lamamra, Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union. I wish to
thank the guests for the statements they have made,
and also to thank the Secretary-General of the United
Nations for being with us and for his statement.

This debate today is an opportunity for the United
Nations to focus once again on peace and security in
Africa. Uganda commends the panel for the report. It is
significant that from the outset the report recognizes
the primacy of the United Nations Security Council in
matters of international peace and security, which is
very fundamental. The report also emphasizes the need
to enhance the strategic relationship between the
United Nations and the African Union (AU) as the
basis for a more effective partnership when addressing
issues of mutual interest.

As many in this Council know, conflicts have
devastated many parts of the African continent. They
have caused untold economic and social damage and
have adversely affected the continent's development.
Apart from causing human suffering, those conflicts
aggravate poverty and create breeding grounds for the
emergence of new security threats, including
international crime and terrorism.

It is significant to note that in the last decade
Africa has shown great resolve and has exhibited much
stronger political will in efforts to end conflicts on the
continent. Africa has demonstrated greater
responsibility in finding solutions to many of those
conflicts.

Since its establishment, the AU Peace and
Security Council has made a tremendous contribution
towards peace and security in Africa. Africa has
developed its own capacity to respond to crises, and we
have seen in recent times the pivotal role the African
Union has played in settling crises on the continent in
places such as Comoros, Liberia, Sierra Leone and
Burundi. African ownership has been clearly
demonstrated through the contribution of troops,
logistics, political management of conflicts and
finances, according to Africa's capacity.

It is for these reasons that Uganda emphasizes the
need for clarity in the relationship between the United
Nations and the African Union, especially between the
United Nations Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council, and the United Nations
Secretariat and the African Union Commission, as the
basis for a more effective partnership on peace and
security. The role of regional arrangements is
acknowledged in the Charter of the United Nations and
should rightly be the basis for building a solid
partnership.

The demands placed on the United Nations for
intervention have shown that there needs to be a
division of responsibilities between the United Nations
and regional organizations such as the African Union in
the spheres of conflict prevention, peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding in order to make
possible more effective and comprehensive responses
to conflict situations. Such division of labour should
take advantage of the different capabilities. As the
report rightly states, "There is a significant synergy to
be achieved in drawing on the respective capacities of
both organizations and exercising the comparative
advantage that each can offer" (S/2008/813, para. 6). It
is essential that the concept of sharing responsibilities
for the execution of missions for the maintenance of
international peace and security between the United
Nations and the AU is clearly understood.

Uganda therefore welcomes the establishment of
a more effective relationship between the United
Nations Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council and between the United Nations
Secretariat and the AU Commission. Decisions
pertaining to the setting up of missions, the mandates
conferred, the composition of the force, the rules of
engagement and reviews of conduct and performance
of such missions from time to time can and should be
made with consultations with all involved.

Lessons have been learned from various
peacekeeping operations in Africa. One is the need to
develop capacity to support operations. As the report
rightly points out, the African Union will be able to
respond to crises effectively only if there is sufficient
political and financial commitment by its own member
States and also by the international community. By all
accounts, lack of resources remains the single biggest
challenge limiting the ability of missions to implement
their mandates effectively.

The African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) has provided examples that have shown
that the reliance on unpredictable sources of funding
has been a disincentive to potential troop-contributing
countries, who are understandably reluctant to commit
to missions that they see as under-resourced, especially
when that is accompanied by a lack of any guarantee of
sustained reimbursement of resources. The proposed
establishment of a trust fund as one of the secondary

sources of funding is welcome. However, that requires
that issues of the predictability and sustainability of
such a fund be addressed. The management of the
proposed trust fund would also need further
elaboration, with a view to creating a management
system that is flexible, transparent and rapid.

The establishment of a predictable, sustainable
and flexible financing mechanism for United Nations-
mandated peacekeeping operations undertaken by the
African Union is important. Since the AU acts on
behalf of the United Nations Security Council in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter, it is imperative that the primary source of
funding for peacekeeping operations be United
Nations-assessed contributions. That underscores the
collective responsibility provided for in the Charter.

Finally, I wish once again to commend the panel
for the report. Peacekeeping is and remains an essential
and indispensable tool available to the United Nations
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
Its viability and effectiveness will be greatly enhanced
if there is closer cooperation and coordination between
the United Nations and the AU. The debate today is
part of a process, and Uganda will continue actively
participating in this process in order to identify feasible
actions that can ensure timely intervention so that
conflicts, particularly in Africa, can be prevented and
many precious lives saved.

Uganda subscribes to and supports the Libyan-
initiated presidential statement, which, we think, would
be a logical outcome to this important debate.

