Mrs. Theofili (Greece): Allow me at the outset to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate,
since the plethora of crises and ever-increasing
challenges in the Middle East and North Africa are of
great interest to and effect, directly or indirectly, all
of us.

We would like to align ourselves with the statement
of the European Union, to be delivered later, and to
make some additional remarks.

In recent years, the Middle East and North Africa
region has turned into a zone of endemic conflict, with
severe repercussions for its security and economic
development. Terrorism, as well as phenomena such
as the radicalization of individuals and the resurgence
of criminal networks, have had a significant impact on
the region's stability and the welfare of its inhabitants.
The stalemate in the Middle East peace process poses
another serious challenge, which needs to be addressed
on the basis ofthe two-State solution. The Syrian, Libyan
and Yemeni conflicts affect the broader region through
possible spillover, with unimaginable humanitarian
consequences for the population: unprecedented
refugee and migration flows, human smuggling and
trafficking, illicit arms trafficking, and asymmetric
threats undermining security in the Middle East and
North Africa and the broader Mediterranean region.

In this regard, we would like to make a special
reference to the Syrian crisis and its tangible impact
on our country, owing to Greece's geographic location,
following unprecedented refugee flows. The challenges
posed by this situation are just one of the imperative
reasons for which the crisis needs to come to an
end. In our view, there is no alternative to a political
solution reached through an inclusive dialogue, in
line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex). This will allow for
the refugee issue to be addressed in a comprehensive and
efficient manner, paving the way for refugees to return
to an ordinary life. Any action that could undermine
this possibility or aggravate the humanitarian situation
within the country should be avoided.

It is our firm belief that in order to restore stability
and peace the region, it is essential to abide by certain
principles. First of all, there must be a political solution
to end this crisis. In this respect, the United Nations
has a fundamental role to play, which needs to be
strongly supported by the international community and
the parties to the conflict. At the same time, respect
for international law, relevant treaties and United
Nations resolutions remains the cornerstone of our
efforts to maintain peace and security. In this context,
it is important to refrain from actions that undermine
the principle of territorial integrity and sovereignty.
Accountability is another crucial element that needs
to be safeguarded in order to put an end to impunity.
Last but not least, it is essential to promote a positive,
broader and manifold agenda of cooperation focusing
on developing synergies and joint activities, especially
through constructive topics, such as the economy,
trade, energy, education and research, taking into
account the emergence of viable gas hubs, as well as
the promotion of religious coexistence and pluralism
and the untapped potential of culture as one of the main
drivers of soft power.

In the light of all this and in an effort to promote
security in its neighbourhood and the broader region
of the eastern Mediterranean, but also to contribute
to enhancing a positive agenda of cooperation among
actors that have a special interest in the Middle East,
Greece has launched targeted initiatives, including
the Rhodes Conference for Security and Stability
and the Athens Conference on Religious and Cultural
Pluralism and Peaceful Coexistence in the Middle East.
Furthermore, along with Cyprus, we have established
trilateral teams of cooperation, which have acquired an
institutionalized character, with Egypt, Israel, Jordan,
Lebanon and Palestine.

