Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First, let
me thank my good friend Ambassador Tanin for his
comprehensive briefing. We continue to welcome the
good cooperation between the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and its
international partners, such as the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo. I will focus on three points
today: the future of UNMIK, the dialogue facilitated
by the European Union (EU) and the rule oflaw.

First is the future of UNMIK. Like other European
Union members of the Security Council, we firmly
believe that the situation in Kosovo allows for a
substantial reduction of the current reporting cycle. We
furthermore believe that the Security Council should
refocus UNMIK's efforts so that the means deployed
by the United Nations are tailored fully to the situation
on the ground. In that light, we look forward to a
strategic review of UNMIK, as suggested by Poland in
our February meeting (see S/PV.8176).

Secondly, I turn to the EU-facilitated dialogue.
We commend High Representative Mogherini for her
continuous efforts in that process. The resumption of
discussions in March was an important step towards
the normalization of relations between Belgrade and
Pristina. It should be stressed that in both countries
such dialogue requires sincere political will and a
united effort to achieve concrete results. We call upon
the Serbian and Kosovar authorities to move beyond
the present tensions and prove their commitment to the
dialogue by continuing discussions and implementing
agreements reached thus far.

My third point is the importance of the rule oflaw.
For peace to become entrenched in the fabric of society,
Kosovo must protect and promote the rule of law and
hold accountable those who have committed crimes. In
that regard, we note recent steps taken by Kosovo to
reform its judiciary, but we stipulate that many more
need to be taken. The Netherlands is the host country
of the Kosovo Specialist Chambers and the Specialist
Prosecutor's Office. In that context, we express the
hope that Kosovo will do everything to uphold its
commitments and obligations.

We are encouraged by the recent ratification of
the territorial delineation agreement between Kosovo
and Montenegro. We take that as a sign of Kosovo's
continued commitment to peace, reconciliation and
good neighbourly relations.

