Mr. Siddig (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Since
December 2018, the Sudan has seen significant positive
developments that have created a new political reality
that will undoubtedly lead to a system rooted in
freedom justice and the rule of law. We have launched a
serious process to lay the solid foundations ofa civilian
and democratic Government, led by the people and
subject to law andjustice. In this new reality, there is no
place for impunity. Accountability is its cornerstone,
prosecution and legal recourse rulings are protected and
enforced, and its boundaries are freedoms that respect
human rights. It will be a reality where children are
taken care of and protected, women are empowered and
dealt with on equal footing, young people are heard,
and old people and people with disabilities are attended
to and provided for. There will be full equality based on
citizenship as a basis for rights and duties. Under this
new reality, priority will be given to persons affected
by war and conflict, whether martyred, killed, injured,
disappeared, displaced or refugees.

Tomorrow, 19 December, will mark the first
anniversary of the Sudanese revolution against
injustice, persecution and dictatorship in favour of
freedom, justice and a life of dignity. The fire of the
revolution continues to burn, demanding peace, freedom
and justice rooted in fighting impunity, ensuring
accountability and providing justice to victims

The people of Darfur have suffered in the past,
especially under the former regime. Under that regime,
Darfur saw infighting, destruction, death, strife
and conspiracies. People in Darfur were powerless,
their rights violated, their resources depleted and
their purported will fabricated. They were forced to
become emigrants, refugees and internally displaced
persons (IDPs). Many of them continue to suffer
marginalization and underdevelopment in all forms,
including poverty, hunger and disease. That is why
the transitional Government has placed Darfur and its
people at the top of its priorities during the transitional
period. We have undertaken to achieve comprehensive,
just and lasting peace by ensuring the voluntary return
ofIDPs, resolving land disputes and enforcing the goals
of the revolution: justice and accountability.

Dialogue towards lasting peace has already started.
On 11 September, the Sovereign Council and the coalition
of armed groups across the Sudan, including Darfur,
signed the Juba Declaration for Confidence-building
Procedures and the Preparation for Negotiation. The
Declaration sets a comprehensive road map to settle the
dispute across the Sudan, culminating in lasting peace
agreements. Since 10 December, direct negotiations
between the two parties have started in Juba to end
the war in Darfur and South Kordofan and Blue Nile
states. The Juba Declaration has been extended for an
additional two months, to 15 February 2020, as a clear
sign that the negotiating teams of the Government and
the armed groups are serious and honest about reaching
a peace agreement that would end the long war and
the armed conflict and be followed by meeting the
aspirations of the Sudanese people as soon as possible.

His Excellency Prime Minister Abdalla Hamdok
started a tour of neighbouring countries seeking peace,
beginning with Juba, followed by Egypt and Eritrea.
Yesterday, he visited Chad and met with the leaders
of the armed resistance to include a larger number
of stakeholders from Darfur in the peace process.
His Excellency has also held several meetings with
most leaders of the armed opposition over the past 14
months, including Abdul Wahid Mohamed Al-Nour
in Paris. On 4 November, His Excellency also visited
some IDP camps in Darfur, where he listened to the
people and promised a new era oflasting peace, justice
and dignified living and prosperity.

The Sudanese judiciary completed its proceedings
against former President Mr. Omar Al-Bashir, who has
been held in Kobar prison since 11 April. Regarding
the first charge of corruption against him, the court
sentenced Mr. Al-Bashir on December 14 to two years'
incarceration at a social rehabilitation centre within the
prison where he is being held, following atrial that started
in August. The deposed President has been convicted of
illegal self-enrichment and foreign exchange dealings.
According to a 14 December statement by the Public
Prosecutor, this is only the first case against the former
President and will be followed by other cases under
article 130 of the Sudanese Criminal Code - homicide
and other charges related to crimes against humanity
and undermining of the constitutional order. The public
prosecution is currently interrogating him and the
remaining detainees, Mr. Abdel Rahim Mohammed
Hussein and Mr. Ahmad Haroun in cases related to
the 1989 coup against the civilian Government and
other crimes.

There are at least five other cases currently
under investigation, most importantly those related to
crimes committed against our people in the state of
Darfur, which are a top priority for the Government's
transitional justice programme. There is no lasting
peace without justice. Providing justice to victims
is not a mere slogan; it must be followed by concrete
and informed measures that would satisfy the victims
and those affected. The transitional Government has
the responsibility to fight impunity through credible
national measures. Failure to combat impunity would
embolden those people to commit further violations
and encourage others to believe that they will not
be punished. We recall that our Government of the
revolution has appointed a qualified judge as the first
woman Chief Justice in the Sudan. This is a first, not
only in the Sudan, but also in the region.

We are satisfied that the report presented by
Ms. Bensouda has recognized the gradual progress and
improvements in Darfur. The various reports issued by
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union
and the Secretary-General of the United Nations
have called for a continued drawdown of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), in accordance with the same schedule, and
for a transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding and
achieving stability in Darfur. Demonstrating that the
Sudanese Government is serious about peace in Darfur,
we have asked to for an extension of the UNAMID
mandate for an additional year. That will provide more
time to arrange the situation on the ground and to give
the peace file further attention, while addressing the
root causes of the problem in order to provide justice to
victims, martyrs, missing persons, internally displaced
persons and refugees, including issues related to land.

Following the success of the December revolution,
the Sudan is opening a new chapter of cooperation and
coordination with the international community on this
important matter. My country is making tremendous
efforts to improve the human rights situation in the
Sudan, which on 25 September culminated in the signing
of an agreement to inaugurate an Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in the
capital, as well as field offices in the states of Darfur,
Blue Nile and South Kordofan states and eastern Sudan.
This is in line with the constitutional declaration that
established the transitional Government and with the
aspirations of the Sudanese people to a new, modern
and democratic national State rooted in human rights.

In closing, we stress that fighting impunity is a
noble goal of justice and is not a point of contention.
It represents, as we said, one of the most important
priorities for the December revolution and one of the
elements necessary to achieving peace in the Sudan. It
is first and foremost the responsibility of the competent
domestic and national legal authorities. The transitional
Government is fully convinced of the need to fight
impunity and committed to it. We have launched
serious efforts to settle this issue once and for all in a
manner that will satisfy the Sudanese people, especially
the victims of Darfur. We will not allow any person to
escape punishment and accountability.

The meeting rose at 4.30pm.
