Mr. Ben Sliman (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to offer our condolences to
Pakistan following this morning's horrendous attack on
a school in Peshawar.

I would like to congratulate Chad on the occasion
of its accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I also thank you, Mr. President,
for your initiative to convene this debate, which
provides an opportunity for a constructive exchange
on ways to further strengthen cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union in the context of
peacekeeping and international security, characterized
by numerous challenges, the proliferation of crises and
multifaceted threats.

We cannot but welcome the increase in recent years
of the number of Security Council meetings devoted
to the partnership between the African Union and the
United Nations. It clearly reflects measheightened
awareness and a commitment to working jointly to meet
the peace and security challenges facing that Africa
through the building and strengthening of a strong and
innovative partnership between the African Union and
the United Nations.

The experience of judicious cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations, led by
the African Union, demonstrates the foresight, wisdom
and pioneering vision of the authors of the Charter of
the United Nations, who decided to include Chapter
VIII, recourse to which is nowadays indispensable to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
This resurgence of Chapter VIII as an instrument to
promote the participation of regional and subregional
organizations in the establishment and building of
peace and security not only strengthens the universal
character of the Charter, but also gives regional
organizations a growing role in the management of
crises and post-conflict stages.

With this in mind, we welcome the leading role
played by the African Union in the implementation of
the African Peace and Security Architecture. Despite
the weakness of its material and financial resources,
Africa has managed to deploy African peacekeeping
missions of peace in the Sudan, Darfur, Somalia, Mali
and the Central African Republic. These missions
have undoubtedly contributed to the improvement and
evolution of African-led peacekeeping operations,
while generating organic and even strategic links
between the African Union and the United Nations,
which are especially important in light of the fact that
the continent is the focus of a majority of the activities
of the United Nations and hence of the Security
Council's work. Today, 50 per cent of peacekeeping
operations, 80 per cent of Blue Helmets and 70 per cent
of the peacekeeping budget are devoted to Africa.

The new cooperation mechanisms that are being
put in place between the United Nations and the African
Union, such as the annual meetings between the United
Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council contribute greatly to defining the
guidelines and common approaches for responding to
complex and multifaceted crises, civil wars, rebellions,
terrorism and crime, as well as to the ongoing evolution
of peacekeeping.

This close partnership, based on the comparative
advantages of each organization, strengthens the
resilience of both organizations to new threats and to
the demands of the rapidly changing realities on the
ground. Innovative arrangements - such as the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
the transformation of the African-led International
Support Mission in Mali into the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali, and of the African-led International Support
Mission for the Central African Republic into the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic - illustrates
the flexible approach that now prevails at the United
Nations and the African Union.

In that context, we welcome the Secretary-General's
initiative for an a overall review of peacekeeping
operations and to include in that review, pursuant to
resolution 2167 (2014), modalities for transitioning
an African mission to a United Nations peacekeeping
operation. Similarly, we believe it is appropriate that,
next March, the Secretary-General will submit an
assessment report and recommendations dealing with
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
organizations in peacekeeping operations.

My country, which is involved in a number of
peacekeepingoperationsinAfricaasatroop-contributing
country - the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic, among others - welcomes these
various transitions and adaptations of peacekeeping
operations and their immediate impact on the ground.
Nevertheless, we support further consideration with
regard to the lessons learned from experiences acquired
during the transition of operations from the African
Union to United Nations peacekeeping operations, with
a view to improving the conditions necessary for such
transitions and to avoid delays, which are sometimes
too long, in deploying a new peacekeeping operation. It
is crucial to rapidly deploy contingents, peacekeeping
staff and support staff for reconstruction. It is equally
important to consider the possibility of establishing
a system of standby forces and capacities in order to
rapidly intervene when crises occur. That should be
based on an early-warning system so that the necessary
measures can be taken at the appropriate time.

The experience of recent years has shown that the
United Nations and the African Union are working,
in the framework of their partnership in the area of
peacekeeping, towards establishing a solid, effective and
innovative peacekeeping architecture based on lessons
learned from recent years. However, flexible, sustained
and predictable financing for those operations remains a
vital precondition for their success. It is highly desirable
that we see a more sustained international commitment
to financing such operations and to strengthening the
operational capacity of the African Union in the areas
of conflict prevention, crisis management and post-
conflict stabilization.

