Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Australia welcomes the
opportunity to participate once again in the Security
Council's deliberations on Timor-Leste. We
particularly welcome the participation of Deputy Prime
Minister Guterres today. We congratulate Timor-Leste
on its recent tenth anniversary of the United Nations-
sponsored popular consultation, and we endorses the
statement issued by the President of the Security
Council on 27 August, which reaffirmed the Council's
support for the efforts of the people and the
Government of Timor-Leste and for the work of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) in fulfilling its mandate. The effective
implementation of that mandate continues to be vital.

For Australia's part, we remain a steadfast friend
of Timor-Leste and will continue to contribute what we
can to international efforts to assist it in becoming a
stable and prosperous nation. We welcome the positive
developments in the security situation since the
11 February 2008 attacks on President Ramos-Horta
and Prime Minister Gusmao - developments recently
demonstrated in the successful local Suko elections
held on 9 October, which took place with only minor
and isolated security incidents. Equally pleasing has
been the closure of the last of the camps housing
internally displaced persons. We congratulate the
Government of Timor-Leste and others involved on
that achievement.

However, we recognize that the closure of those
camps is only the first step in the reintegration process.
The return of significant numbers of people to
communities with limited infrastructure and other
support services presents new risks and challenges.
Certainly Australia will continue to support efforts by
the Timorese Government to ensure the long-term
sustainability of the return and reintegration process.

The Australian-led International Security Force
(ISF) has commenced a shift in focus from a purely
security support role to one of defence cooperation
with Timor-Leste's military to support the work of
Australia's own bilateral Defence Cooperation
Programme. We wish to acknowledge the significant
cooperation of UNMIT and other international partners
with the ISF. In particular, we wish to express our
appreciation to New Zealand for its contribution.

In addition to the work of the Defence
Cooperation Programme, Australia's bilateral Timor-
Leste Police Development Programme is working
closely with the Government and the National Police of
Timor-Leste (PNTL) to develop its capacity. While
good progress has been and continues to be made, the
United Nations role on the ground in Timor-Leste in
this area in particular remains significant and quite
crucial. A major development this year has been the
commencement of the handover of policing
responsibility from the United Nations police to the
PNTL. The process mutually agreed between the
Government of Timor-Leste and UNMIT is for the
handover to be done gradually, with each district and
specialized unit required to meet a set of objective
criteria. That has resulted, as we know, in three
districts and one unit being handed back to the PNTL
to date.

We very much support that joint approach, which
not only ensures a controlled and orderly handover, but
also provides valuable information to international
partners as to the critical needs of the PNTL. We
support the view expressed in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2009/504) that continued monitoring by
UNMIT will be critical in this respect and that Timor-
Leste and UNMIT are at the beginning of a delicate
process - as the report says - of handover on which
we should not impose a predetermined artificial
timeline.

The development of the justice sector has
continued with the addition of more judges, public
defenders and public prosecutors. District courts are
now functioning and providing increased judicial
services to the rural population. Australia continues to
support the development of the justice sector, as do
others. While progress overall in that sector has been
positive, the clear principle of separation of powers
must be kept in mind at all times to ensure a strong and
independent judiciary.

Of course, the Government and the people of
Timor-Leste will themselves continue to take primary
responsibility for the development of a stable and
prosperous nation, including through institutional and
economic reform, the development of the private sector
and the provision of infrastructure, health and
education services and housing. The Secretary-
General's report recognizes, however, that many of the
underlying factors contributing to the 2006 crisis -
poverty, lack of an effective land regime, weakness in
the justice sector and still-nascent security
institutions - remain.

In support of capacity-building to address those
and other challenges, Australia is finalizing a new
country strategy for development assistance to Timor-
Leste for the next five years. It will reflect a tighter and
more explicit focus around priorities that have been
clearly identified by the Government of Timor-Leste
itself. Our aid programme under the new strategy,
which of course is conditional on Timor-Leste's
approval, will likely focus on delivering services -
particularly in child and maternal health - in rural
areas; creating training and employment opportunities
for young men and women, a crucial task; improving
food security; and assisting with capacity-building
within the institutions and the Government of Timor-
Leste itself.

A positive development has been progress in
institutional reform supported by donors. Those
developments include the establishment of a public
service commission and the adoption of legislation to
establish an anti-corruption commission, both of which
are significant landmarks.

As a significant donor to Timor-Leste and
mindful of the broad and complex range of
development cooperation taking place, we look
forward to continuing to work in partnership with the
Government of Timor-Leste and closely with other
development partners, including the United Nations in
all its forms, to ensure a carefully coordinated
approach.

It is axiomatic that the international community,
led by the United Nations, will continue to support
Timor-Leste as it moves towards more effective and
sustainable governance arrangements. For our part, we
remain committed to continuing our own strong
support for Timor-Leste during this important period of
transition.

In concluding, I would like to commend the

Secretary-General's Special Representative,
Mr. Atul Khare, not just for his professional
contribution- which we expect - but also for his

impressive personal commitment to Timor-Leste. We
have all been present at a point in history that has seen
the emergence of this new nation, and Mr. Khare and
his United Nations team have been a very significant
part of that history.

