Mr. Lewicki (Poland): First of all, let me join other
delegations in thanking Mr. Khan for his report (see S/2019/407) and in expressing our deep appreciation for
his work and that of the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(UNITAD)

We have said it many times in this Chamber but
let me also reiterate that there is no peace without
justice and that the key element to providing justice
is accountability. As Mr. Khan rightly pointed out,
accountability must be based on solid evidence, which
is why we greatly welcome the contribution of the
Special Adviser and his Team to accountability efforts
by collecting, preserving and storing evidence of
acts that could amount to war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide committed by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Iraq. I cannot agree
more with Mr. Khan that ISIL must be held accountable
for those atrocity crimes. We also welcome in particular
the advances in operationalizing the Team's mandate,
including the development of the investigative strategy,
and the activities undertaken by UNITAD in line with
the investigative priorities, which include the excavation
of 12 mass grave sites.

The establishment of trust and safeguarding
cooperation with the Government of Iraq and the
authorities of a number of other States, as well as
Iraqi regional and local authorities and representatives
of different parts of society, including survivors, is
equally commendable. We are greatly pleased to hear
from Mr. Khan himself in the Chamber today about
the exemplary cooperation UNITAD and he personally
enjoy with Iraqi Government authorities. That kind
of cooperation demonstrates the will, and even the
commitment, of the Iraqi Government to provide justice
and accountability. It is also a kind of sine qua non of
reconciliation within Iraqi society. We look forward to
the development of such cooperation further increasing
the Team's operational capabilities and progress in its
substantive work in line with its mandate. We call on all
stakeholders to support UNITAD and provide it with
any assistance it may need.

The efforts to ensure geographic diversity and
gender, ethnic and religious balance in appointing
the Iraqi members of the Investigative Team deserve
recognition. The Team's composition should reflect the
diversity of the Iraqi population, and thereby increase
the its capabilities in collecting evidence in various
communities affected by Da'esh. In that context, like
many other delegations, we welcome Special Adviser's
appointment of Ms. Salama Hasson Al-Khafaji as Chief
of National Engagement and Support. We encourage
efforts to integrate Iraqi members into the Team. We
also encourage States Members of the United Nations
to consider offering expert personnel support.

Delivering meaningful justice to the Victims of
the crimes of Da'esh/ISIL and their relatives requires
independent, credible investigations and fair trials. It
entails evidential and material collection and analysis
in accordance with the highest international standards.
In that context, the considerable progress achieved
by UNITAD with regard to the establishment of
frameworks for the collection and storage of forensic
material and documentary, digital and testimonial
evidence, as well as for protecting witnesses, should be
noted. I thank Mr. Khan for his updates. Great progress
has been made in that regard.
We commend the victim-centred approach adopted
by UNITAD, as highlighted by Mr. Khan, including
the steps taken to ensure that victims of sexual and
gender-based crimes in particular are provided with
adequate support.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that Poland fully
supports UNITAD, its impartiality and independence.
While welcoming the cooperation to date by different
stakeholders with the Special Adviser and the
Investigative Team, we call for further development in
that regard. Allow me also to once again acknowledge
the crucial contribution of the Special Adviser and the
Investigative Team to promoting accountability and
reconciliation in Iraq. We encourage them to continue
to effectively carry out their mission.

Last but not least, I concur with the words of
Mr. Khan that collecting the evidence will not mean the
end of UNITAD'S mission. The end of its mission will
be accomplished once justice has been provided for the
victims of the atrocities committed by ISIL and Da'esh.

