The President (spoke in French): I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of Belgium. The peaceful resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, one of the most long-standing conflicts on the Security Council's agenda, can be a factor of peace and stability in a particularly troubled region. Belgium therefore deems it important that the international community redouble its efforts to contribute to a just, comprehensive and lasting peace between Israel and Palestine. Our position has not changed. With its European Union partners, Belgium has always stressed that a credible negotiating process must take place within the framework of international law and include the relevant resolutions of the Council. There is no sustainable and realistic alternative to meet the legitimate aspirations of both Israelis and Palestinians for lasting peace. To facilitate the negotiation of such a solution, the international community has set out parameters from the outset. Allow me to recall them here. The first is an agreement on the borders between the two States on the basis of the borders of 4 June 1967, with land swaps mutually agreed between the parties. In that regard, Belgium deems the policy of settlements to be illegal under international law and to constitute a growing risk to the two-State solution. Any credible initiative to relaunch the peace process must be accompanied by measures aimed at putting an end to that policy. Moreover, any unilateral annexation would constitute a flagrant violation of international law and be an obstacle to peace. Recent statements in that regard are extremely worrisome. The European Union will not recognize any changes made to the pre-1967 borders, including as concerns Jerusalem, unless they have been accepted beforehand by the parties. Secondly, a just, equitable and realistic solution to the issue of refugees is a prerequisite. In that context, Belgium continues to support the indispensable work done on the ground by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and calls on all its partners to do the same. Thirdly, concerning Jerusalem, we must find through negotiations a way to settle the status of Jerusalem as the future capital of both States that in particular will do justice to the aspirations of all its inhabitants. Fourthly, there must be provisions made in the area of security that respect Palestinian sovereignty and show that the occupation is over, and that ensure Israeli security, prevent the resurgence of terrorism andrespond effectively to the threats that have emerged in the region and to the unacceptable attempts of those who try to call into question the very existence of Israel. A lasting solution requires a State of Israel with legitimacy recognized by all States and an independent, democratic, contiguous, sovereign and viable Palestinian State, so that the two States can live side by side in peace, security and mutual recognition. Those parameters address extremely sensitive issues. Any contribution to relaunching negotiations is welcome, but unilaterally calling into question those parameters could exacerbate tensions, which are also already very high on the ground. We therefore call on all parties to show the greatest restraint and respect international law. The American vision has put the Israeli-Palestinian conflict back at the top of the international and diplomatic agenda, and it underscores the importance of the international community becoming mobilized once again in order to provide an environment that is favourable to good-faith negotiations between the parties. The Israeli-Palestinian conflict must be urgently resolved in the context of a dialogue between the parties, supported by the multilateral system established by the international community in 1945 as a framework for relations among its members, within which Belgium believes has a fundamental responsibility. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. I give the floor to Mr. Aboul Gheit.
