Mr. Moeller (Denmark): Let me begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting and for directing the attention of the Security
Council to the importance of civil society's
involvement in conflict prevention and in the pacific
settlement of disputes. I also welcome the participation
of representatives from civil society in today's
meeting, and I am glad to have heard what they have
said.

At the outset, I would like to fully associate
myself with the statement to be made later this
morning by the representative of the United Kingdom
on behalf of the European Union.

The approaches that we take to peacebuilding and
to conflict prevention must be similar. If we are unable
to nurture and build sustainable peace, we cannot
prevent new conflicts from breaking out or, indeed,
prevent old ones from relapsing into new violence.
Consequently, our efforts to establish a Peacebuilding
Commission are also relevant from a conflict
prevention perspective. The establishment of a
Peacebuilding Commission is an inspiration of hope
for those who suffer from the effects of armed
conflicts. And it brings hope to those civil society
organizations and individuals who work tirelessly to
raise their societies out of the ashes of conflict. As
agreed at the summit, we must ensure that this new
body begins its work no later than at the end of this
year

The role played by civil society in conflict
prevention is not only important; it is indispensable.
Allow me to mention just a few of the situations in
which we would be at a loss without civil society.

First, the sustainable, long-term solution for the
protection of human security is to address the root
causes of conflict. To tackle those causes, it is
imperative to involve local civil society. Dialogue and
cooperation with civil society is key in our efforts to
reach the overarching goal: the continued peaceful
development of democratic and pluralistic societies.

In Denmark, we have realized the pivotal role of
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in conflict
prevention. In our Africa Programme for Peace, we are
contributing to the work of civil society to enforce its
important role in the prevention of local conflicts.
Danish NGOs play an active and crucial role in
Danish-funded projects throughout the world, and they
work closely with local NGOs.

Secondly, a basic prerequisite for conflict
prevention is early warning. In order to take timely and
sufficient steps to avoid the eruption of conflict, it is
imperative that the necessary knowledge and
information be available. Early response demands early
warning.

No one is better placed to spot the early signs of a
potential conflict than civil society. National and
international NGOs, national human rights institutes,
women's organizations and representatives of
minorities and indigenous peoples are all examples of
civil society representatives who possess first-hand
knowledge of rising tensions in fragile societies. We
depend on members of civil society to sound the alarm,
and we should listen to them and act when necessary.

Finally, civil society often plays a crucial role as
peace facilitators and local partners for mediation
between parties in conflict. In societies torn by ethnic,
political or religious tension and distrust, the difference
between open conflict and reconciliation can be the
active involvement of civil society. Confidence-
building between estranged parties is the foundation
for building the peace.

We have seen how the activities carried out by
NGOs often have great impact. Let me cite some
examples. In northern Uganda, Denmark supports the
activities of Save the Children, which are aimed at
creating an enabling environment for peaceful
coexistence and peacebuilding. Those activities include
peace clubs in schools, parents' support groups to
promote conflict prevention and the dissemination of
children's peace messages through the mass media.
Another example is mine action. A Danish NGO in
Afghanistan runs a programme in which ex-combatants
are hired to help in mine clearance. In that way, they
become peaceful breadwinners, thereby significantly
reducing the risk of their recruitment by destabilizing
elements.

Civil society cannot play the role of peace
facilitators in a vacuum. Civil society needs the
support and understanding of national Governments
and of the international community, including the
Security Council. We need to provide a secure
environment in which representatives for civil society
can operate; political encouragement and economic
support are of equal importance. Capacities for
prevention and peacebuilding must be strengthened
through further information-sharing, coordination and
mutual assistance between Governments and civil
society. In that regard, the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission would benefit greatly by the involvement
of civil society.

The Security Council has primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
However, the Security Council cannot discharge those
duties in solitude. As it is true for civil society, it is
equally true for the Council that it cannot play its vital
role in a vacuum. The interdependency and the
interrelation between the actions taken by the Security
Council in New York and the role played by actors in
the field, including civil society, call for close dialogue
and cooperation.

One concrete step is to have an NGO focal point
in United Nations integrated missions. In civil-military
planning and in peacebuilding activities, civil society
should be considered a partner and a contributor. In
general, the views of civil society should be reflected
in the reports of the Secretary-General to the Security
Council on mandated operations.

Another appropriate area is the development of
conflict prevention strategies. The Council should
explore new ways in which to establish a cooperative
framework with civil society. We could - as the
presidency has done today - take greater advantage of
the opportunity to invite representatives of civil society
to our open meetings, or we could hold traditional
informal meetings with NGOs.

In conclusion, dialogue, information-sharing and
cooperation between Member States and civil society
in New York and, most important, in the field
constitute important elements in ensuring that peace
and prosperity are not just an aspiration but a fact.

