The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.

I thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Patten, for their
comprehensive briefings.

Japan is deeply concerned about the human rights
and humanitarian conditions on the ground, as well as
the alleged killings of civilians and the displacement
of over 620,000 people to Bangladesh. Japan's Prime
Minister Abe met with Myanmar's State Counsellor
Aung San Suu Kyi on 14 November and expressed
his serious concerns over the situation in Rakhine
state, as well as his expectation of the restoration of
security in accordance with the law, the restoration of
humanitarian access, and the safe and voluntary return
of displaced persons.

Regarding the allegations of serious human rights
violations, it is necessary to take action against all
perpetrators, regardless of their place of origin or
political position. On 20 November, the State Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Japan, Mr. Nakane, metwith Senior
General Min Aung Hlaing, the Commander-in-Chief
of Defence Services of Myanmar, following the
investigation that was carried out by the armed forces.
State Minister Nakane urged Senior General Min Aung
Hlaing to take punitive measures against the alleged
human rights abuses, based on credible investigations.

The Government of Japan highly commends
the dedicated efforts of Bangladesh to continuously
respond to current humanitarian needs. Indeed, Japan's
Foreign Minister Kono visited a displaced persons
camp in Cox's Bazar on 19 November. Japan has
decided to extend assistance of $18.6 million through
international organizations for such high-priority needs
as food for displaced persons. We welcome the recent
efforts of the Government of Myanmar to improve
humanitarian access, including for the World Food
Programme. We encourage the Government to further
grant humanitarian access.

We welcome the arrangement signed on
23 November by Myanmar and Bangladesh for the
return of displaced persons who had fled Rakhine
state to Bangladesh. We hope that the return process
will be implemented steadily, in accordance with
the arrangement, and that their safe, voluntary and
dignified return will be achieved. We also welcome
the establishment by the Government of Myanmar of
the Union Enterprise Mechanism for Humanitarian
Assistance, Resettlement and Development in Rakhine,
and its efforts to facilitate humanitarian assistance,
as well as the return of displaced persons and the
restoration of peace to the affected communities. Japan
is ready to further support Bangladesh and Myanmar
in moving those efforts forward in order to improve the
situation on the ground.

The international community should continue to
closely follow the situation in Rakhine state and support
the efforts of the Government of Myanmar in seeking
long-term solutions, including the implementation of
the recommendations of the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State, chaired by Kofi Annan, to address the
root causes of this issue.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative
of Myanmar.

