Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank the Prosecutor for her briefing.

Eight years ago, the Security Council referred the
situation in Libya to the International Criminal Court
(ICC). Resolution 1973 (2011) addressed a dangerous
moment in Libya's history. Al-Qadhafi's horrific abuses
stunned the world. Now, as then, we stand against
impunity and support efforts to bring to justice those
responsible for atrocities in Libya. We reiterate our call
for SaifAl-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Al-Tuhamy Mohamed
Khaled, former head of Libya's notorious Internal
Security Agency, to be held to account for their alleged
crimes against humanity, torture and the murder and
persecution of hundreds of civilians in 2011. We also
renew our call for Libyan authorities to hold Mahmoud
Al-Werfalli to account for alleged unlawful killings.

The United States is deeply concerned by the
instability in Tripoli, which is endangering innocent
civilians. Lasting peace and stability can come only
through a political solution. All parties should rapidly
return to United Nations political mediation, the
success of which depends upon a ceasefire in and
around Tripoli.

We support the ongoing efforts of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ghassan
Salame and the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya to help avoid further escalation and chart a path
forward that provides security and prosperity for all
Libyans. This briefing is an important reminder that
accountability not only provides justice for victims of
past violations and abuses, but also signals that future
violations and abuses will not be tolerated.

We remain concerned about abuses that human
traffickers and smugglers have perpetrated against
migrants, refugees and asylum-seekers in Libya. We
support efforts to hold those individuals, including
Government officials found to be complicit, accountable.

The United States will continue to work to end
impunity for human rights abuses, including the
persistent problem of human smuggling and trafficking,
which has plagued the region. We strongly condemn
attempts by terrorists, including the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham in Libya and Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb, to use violence against innocent Libyans and
key institutions to sow chaos. They must not be allowed
to succeed. We will continue to work to defeat those
groups. The United States has historically been, and
will continue to be, a strong supporter of meaningful
accountability and justice for the victims of atrocities,
through appropriate mechanisms.

The perpetrators of atrocity crimes must face
justice, but we must also be careful to recognize
the right tool for each situation. However, I must
reiterate our long-standing and principled objection
to any assertion of ICC jurisdiction over nationals of
States that are not party to the Rome Statute, absent a
Security Council referral or the consent of such States.
Although we note the recent decision not to authorize
an investigation into the situation in Afghanistan, we
remain concerned about illegitimate attempts by the
ICC to assert jurisdiction. Our position on the ICC in
no way diminishes the commitment of the United States
to supporting accountability for atrocity crimes.

