Presidents of the General Assembly: the first, the late
Mongi Slim of Tunisia, who on 13 July 1960 introduced
in the Council the draft resolution to create the United
Nations Operation in the Congo, better known as ONUC.
The second is Theo-Ben Gurirab of Namibia, who has
unceasingly reminded you of the deplorable situation and
unspeakable suffering of the Congolese population as a
result of the shameless aggression against my country by
the armed forces of Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi. May
those two illustrious sons of Africa and their respective
countries, Tunisia and Namibia, accept this expression of
profound gratitude from the Government and people of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The fact that the Council is meeting today to help
my country once again seems to us a well-deserved
victory of those illustrious statesmen. It is their victory,
and the fact that the Council is examining a situation of
aggression that has been noted and recognized by the
entire world is also their victory.

Through these two personalities, these two worthy
sons of Africa, now independent, my delegation would
like to thank very sincerely all the members of the
Security Council present here and all the representatives
of the African States who have served on the Council
since 1998. My delegation also wishes to extend its
thanks to the member States of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) as well as the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) which consistently
and strongly pressured the United Nations to find a
solution to this war of aggression and for the Security
Council to forego its timorous approach to the aggression
against the Democratic Republic of the Congo which has
been occurring since 2 August 1998.

How could I fail to remind you that on 2 August
1990, confronting a similar situation in a State victim of
aggression in another region of the world, the Council had
raised an entire army to combat that instance of
aggression.

My delegation must nevertheless welcome this
awakening of the Security Council concerning this
situation which is now almost two years old - this

 

breach of peace and security, this violation of the
independence, national sovereignty and territorial integrity
of a Member State of the United Nations by other Members
of this universal organization.

Allow me also, Mr. President, to avail myself of this
opportunity to salute your predecessor, the representative of
the United States, who during his presidency in January
took the courageous initiative of inviting our African heads
of State to participate in the special meeting of the Security
Council on the Democratic Republic of the Congo. His
skilful and masterly approach and his vision enabled the
representative of the United States to achieve considerable
progress in the search for a lasting peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in the region.

My delegation would also like to pay well-deserved
tribute to Secretary-General Kofi Annan for the remarkable
efforts he has constantly made to bring about an end to the
aggression and for his numerous and laudable initiatives in
favour of truth, peace and security in the region.

My delegation is gratified to see that after so much
equivocation, the Security Council has finally heard the
cries and lamentations of the Congolese people, who, from
the heights of Mount Ruwenzori to the plains of Kinshasa,
from the equatorial basin to the savannahs of Katanga, are
suffering the tortures of the damned. It has heard the cries
of thousands of orphaned children, and haunting laments
arising from the graves of those women buried alive, or
from those mothers whose entrails were spilled on the
ground because they were suspected of bearing in their
womb a potential perpetrator of genocide.

My delegation believes that it is incumbent upon you,
members of the Council, to shoulder your responsibilities,
to condemn energetically these massacres of innocent
victims so that the entire world may say: never again!

From this very table, on 24 January, you heard Mr.
Laurent-Desire Kabila, President of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, assure you that the Congolese
Government will spare no effort in order to restore the
Congolese people to its status as primary sovereign and as
the unique source of legitimacy. The head of the Congolese
State had come to share with you his intention to accept the
holding of an inter-Congolese dialogue, whose objectives
are no different from those of the national debate already
convened by the Congolese Government and which is
designed to define the rules of the game that will govern
the exercise of power and thus lay the basis for a new and
democratic political order, of which the Congolese people
have so long been deprived.

His Excellency President Laurent Kabila, who on
that occasion extended his hand to those who were once
allies but are now enemies, also called on the
international community to persuade the aggressors
against the Democratic Republic of the Congo that they
had to make similar efforts to bring peace to their own
countries.

Members will understand that my country cannot fail
vigorously to support the proposal made by the Secretary-
General and by the Organization of African Unity and
echoed by France regarding the convening of an
international conference on the Great Lakes region to
tackle difficult common problems in the region and to
consider the requirements for lasting peace and
development throughout the region, with a view to the
permanent elimination of both the distant and the more
immediate causes of the disaster that has cast a shadow
over our continent.
My delegation is therefore gratified by the adoption
of today's resolution expanding the mandate of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUC) in the context of the second
phase of its deployment. We regret, however, that
members of the Council did not strive to spare the
Democratic Republic of the Congo further humiliation
with grave consequences, lacking the courage to
completely dissociate the issues relating to two hostile
countries, one of which has clearly caused its own
misfortunes as well as those of its neighbour: my own
country.

My delegation sincerely thanks the Administration
and the Congress of the United States for having spared
no effort in providing material support for MONUC. We
are grateful too for the sincere cooperation we have
enjoyed from the United Nations, through its Department
of Peacekeeping Operations. But my delegation is duty-
bound to observe that the United Nations operation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo would have been less
costly had the United Nations acted on the many requests
made to the Council by the Democratic Republic of the
Congo since the outbreak of aggression in August 1998.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is now
curious to see how much the present operation will cost.
It was the Council's hesitation that led to the current
situation. Had the Council been in a position to respond

 

to my country's complaints since the fateful month of
August 1998, it would not now be mourning the dead,
regretting violations of the Lusaka Agreement and much
else besides.

My delegation assures the Council that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will have a warm welcome for
MONUC. It will greet those sons and daughters of
countries that cherish peace and justice with legendary
African hospitality, as only the Congolese can offer it.

For the deployment of MONUC to be a complete
success, it will have to be carried out in close cooperation
with the authorities in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. My country would wish to be consulted at all times
about the way in which the operation is set up; in that
connection, it is possible that the Democratic Republic of
the Congo will refuse offers by some States whose dealings
with the aggressors make it impossible for them to be truly
neutral.

My delegation wants to remind the Council of its
primary Charter responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. We call on the Council to
act in full knowledge of the facts, for the greater benefit of
the Congolese people. My delegation has not the slightest
doubt that the Congolese people will be thankful for this
and will be in a position to express their deep gratitude.

Echoing what His Excellency President Laurent Kabila
affirmed to the Council last month, my delegation reiterates
the readiness of the Congolese Government openly and
seriously to discuss ways and means to put an end to this
futile, bloody and tragic war, so that we will be able
together to build a region in which its peoples can live in
peace and prosperity.

