Ms. Shalev (Israel): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate the delegation of Mexico on its
stewardship of the Council this month and to thank it
for convening this very important debate. I also wish to

thank Her Excellency Secretary of Foreign Affairs
Patricia Espinosa Cantellano for her presence here
earlier today. I also thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy;
the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Atul Khare; and the Deputy Executive
Director of UNICEF, Ms. Hilde Johnson, for their
informative statements and their commitment to this
important issue.

I also wish to commend the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict for its important work
and the Permanent Representative of Mexico for his
able guidance as Chair of the Working Group. Finally, I
also wish to offer my personal thanks to Ms. Manju
Gurung for appearing before this Council and sharing
her experience with us. Her testimony awakens us all
to the necessity to act decisively on the issue of
children in armed conflict.

Since this Council last debated this issue,
significant advances have been made in the protection
of children in situations of armed conflict, including
the adoption of resolution 1882 (2009), expanding the
scope of the annexes of the Secretary-General's
reports. Additionally, for the first time, a Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict is
coordinating the activities of the United Nations on this
issue.

The recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/181) highlights progress in other areas, as
well. In nearly every region affected by conflict,
scores, hundreds, and even thousands of children
conscripted into armed groups have been released. In
many other situations, action plans have been
developed and should be implemented without delay.

Unfortunately, for the hundreds of thousands who
remain trapped in armed groups, valuable time is being
lost. All those who exploit minors in armed conflict
must cease this practice and immediately release the
children in their ranks. We further urge sustained
international support for disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration efforts so that children can hope for a
future outside of combat. In addition, the increased
deployment of child protection advisers in
peacekeeping missions could serve as an additional
tool for monitoring and defending the interests of
children.
Israel follows with interest the important work of
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. The attention she has paid to
children in specific situations of conflict, as well as
that paid by the Security Council Working Group
through its reports and communications, has the
potential to rein in the most egregious practices of
armed groups.

We note the reference in the Secretary-General's
report to Israel's concern that more information should
be provided in order to enable the appropriate
authorities to investigate and respond substantively,
where appropriate. However, the continued reliance on
allegations lacking supporting detail continues to
undermine the credibility of the report. We therefore
urge the Office of the Special Representative to give
greater attention to the invaluable process of carefully
documenting and vetting the various sources of the
information it receives and uses in its reports,
especially those aspects that rely heavily on
uncorroborated allegations.

While we hope for and work towards peace, our
region remains filled with dangerous threats against
children from terrorists and extremists. We welcome
the mention of Israeli children who have been victims
of armed conflict - a sad reality that Israeli children
have had to live with. We also take note of the
instances of the exploitation of children and their use
as human shields by the Hamas terrorist rulers in Gaza.
Given the abundance of accounts and documentation of
such incidents, we strongly encourage future reports of
the Special Representative to further elaborate on this
aspect, rather than mentioning it in passing.

One such well-documented incident took place
just weeks ago when approximately 30 gunmen
attacked and set fire to United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) recreational facilities dedicated to use by
children. The attack not only undermined the work of
UNRWA and was condemned by the Secretary-
General, but according to the UNRWA Director of
Operations in Gaza it was also "an attack on the
happiness of children". In addition, one abhorrent
practice of Hamas is to gather civilians - notably
children - to the location of a pending strike by the
Israel Defense Forces on terrorists or weapons
facilities, in the knowledge that Israel will refrain from
intentionally attacking civilians.
14

While the incidents I have just described require
the attention of this Council, the broader context in
which children are used in armed conflict by terrorists
must also be addressed. In this respect, the incitement
of children is no less dangerous than terrorism, as
hateful education fans the flames of conflict. Let me be
clear - inciting children today provides them with the
foundation for becoming the terrorists of tomorrow.

Accordingly, the international community has a
duty to prevent such incitement in schools, camps,
houses of worship, the media and elsewhere. Many
children across the region, and in particular generation
after generation of Palestinian children, have been
taught to deny Israel's legitimacy and to hate and kill
Jews. Such incitement is only one element in a
determined effort by many in the region to indoctrinate
children to take up arms.

Although examples abound, I wish to share only
one with this Council. A Hamas magazine for children
reads

"Oh, our Aqsa [Mosque], we shall return; we are
soldiers of God's religion We will rejoice at
the victory and kill the Jews by the sword".

We tend to focus our energies primarily on the
conscription and use of children in hostilities. It is no
less important that we effectively and more
comprehensively deal with the brainwashing of
children who are taught to glorify terrorism,
martyrdom and anti-Semitism. Unfortunately, hatred
and violence are taught to children. Yet we can - we
must - undo the teaching of such destructive ways so
that all children will become contributing members of
a global, tolerant society.

