Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Zouev and the Police Commissioners
present with us here today, as well as Ms. Reitano, for
their briefings.

I would like to begin by asking all the Blue Berets
at today's meeting to pass on to their colleagues the
United Kingdom's thanks and admiration for their
service and bravery. Their work and sacrifice in fragile
and post-conflict States is a vital part of peacekeeping
operations. In countries such as the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, South Sudan and Haiti, the men and
women of United Nations policing put their lives on the
line to protect the most vulnerable as their communities
emerge from conflict. Their presence allows people to
rebuild their lives, communities and livelihoods. They
also help to embed longer-term stability by promoting
the rule of law and human rights and by helping build
capable and accountable national security institutions.

In the light of the important role played by United
Nations policing in peacekeeping and the maintenance
of international peace and security, it is vital for the
Security Council to have the opportunity to hear at
first-hand from Police Commissioners about what
the Security Council can do to support them and
their offices.

IfUnitedNations policingisto remain effective,then
we - whether Council members, police-contributing
countries or police commanders - need to listen to the
experiences of police on the ground and consider how
reform can make a practical difference. That is why the
United Kingdom was a strong supporter of resolution
2382 (2017) and the 2016 external review. We look
forward to the full implementation of the resolution
and those recommendations of the external review that
remain outstanding. We believe that the forthcoming
report on policing by the Secretary-General will
provide an opportunity to take stock of the various
strands of reform and set out a clear plan for the future.
There are two particular areas I would like to highlight.

First, the United Kingdom would like to underline
the full integration of policing advice into mission
planning processes, ensuring that policing expertise
is included in decision-making through the life of the
mission. That needs to be underpinned by a strong and
analytical capability that can undertake the continuous
assessment necessary to ensure that policing activity
remains appropriate to the needs on the ground.

Secondly, it is vital that United Nations missions
continue to support the development of law enforcement
in host States and do so based on assessment of the host
State needs and capacity. The United Kingdom believes
that, to maximize impact, United Nations police need
to be in a position to deploy sufficient numbers of
specialists in those specific disciplines that are relevant
to a particular mission. The United Kingdom would like
to encourage the Police Division to improve efficiency
in recruitment and subsequent deployment into police
components so that the relevant expertise is available
when needed most.

United Nations police are present throughout the
continuum of conflict. The Blue Berets are usually the
first and the last members of the United Nations family
that a local population meet during any intervention or
response to a crisis. Therefore, in order to succeed in
their mission across the duration of their deployment,
officers need to establish a relationship with the
population - one that must be one that is founded
on trust. That trust is more readily formed if United
Nations police officers reflect the diversity of the world
that they are sent to protect.

Allow me, therefore, to conclude by expressing
my support for police-contributing countries that are
addressing the obstacles preventing more women from
entering United Nations police. I also wish to encourage
even greater efforts within United Nations police
components to consult with communities, including
women, and ensure that their views and needs are fully
part of their day-to-day work and are reflected in their
reporting to the Council.

