Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate. We
welcome every effort from the Security Council to push
this agenda forward. I also thank Mr. Ian Martin for
his briefing.

In recent years, some steps were taken to increase
the transparency, inclusiveness, interaction and
efficiency of the work of the Security Council. In that
regard, we commend the recent work by the members of
the Council, under the leadership of Japan, in updating
the presidential note S/2010/507. The challenge now
lies in its implementation.

As yet another member of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group, we associate
ourselves with the statement delivered earlier by the
Permanent Representative of Switzerland. I would like
now to briefly touch upon four aspects and suggest
some concrete improvements.

The first aspect concerns open debates, which
tend to be a regular feature of the Council's monthly
programme of work. We welcome these debates as an
expression of the commitment to greater transparency
and openness to non-Council members. But open
debates are also a way to enable Member States to better
understand the measures adopted by the Council and to
enhance their commitment to the full implementation of
these measures. In this vein, we believe that whenever
an open debate is expected to have an outcome, the
Council should preferentially decide to allow at a later
stage for the outcome to reflect the input of non-Council
members, as deemed relevant by the Council.

With regard to the second aspect, we note with
appreciation that an increasing number of Council
members are expressing their views publicly at briefings.
We welcome and encourage that good practice, as
it contributes to increased transparency and allows
members of the Council to have their views on record,
without prejudice to informal consultations whenever
the Council's members deem that appropriate.

Thirdly, we believe that the Security Council's
consultation with the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Economic and Social Council increases the power
of synergies and strengthens a more coordinated United
Nations response in conflict prevention, peacebuilding
and sustaining peace. The importance of such
interactions has already been recognized by the Security
Council. What is now required is to bring this approach
into full practice. We therefore encourage the Council
to regularly invite the Chairs of the Peacebuilding
Commission and of its country configurations, as well
as the President of the Economic and Social Council,
as briefers or participants in informal dialogues,
as necessary.

Fourthly, we encourage the Council to make better
use of its subsidiary bodies, such as the sanctions
committees and the working groups, to ensure that it
captures early signs of emerging threats to peace and
security, including those closely linked to the larger
development agenda, climate change, pandemics,
illegal trafficking or organized crime.

Mr. President, in the coming months, as you ably
guide the Informal Working Group as its as Chair, we
trust that the Council will agree on further progress
related to its working methods, without overburdening
the Council's workload.

