Mr. Jayanama (Thailand): Let me first extend
my delegation's appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
providing an opportunity for non-members of the
Security Council, including my delegation, to express
our views on developments in East Timor. I wish
sincerely to thank Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
comprehensive briefing this morning. I also welcome
Mr. Jose' Ramos-Horta, who is here in the Chamber
today.

Thailand fully concurs with the Secretary-
General's assessment in his most recent report
(S/2001/719) that the past six months have been East
Timor's most productive period. There is no doubt that
this rapid progress was made possible by the collective
efforts of the United Nations and the international
community, under the able guidance of Mr. Vieira de
Mello, in charting the course towards a self-governing
and independent East Timor.

Thailand, for its part, has played an active role in
the peacekeeping operation and in development
assistance from the very beginning. We have
continuously contributed military and civilian police
personnel in East Timor since the United Nations
Mission in East Timor (UNAMET), which was the
predecessor mission of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET). We are
pleased to provide Lieutenant-General Boonsrang
Niumpradit, the Force Commander of the UNTAET
peacekeeping force. We will continue to be a working
partner of the United Nations and the international
community.
While we recognize the remarkable achievements
of UNTAET, it may be too early to proclaim it a
success story for United Nations peacekeeping
operations. It is pivotally important that UNTAET
continue to build on its achievements as an example of
a post-conflict peace-building mission. We believe that
challenges remain and that developments over the next
six months will be crucial to the future of East Timor.
We believe that, in line with the report (S/2000/809) of
the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations chaired
by Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, which we all supported, the
United Nations still has a role in steering East Timor
towards the desired democratic path. We believe that
the United Nations should have a clear exit strategy, as
envisaged in the Brahimi report; this means that solid
groundwork and appropriate conditions conducive to
East Timor's self-development should be in place
before the United Nations leaves.

Even after the United Nations leaves,
international assistance will still be needed. Thailand
thus supports the Secretary-General's recommendations
on the need for a substantial international presence in
East Timor after independence. One of the fundamental
elements of East Timor's attaining self-sustenance in
the political, economic, social and cultural spheres lies
in capacity-building. In this regard, Thailand has
offered its assistance - technical, agricultural and
public-health expertise - to help the East Timorese
sustain themselves. We recognize that only a strong
and stable East Timor will contribute to the political
and economic stability of the region. We therefore urge
the further enhancement and acceleration of
Timorization in institution-building in the areas of
governance, education, the judiciary, management and
security. In this regard, we urge more East Timorese
living abroad to return home to help in the
development of an independent East Timor.

One area in which UNTAET has achieved
remarkable success is in the maintenance of security in
East Timor through UNTAET's military component.
But that task is, in our view, far from over. What
remains of concern to us is the post-election
monitoring of security. Any future reduction in the
force should take into account the prevailing security
situation on the ground and the development of the
East Timor Defence Force.

Finally, I wish to reiterate Thailand's
commitment, within its limited capabilities and
resources, to cooperating with the United Nations and
the international community to assist East Timor on its
path to independence and democracy. We stand ready
to play our role in making East Timor one more United
Nations success story.

