Central Africa has made some progress, but remains a fragile region with many political, security, humanitarian and human rights challenges. The very volatile situation in the Central African Republic is a case in point. The Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic is being challenged by armed groups, and the pre-election period is fuelling political tensions. The Lake Chad basin faces the persistent threat of Boko Haram and despite commendable initiatives by countries in the region, the Gulf of Guinea remains the global epicentre of piracy. The situation is all the more precarious since the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has not spared the region and is likely to have a significant socioeconomic impact. As several countries prepare to go to the polls, we must be fully aware of the risk of both political and security destabilization. The support of international partners is critical if we are to help Central African countries to contain those threats. Following up on the call to action for Africa, launched on 15 April by President Macron and several African and European leaders, France has pledged €1.2 billion to support Africa in the fight against COVID-19. It has also launched an initiative within the Group of 20 and the Paris Club for a moratorium on debt servicing for countries affected by the pandemic. In Central Africa, Chad, the Republic of Congo and Cameroon have benefited from that measure. France has also committed to a humanitarian air bridge between the European Union and several African countries in order to support the continuity of operations of humanitarian organizations and their participation in the response to COVID-19 at a time when border closures have caused major logistical difficulties. The first flight, on 8 May, was to the Central African Republic. The second flight, on 15 May, was to Sao Tome and Principe. On 8 and 9 June, the French Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, his Belgian counterpart and the European Commissioner for Crisis Management visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo on the occasion of the first flight of the air bridge, which is expected to carry nearly 40 tons of cargo and more than 100 humanitarian workers. In addition to that bilateral support, France is also supporting the United Nations humanitarian agencies present in the region. In that context, France is expected to contribute €4.5 million to the fight against COVID-19 in Africa. It is necessary to pursue concerted and cohesive action under the auspices of the United Nations. We must do more. France also reiterates its full support for the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and safe and unhindered humanitarian access. There is no alternative to effectively combating the COVID-19 pandemic.
