I welcome the opportunity to present my thirty-second report regarding the situation in Darfur, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005), and to brief the Security Council on recent developments. Before doing so, I congratulate South Africa on assuming the presidency of the Council for the month of December and wish it continued success in carrying out its essential duties. As the world continues to navigate this uncertain era of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, I again brief the Council virtually. Since my latest update in June (see S/2020/538), there have been significant developments in the Darfur situation. Today I will focus on two of those important developments: the ongoing case against Mr. Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-Rahman, also known as Ali Kushayb, and the directly related issue of the status of cooperation between my Office and the Government of the Sudan. Fifteen years after the referral of the situation in Darfur to the International Criminal Court (ICC), pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005), the victims of the crimes in Darfur finally have a chance to see justice in relation to one of the cases. My written report sets out the main judicial developments in the case against Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman, who was transferred to the International Criminal Court on 9 June following his voluntary surrender to authorities in the Central African Republic, as the Council was made aware in my June report. My Office, assisted by the Registry of the Court, was able to secure the surrender and transfer of the suspect to the custody of the ICC, notwithstanding the operational challenges presented by the COVID-19 pandemic. The Council will recall that the Court had issued two arrest warrants against Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman for multiple counts of war crimes and crimes against humanity allegedly committed in Darfur. The first warrant concerned crimes allegedly committed during attacks against civilians in the locations of Kodoom, Bindisi, Mukjar and Arawala between August 2003 and March 2004. The second arrest warrant concerned the crimes allegedly committed in the town of Deleig in March 2004. Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman made his initial appearance before ICC Pre-Trial Chamber II on 15 June. The Pre-Trial Chamber scheduled the confirmation of charges hearing for 7 December and later postponed it to 22 February 2021. On 3 December, in the light of the challenges my Office is facing, some of which I will address today, I requested the Pre-Trial Chamber to further postpone the confirmation hearing until 31 May 2021. The defence has yet to respond to that request, and the Pre-Trial Chamber will decide on that request in due course. Despite limited resources, my Office is adapting to the new reality and pandemic-related restrictions in its pursuit of justice for victims in the Darfur situation. My team of investigators, analysts, advisers and lawyers has been working under difficult conditions, including conducting missions in Europe and Africa to expedite preparations for Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman's confirmation of charges hearing. The planning, preparation and conduct of those missions have been heavily impacted - and at times unavoidably delayed - by the challenges that my Office, cooperating States and other partners have had to overcome to enable my team to conduct its work in the circumstances of a global pandemic. I take this opportunity to express my appreciation to the team for their hard work and resilience over the past six months, in extremely challenging circumstances. During the reporting period, my Office continued to monitor alleged crimes in Darfur that may fall within the Court's jurisdiction. There have been repeated allegations of attacks on civilians in Darfur, reportedly occurring mainly in June and July. Those attacks reportedly resulted in significant casualties. Alarmingly, there are continuing reports of sexual and gender-based violence and crimes against children. Such attacks must stop, and the protection of civilians must remain a priority. I welcome the Juba Peace Agreement, signed on 3 October, between the Sovereign Council and the Sudanese Revolutionary Front and other movements. I am hopeful that the Agreement will help bring justice to the victims of atrocity crimes in Darfur and build sustainable and prosperous peace in the Sudan. I commend the parties' agreement to create a special court for Darfur crimes and a truth and reconciliation commission. I also welcome the importance that the Juba Peace Agreement lends to the ICC and the emphasis placed on cooperation between the Sudan and the Court in relation to the five ICC suspects, including Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman. Indeed, the parties are committed to facilitating the appearance of those wanted before the ICC, providing its prosecutors and investigators with access to victims, witnesses and investigation sites and allowing Court personnel to travel freely throughout the Sudan. The Juba Peace Agreement also states that the parties shall not interfere with ICC investigations and shall ensure the safety of victims and witnesses. I also welcome the Sudan's recent repeal of the criminal law provisions that prevented cooperation with the ICC. In October, I led the first mission by my Office to the Sudan in 13 years. In Khartoum, my team and I engaged in productive meetings with officials of the Government of the Sudan at the highest levels. I also held productive discussions with representatives of civil society organizations, international bodies and the diplomatic corps in Khartoum. Those meetings enabled my team to explain the ICC proceedings and the status of the Darfur cases. Our discussions also presented an opportunity to hear directly from the Sudanese authorities about their plans for cooperation with my Office and their commitment to accountability and justice for the people of Darfur. My visit to Khartoum further gave my delegation and the Government of the Sudan the opportunity to hold preliminary discussions on possible mechanisms for bringing to justice the suspects against whom ICC warrants have already been issued. I welcome the assurances of support, cooperation and the commitment to justice expressed by the authorities during my mission to Khartoum. I am also hopeful that the draft memorandum of understanding on modalities of cooperation, submitted by my Office to the Sudan shortly after the mission, can be swiftly concluded. At the present time, we are waiting for the authorities of the Sudan to provide their reaction to the draft. In Khartoum, I stressed the urgent need for my investigators to be given access to the territory of the Sudan. I emphasized that time is of the essence as my team strives to meet the various deadlines set by the Court's judges in Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman's case. I reiterate that call and urge the Council to impress upon the Sudan the urgent need for my investigators to access its territory, and in particular to conduct investigative missions in Darfur, without further delay. I had hoped that my team would travel to the Sudan in November for an operational assessment mission to pave the way for fully fledged investigative activities immediately thereafter. Unfortunately, that mission was postponed at the request of the Sudanese authorities. No new dates have been offered, and the window of opportunity to conduct investigations prior to Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman's confirmation of charges hearing is rapidly closing. Unless the mission is rescheduled soon, my Office risks losing a golden opportunity to directly engage with victims and witnesses in situ for the first time and to ensure that their evidence is made available to the judges at Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman's confirmation of charges hearing, currently scheduled for 22 February 2021. The Sudan's immediate facilitation of access to its territory would demonstrate to the victims, the Sudanese people and the international community, including the Council, that the Sudan seriously intends to implement the principles adopted in the Juba Peace Agreement and resolution 1593 (2005), which referred the situation of Darfur to my Office. It would give further concrete expression to the assurances of cooperation conveyed to me in person during the recent historic visit of my Office to Khartoum. It would also signal that the Sudan is genuinely committed to the path of justice. My Office stands ready to work collaboratively with the Sudan as it charts its way towards accountability for the atrocity crimes alleged to have been committed in Darfur. Allow me to also take this opportunity to stress that the outstanding ICC arrest warrants against Mr. Omar Al-Bashir, Mr. Ahmad Harun, Mr. Abdel Raheem Muhammad Hussein and Mr. Abdallah Banda Abakaer Nourain remain in full force. To date, my Office has not received any official confirmation by the competent authorities of the Sudan on what actions they intend to take in relation to the remaining ICC suspects, who, with the exception of Mr. Banda, are reportedly in their custody. I take this opportunity to appeal to the Council and, through it, to the authorities of the Government of the Sudan, to intensify dialogue with my Office in relation to those outstanding warrants. While fully respecting the principle of complementarity, we must ensure that all the ICC suspects are brought to justice through fair, objective and independent proceedings - either before the Court or in Sudanese courts - and guided by the requirements of the Rome Statute. The Council can play a decisive role in expediting that process and ensuring the Sudan's full, prompt and tangible cooperation with the ICC, consistent with its international obligations. The victims of atrocity crimes in Darfur deserve to finally see real progress in the pursuit of justice. I would like to acknowledge and express appreciation for the productive cooperation between my Office and other States in Africa, Europe and beyond in relation to our investigative activities on the Darfur situation. The support and cooperation of all States in the implementation of resolution 1593 (2005) is essential for the success of my Office's investigations, particularly in the case against Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman. The progress my Office has been able to make to date, despite the significant challenges we face, would not have been possible without the principled cooperation of a number of States, including some of those who sit on the Council. Allow me to express my sincere gratitude for that unwavering support. I must also express my heartfelt thanks and respect to the inspirational witnesses, victims and other individuals and organizations who continue to do everything in their power to pursue justice and accountability for crimes in Darfur. Despite the many challenges faced by my Office in the course of its work, we remain undeterred by any obstacles to the pursuit of justice for victims in the Darfur situation, including political interference. My recent mission to Khartoum and related high-level meetings represent a turning point in the Office's formal relationship with the Government of the Sudan. During those meetings, a number of officials at the highest level assured me that the Sudan's commitment to justice in Darfur was genuine and that the presence of my delegation in Khartoum was a demonstration of that. I do not doubt the sincerity of those words, but they must now be matched with concrete action, starting with unimpeded access for my investigators to witnesses, crime scenes and other evidence in Darfur. My next report on the Darfur situation will be submitted in June 2021. It will be my last report to the Council as Prosecutor of the ICC. In that final report, I hope to be in a position to brief the Council on the activities that my Office has conducted on the ground in Darfur. Before then, I also hope to visit Darfur in order to engage with victims and pay personal tribute to the courage, resilience and patience they have demonstrated since the Council's referral first ignited their hopes for justice 15 years ago. Access to justice is what the victims expect, and it is what the Sudan, with the support of the Council, must immediately facilitate. The developments in the Sudan give renewed hope for justice and accountability in Darfur. Those hopes must not be dashed. Those promising developments also convey a clear message - the politics that aims to undermine the progressive movement towards greater accountability for atrocity crimes has a limited shelf life, because it goes against the currents of modern history and the quest and need of humankind for a more just world.
