Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): Mr. President, I
congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of May. You can count
on the support of the Brazilian delegation. I also
commend Ambassador Takasu and his delegation for
their work in the month of April.

I would also like to thank Baroness Ashton,
European Union (EU) High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, for her briefing. I also
wish to extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr.
Michael Spindelegger, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Austria.

It is important for the Security Council to be kept
abreast of activities undertaken by regional
organizations in assisting the Council to fulfil its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

As the Treaty of Lisbon launches a new phase in
the institutional development of the EU, we hope it
will strengthen cooperation with the United Nations
and help to advance what already is a mutually
beneficial partnership.

We commend the European Union for promoting
political dialogue and strengthening national capacities
in several countries and regions, including Europe,
Africa, Asia and the Middle East. In particular, we
welcome the role of the European Union in the
stabilization of the Balkans, under the general
framework of the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

My delegation attaches great importance to the
work the EU undertakes in the area of peacebuilding.
The European missions in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo are playing an important role. We encourage
them to continue to closely coordinate with the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and other players in the reform
of both the Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo and the Congolese national
police.

As Chair of the country-specific meeting of the
Peacebuilding Commission for Guinea-Bissau, we
appreciate the contribution that the European Union is
making to security sector reform in that country. We
wish to continue to cooperate with the EU Mission in
Guinea-Bissau so as to create the conditions for
successful reform.

