Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): My delegation is
grateful to the Kuwaiti Permanent Mission for initiating
this emergency briefing on the unfolding situation
in Gaza. We also express our appreciation to Special
Coordinator Mladenov for his comprehensive and
objective update.

We were alarmed by the situation in that part of
the Middle East. We are extremely concerned about
the increase in the death toll caused by Violence on
the border between the Gaza Strip and Israel. My
delegation expresses deep grief following the tragic loss
of Palestinian civilians during protests. We consider
that to be an irredeemable loss of life. Kazakhstan fully
supports the right of the Palestinian people to self-
expression and peaceful demonstrations. While tensions
on the ground are high, Kazakhstan calls on all actors
to show responsibility to prevent further tension and to
avoid the instigation of violence. We believe it could be
a dangerous development in the situation in the Middle
East region as a whole. In that regard, Kazakhstan calls
on both sides of the conflict to exercise restraint.

The Republic of Kazakhstan calls on the
international community to take exhaustive measures
to immediately end the Violence. After several weeks
of violence and in the face of the growing number
of Palestinian victims in the Gaza Strip still today,
Kazakhstan condemns the indiscriminate use of live
ammunition against civilians and urges the Israeli
authorities to exercise restraint. Investigations should
be conducted on all of those cases. We reiterate that
Israeli security forces must calibrate the use of force.
We recall the common duty of United Nations States
Members to protect civilians, especially minors.

We join the position of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation concerning the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
We endorse the outcomes of the Dhaka declaration

adopted at the forty-fifth session of the Council of
Foreign Ministers of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation in Bangladesh on 6 May. Specifically,
we reiterate that Jerusalem is the common homeland
of different ethnicities and religions. All parties must
avoid taking actions that might further escalate the
situation, while both Palestine and Israel must respect
each other's right to existence. International law is
unambiguous about the status of Jerusalem. Any
unilateral action to change the status of the city runs
counter to the letter and spirit of international law and
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions,
and fuel violence and instability in the region. The
status of Jerusalem will have to be determined in the
framework of negotiations to come in the context of
internationally agreed parameters in order to reach a
just and lasting solution - namely two States, living
side by side in peace and security.

Kazakhstan considers it important to continue
efforts to consolidate the Palestinian ranks on the
Palestine Liberation Organization political platform
as a necessary condition to practically realize the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people for the
creation of their own independent State.

We note that the parties must find a solution for
the difficult humanitarian situation of Gaza. That
requires economic confidence-building measures and
strong support from the international community. With
regard to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA),
Kazakhstan reiterates the need to support that important
mechanism. In that regard, Kazakhstan endorses the
concern expressed earlier by the Special Coordinator
over the funding of UNRWA this year. A significant
reduction in its regular budget has already increased
the anxiety level of the 5.3 million Palestine refugees,
who have already suffered the longest-protracted
refugee crisis.

Lastly, while reaffirming its commitment to the
decisions and resolutions of the Security Council and
the General Assembly, the Republic of Kazakhstan
has consistently supported the early, complete and
comprehensive settlement of the situation in the
Middle East within the framework of peaceful political
progress. We believe it is urgent to recreate the necessary
conditions for the search for a political solution in a
regional context already marked by strong tensions. We
call upon the leaders of Israel and Palestine and other
parties to take concrete steps to preserve the possibility
of peaceful coexistence and the two-State solution, to
strengthen the prospects for peace by remaining calm
and exercising the maximum restraint in order to avoid
actions that can erode and derail peaceful efforts and
further escalate tensions between the Palestinians
and Israelis. It should be based, as we always say at
the Council, on the inalienable rights of Palestinians
to statehood and Israel's to security. In the very near
future, we must begin negotiations on each existing
problem, aimed at reaching agreement on pending
issues and giving them a final status. We believe
that only a political solution and confidence-building
measures in different dimensions can help the parties
to resolve the contradictions.

