Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
for presenting the informative twenty-sixth report, in
accordance with resolution 1593 (2005).

We have taken note of the progress in the
investigations, as well as the difficulties that the Office
of the Prosecutor has faced during the course of the
investigations and in its judicial activity, which are both
linked to situations that hinder the work entrusted to it
by the Security Council. Bolivia believes that those who
have committed alleged war crimes and crimes against
humanity must be brought to justice. We cannot deny
that this is an important element in the achievement of
stable and lasting peace.

As we express our support for the work of the
International Criminal Court, we recall that, when the
Security Council referred the situation in Darfur to the

International Criminal Court through resolution 1593
(2005), it not only agreed to activate its jurisdiction for
the prosecution of persons, but also urged the Court
to support international cooperation in the promotion
of the rule of law, the protection of human rights
and the fight against impunity, while emphasizing
non-jurisdictional activities such as the promotion of
peace, reconciliation and institutional strengthening.

We encourage the Court to join the efforts of
regional organizations and of the international
community to strengthen the political processes in the
Sudan, in particular as pertains to the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur. In that regard, we believe that
cooperation with the African Union is essential. We
recognize its indisputable commitment to the fight
against impunity, as expressed in its Constitutive
Act. In addition, we recall that the African Union has
established a ministerial council to address the issues
related to the case in question. In that regard, we call
for the establishment of constructive dialogue that
facilitates the work at hand and engenders trust between
both institutions.

We see positive developments in the Sudan over
the past year. For example, there were no clashes
between the Government and rebel groups during
the period covered by the Secretary-General's latest
report on Darfur. Also worthy of note were the
developments in the operational environment, the
decrease in obstructions to the movement of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
the increased cooperation between the Government and
United Nations. The recent reports of the Secretary-
General and the report of the Prosecutor have reflected
such progress. Bolivia believes that this point has been
reached mainly because of the joint work of the African
Union, the Government and the United Nations, and
we hope that all efforts will continue to focus on the
consolidation of peace in Darfur.

It is important to emphasize that the development
and future of international criminal justice are
closely tied to the issues of State cooperation and
complementarity. The International Criminal Court is
a complementary court to the primary and sovereign
capacities of each State in the administration ofjustice
in its territory. Therefore, in addition to reaching
effective and timely judgements, local capacities must
be restored. In that regard, the case of Darfur should be
especially analysed given that there has been more than
a decade of conflict.

Bolivia upholds its obligations as a State party to
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
and supports efforts to seek justice and fight impunity.
We therefore call upon all States that have not yet done
so to ratify the Rome Statute in order to guarantee
its universal jurisdiction. We believe that the value
of the principle of the universality of international
criminal justice is fundamental at this point. The
debate on the impunity of many who are responsible for
committing war crimes and crimes against humanity
is diluted in the face of the relative effectiveness of the
capacities of the International Criminal Court owing
to the non-ratification of the Rome Statute by some
countries, which also weakens the overall effectiveness
of its work. We insist that we cannot sustain sincere
dialogue as long as there are countries that demand
all the rigour of justice, but do not fulfil their own
international obligations.

