Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2348
(2017), which renews the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). The resolution we
have just adopted is the outcome of negotiations that
were not always easy, but it is a text of significance
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to the
United Nations.

I would like to highlight three reasons why this
positive text is important.

First, the Security Council today has sent a message
of unanimity and unity in our support for MONUSCO
and for stability and democracy in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which as we know is facing
significant challenges.

Secondly, with the adoption of the resolution,
MONUSCO - which has a defining role to play - now
has an adapted mandate focused on two major strategic
priorities: the protection of civilians and support for the
implementation of the 31 December agreement and the
electoral process. This is a critical point, as the goal of
the negotiations that have just concluded was to adapt
MONUSCO to the political and security issues that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has to address, in
particular this year.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo finds
itself an unprecedented institutional situation. The
mandate of all its electoral institutions has expired. The
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo has entered a phase of
transition on the basis of the political agreement signed
on 31 December 2016 until the elections scheduled for
the end of this year. The agreement, which was reached
thanks to the outstanding efforts of the Conference
episcopale nationale du Congo, constitutes the only
credible road map for an end to the crisis, but delays in
its implementation are very worrying. It is essential for
the stability and future of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo that the agreement be implemented as soon
as possible and that the elections be held.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is also
facing a worrying security situation with the persistence
of armed groups in the east of the country and the
appearance of new outbreaks of violence, particularly
in Kasai, where many Congolese have died over the
past year and where two United Nations experts - as
you recalled, Mr. President - recently died in tragic
circumstances. On behalf of France, I wish here to
reiterate our sorrowful condolences and deep sympathy
to the families of the two victims and their countries.
Civilian populations must be protected from such
violence, whose perpetrators must be identified and
brought to justice.

The third reason why this resolution is particularly
important is because it adapts the composition of
MONUSCO in a consistent and thoughtful way so that it
can better respond to the challenges facing the country.
The troop ceiling has been adjusted to better reflect the
reality of deployment on the ground, but it is mainly the
composition of the force that has been revised through
the replacement of certain troops by specialized units
able to intervene quickly and in a mobile way in the
specific context of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. From the very outset, this mandate makes
MONUSCO more reactive, more mobile and more
focused on the essential, guiding priorities that I have
just enumerated.

For the future, let us be clear. The task is heavy but
MONUSCO has reinvigorated means at its disposal. In
that spirit, I should like on behalf of France to reiterate
our confidence in the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Maman Sidikou.
