Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): Like speakers before me, I welcome the
President of the Republic of Djibouti, His Excellency
Mr. Ismail Omar Guelleh, and thank him for his
detailed briefing on the situation in the Horn of Africa,
in particular the relations between his country and the
neighbouring country of Eritrea. I am also grateful for
the useful information he gave us regarding the
situation in Somalia.

The situation that began in June 2008 on the
border between the Republic of Djibouti and Eritrea
can now be added to the litany of factors sowing
confusion and hindering peace efforts and the
development prospects for all Africa. Africa has other
challenges before it, in particular the practices
hindering economic development, and can no longer
afford to spend scarce resources on military ventures
that are as useless as they are unjustified. The border
dispute between Djibouti and Eritrea is a case in point,
and my country calls on Eritrea to cooperate with the
United Nations in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions on this matter, including
resolution 1907 (2009), in order to bring that situation
to a peaceful resolution.

Regarding Somalia, we share President Guelleh's
relevant analysis and welcome the role and significant
involvement of the Government of Djibouti in the
search for a solution that would allow his country to
find peace once again and thereby regain its place in
the community of nations.

We are also aware that the Government of
Djibouti was an initiator of the Djibouti Agreement,
which enabled the establishment of the Transitional
Federal Government in Somalia. As we have stated on
several occasions, Somalia remains a Member of
United Nations. Therefore, the Organization must
assume greater responsibility towards that Member
State, which has been afflicted by chaos for more than
two decades. Greater support for the African Union
Mission in Somalia is thus now more necessary than
ever. We hope that the Istanbul Conference on Somalia
will make a significant contribution to progress on the
issue of Somalia.

Djibouti's involvement in the fight against piracy
off the coast of Somalia must also be applauded. On
this issue, we remain convinced that an effective
solution to the piracy issue will depend on an
appropriate response to the overall Somali problem.

