Mr. Hachani (Tunisia) (interpretation from Arabic):
Allow me, first, to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Council for this month - you, the
representative of a friendly country. And I would like to
congratulate you on the ideal way in which you are
conducting our deliberations. I also deem it my duty to pay
tribute to what was undertaken by His Excellency the
Ambassador of Gabon, a friend, in chairing the Council last
month. I also welcome the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Muntasser, Secretary of the General People's
Committee for Foreign Liaison and International Co-
operation of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

The Security Council is meeting today in this public
session at the request of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
officially supported by the Committee of Seven of the
League of Arab States and the Committee of Five of the
Organization of African Unity, both of which committees
have been entrusted by these two large and important
regional organizations to follow up on what is referred to
as the Lockerbie case. This formal open meeting of the
Security Council is of particular importance because it is
the first of its kind since the beginning of the crisis, and it
is taking place following important developments which
happened at the end of last month in the form of the two
Judgments by the International Court of Justice dealing with
the interpretation and application of the 1971 Montreal
Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against
the Safety of Civil Aviation - Judgments that also confirm
the jurisdiction of the Court.

Undoubtedly, after the pronouncement of the two
Judgments by the highest judicial authority on an
international level, and until this Court looks into the
substance of the case, the case itself has entered a new,
unprecedented stage. The international community cannot
continue its work in this regard without taking into account
that the position of the Court accords with the essence of
what several groups and States, including Tunisia, have
expressed in terms of their sincere wish and in terms of the
relentless efforts over the past few years to reach a just
settlement which would establish the facts and preserve,
within the bounds of international legitimacy, the rights and
interests and the dignity of all parties concerned in the case,
including the families of the victims, to whom we extend
our sincere condolences. In this respect we also wish to
mention the efforts undertaken by the League of Arab
States and the Organization of African Unity, which
submitted joint proposals to find an honourable solution.
In fact, these proposals - which the Libyan side
expressed a readiness to accept - were also supported by
the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the Non-
Aligned Movement, along with several other Member
States of the United Nations.

Following the Judgments rendered by the
International Court of Justice on 27 February last, we
have entered a new stage which makes it incumbent upon
us all, particularly the Security Council and its members,
to reflect on how to deal with the Lockerbie situation in
the future in keeping with this new fact. In this context,
Tunisia believes that it has become urgent to find a just
and honourable solution, a speedy one, to put an end to
the sufferings of the fraternal Libyan people resulting
from the embargo, and to put an end to the consequences
of the Lockerbie crisis in the neighbouring countries and
for security and stability in the whole region, in a manner
serving the aspirations of all their peoples for building
their common future.

