Mr. Angel] (Canada): My delegation joins others
who have spoken in thanking Under-Secretary-General
Miyet for his very informative briefing. My own
comments will be very brief.

Canada supports High Representative Petritsch's
decision to amend the law on filling a vacant position
of a Member of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. This decision will strengthen the
conformity of the law with the spirit ofthe Constitution
and will help to ensure the efficiency of the election
process.

We believe that a coherent and integrated strategy
is essential if the development of the rule of law in
Bosnia and Herzegovina is to be sustained. In this
regard, Canada commends the work and achievements
of the judicial system assessment programme under the
auspices of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH).

We are encouraged by the fact that progress is
being made in changing the composition of police
forces to better reflect the multi-ethnic character of
their communities, and we welcome the details
provided by Mr. Miyet in this regard. We encourage the
Bosnian authorities to cooperate fully with UNMIBH
in establishing professional and accountable multi-
ethnic police forces.

The return of refugees and displaced persons to
their pre-war homes is a top priority. The Bosnian
authorities must implement fully measures likely to
foster returns, such as the property law, and must cease
to obstruct legal evictions. Progress on this front is
critical in measuring the real commitment of Bosnia's
authorities to a lasting peace within the Dayton
framework.

We must also keep the pressure on Croatia and
the Republika Srpska to ensure that they follow
through on their commitments and take the appropriate
actions to fully implement the agreement they signed
last March on two-way refugee return.

Canada will assume command of Multinational
Division (South-west) this October on a rotational
basis with the United Kingdom and the Netherlands.
We are determined to play a strong role within our
sector of command, particularly with regard to refugee
returns and the work of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia.

