Mr. Oyarzabal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset I wish to thank the Secretary-General,
the Prime Minister of Samoa, the Prime Minister of
Jamaica, the Minister of Finance of Seychelles and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of New Zealand - your
country, Mr. President - for their statements at the start
of today's open debate. We also especially welcome
the high-level participation on the part of the small
island developing States (SIDS), which highlights
the importance of the debate. We are grateful for the
opportunity provided to address the challenges facing
SIDS in an open debate in the Security Council.

SIDS face major challenges linked to multiple
variables that affect their security. While the entire
international community faces challenges related to
drug trafficking, terrorism, criminal gangs and arms
trafficking, among others, SIDS seem to be more
exposed to their harmful consequences, due to their
limited capacities and size.

Argentina expresses its support for and solidarity
with SIDS in the face of the growing challenges
confronting them. Therefore, as in the past, we appeal
to the Security Council to assist SIDS in matters of
international peace and security, pursuant to its primary
responsibility. Likewise, we also request the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council to
strengthen their cooperation with and support for SIDS
in the areas within their competencies.

Arms trafficking and organized crime are the most
dangerous challenge for many SIDS, where criminals
often find facilities to conduct their murky activities,
including trafficking in arms and illegal drugs. We
therefore call upon those SIDS that have not yet done
so to sign and ratify the Arms Trade Treaty as soon
as possible and to implement its relevant measures
to regulate and control arms trafficking in their own
States.

With respect to piracy and armed robbery at sea, we
know that in many cases SIDS lack the infrastructure
and capacity to control and eradicate that complex
challenge, which affects many island and peninsular
States. We call on the international community and the
Security Council to remain vigilant in confronting the
situation and to cooperate with States that need help in
ending to the problem.

We acknowledge that in certain circumstances, the
lack of growth, poverty and persistent inequalities can
cause problems for societies in conflict or post-conflict.
Argentina has often expressed its vision that there can
be no genuine, lasting peace without development. In
that regard, we call on the international community
to cooperate with the States involved through the
competent forums - the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the specialized
agencies of the United Nations system - so that they
can truly enjoy their right to development, which faces
many complex challenges arising from structural
poverty, unemployment, the lack of opportunities for
young people, the lack of education and health problems,
among others, which underline the importance of the
post-2015 agenda being negotiated.

We would like to conclude, Mr. President, by
once again thanking you for having brought to our
consideration the challenges confronting small island
development States. The international community
cannot remain indifferent or forget that the challenges
SIDS face can have especially negative consequences
because of their limited response capability, which in
turn can affect not only the peace and security of the
SIDS themselves, but international peace and security
as well.

