Mrs. Bangura (Sierra Leone): My delegation
congratulates you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of September. We would also like to thank you for
convening this meeting on the situation in Sierra Leone
10-55258
and for giving us the opportunity to contribute to this
debate.

We also express our sincere appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his detailed report (S/2010/471)
on the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL). Among other things, the
report highlights the important developments that have
taken place in the country, the challenges to surmount
and, of course, the activities of UNIPSIL during the
period under review. The recent visit of the Secretary-
General to our country was particularly productive and
remains fresh in the minds of all Sierra Leoneans, as it
coincided with the inauguration of the second-ever
independent public broadcaster in Africa, the Sierra
Leone Broadcasting Corporation.

We would also like to pay particular tribute to the
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General for
his statement this morning, as well as to the Chair of
the Sierra Leone country-specific configuration,
Ambassador John McNee, for his usual meaningful and
instructive contribution to this debate.

For due economy of time, I will resist the
temptation to recount in detail all the important
developments that have taken place in my country
during the period under review, as President Ernest Bai
Koroma, in addressing the General Assembly at its
sixty-fifth session, already did so five days ago by
outlining some of the visible progress his Government
has made during that time, in partnership with the
international community, in the process of
consolidating peace and security to promote economic
growth and development.

Many of those efforts and successes, which are
also reflected in the report before us today, have
equally been acclaimed in indicators, such as those of
the Global Peace Index, which ranks Sierra Leone as
the fifty-third most peaceful country in the world; the
Mo Ibrahim Index, which reflects our significantly
improved ranking in democratic governance among
crisis-affected countries; the World Bank rankings on
doing business; and the Transparency International
Corruption Perception Index, among others. However,
the President was very forthright in cautioning against
complacency based on our achievements so far and in
asserting that those accolades should serve as a catalyst
for the Government to intensify its efforts to improve
the quality of life ofits people.
7

The Government is fully cognizant of the
importance of some of the issues that the Secretary-
General raises in the report with regard to the
implementation of the joint communique of 2 April
2009, in particular with respect to such matters as the
dialogue among political parties, the report of the
Independent Review Panel, the proposed inquest into
the executions, on 29 December 1992, of a former
inspector-general of the police and 27 others, and the
enhancement of the political participation of women in
Sierra Leone.

With respect to furthering the culture of political
tolerance, President Koroma has consistently
emphasized that, irrespective of political affiliation or
religious denomination, the bonds of unity that bind us
together as a nation are stronger than the issues that
have a tendency to divide us. In one such instance, he
reassured the country by asserting:

"I am President of the country and I have a
responsibility to unify the country. I have a
responsibility to let everybody develop a new
concept of democracy, a new culture of
democracy, and that is, you are not enemy with
anybody. You are just maybe opponents on
political issues, but at the end of the day we must
present ourselves as Sierra Leoneans, united in
the development of our country."

On various occasions, he has extended the olive
branch and has been quick to point out that tolerance is
a two-way street and that all Sierra Leoneans should
strive for a unified nation. He has demonstrated his
commitment to deepening the democratic process and
unifying the country, not only by his regular visits
around the country, but also by ensuring that the
development programmes initiated by the Government
are implemented fairly throughout the country,
irrespective of the political leanings or ethnicity of any
particular region or locale.

The Government is fully committed to
strengthening governance and private sector
development. The fight against corruption is
unrelenting. A new anti-corruption Commissioner has
been appointed, and the Government continues to
provide financial support for the implementation of the
National Anti-Corruption Strategy. The commitment to
fighting drug trafficking and transnational organized
crime is equally vigorous. We have transformed the
Joint Drug Interdiction Task Force into the
8

Transnational Crime Unit, with much greater leverage
to eradicate that pernicious menace. However, it is
greatly in need of sustained technical assistance and
support.

On another major front in the ongoing
peacebuilding initiative, we have been able to take
further steps to address the concerns of the young
people of the country. A Youth Commissioner was
recently appointed to lead the National Youth
Commission, established to formulate strategy and
policy related to the empowerment and involvement of
the youth population in nation-building and national
development. That clearly signals the Commission's
readiness to undertake its responsibilities and to start
work on implementing its strategies. We would
therefore appreciate more concrete support from all our
partners, including those that have been actively
involved in addressing that challenge.

With respect to the forthcoming 2012 elections,
the Government is committed to ensuring that the
National Electoral Commission and the Political
Parties Registration Commission deliver effectively on
their constitutional mandate, independently and free of
interference. In that regard, my colleague the Minister
for Finance and Economic Development, has already
started mobilizing support and the necessary resources
to set the stage for a credible, free, fair and fully
participatory process. We count on the United Nations
and the international community to respond promptly
and favourably to his call to action.

Achieving openness and transparency in the
exploitation of our mineral resources is one of the most
fundamental aspects of the Government's development
policy, with the political will to ensure that the
country's vast mineral wealth is exploited for the
benefit of the people. To that end, the Government is
very receptive to the concerns that have been raised
over the mining agreements entered into recently, and
is strongly disposed to put in place modalities to
address those concerns with a view to ensuring full
compliance with the country's mineral laws.

Despite the Government's efforts and the
progress that has been made to date in addressing many
of the problems that led to the civil war, challenges
still abound. Some aspects of the recommendations of
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission still require
support for their full implementation. Most notably, the
reparations process remains largely underfunded some
10-55258
six years after the recommendations were issued. On
the socio-economic front, the prevailing global
economic and financial uncertainties are seriously
undermining our efforts to turn around the economy as
quickly as desired.

In view of the severe impact of those
uncertainties on our efforts, we appeal for urgent and
appropriate attention to be given to the delivery of the
pledges made at the most recent Consultative Group
meeting on Sierra Leone, held in London.

I would like to reiterate my Government's
commitment to playing a constructive role in
addressing the unfolding events and democratization
process in the sister Republic of Guinea. We are
satisfied that our National Electoral Commission was
able to facilitate and ensure the enfranchisement of
Guinean citizens in Sierra Leone, particularly within
the context of the Mano River Union. In that regard,
we will continue to monitor events with intense
interest.

The Government is actively considering the
report of the Independent Review Panel, as well as the
proposed inquest into the extrajudicial executions of
29 December 1992, involving a former inspector-
general and 27 other private citizens, with due regard
10-55258
to resolving this matter in the best interests of the
nation.

In conclusion, I would like to register our
gratitude to the members of Council for their sustained
interest in and engagement with Sierra Leone. We look
forward to their steadfast support of our continuing
efforts to ensure sustainable peace and long-term
prosperity in Sierra Leone and to keep this potential
success story on course.

We share the concerns raised by the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General on the steady
decline in funding of United Nations operations, in
particular UNIPSIL, and the adverse effect that it will
have on the work and credibility of the United Nations.
We hope that that decline will be effectively addressed
by Council.

