Mr. Draunimasi (Fiji): As the last speaker on
this issue, Sir, I wish to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency and, through you, to
thank the Foreign Minister of Timor-Leste, Mr. Jose
Ramos-Horta, for his personal attendance at this
important meeting.

The Secretary-General's comprehensive report
(S/2004/117) recognizes the need to consolidate and
build upon the gains in peace and security in Timor-
Leste. Clearly, Timor-Leste needs to reach a level of
self-sufficiency and sustainability without fear of the
return of an environment of destabilization. History has
taught us that, when peace operations are prematurely
withdrawn, situations often revert to violence and
conflict. We have spoken in the past about the
enormous waste that would result from a non-strategic
exit from Timor-Leste, which would expose any latent
vulnerabilities in the newly emerging democracy.

The United Nations must be vigilant in guarding
against what would appear to be a neo-colonial
tendency in terms of developing democratic processes.
This vigilance, however, needs to be balanced with the
needs of the Government and the people of Timor-
Leste in the process of nation building. We note that,
for Timor-Leste, the sine qua non for achieving the
essence of democracy is a sound and secure
environment. We are therefore sensitive to that
country's requests for a continuing level of
peacekeeping, which would engender an environment
that is more conducive to the Government, assisted by
the United Nations, being able to nurture stability and
security.

The Secretary-General's recommendations in
paragraph 64 of his report are sound and strategic and
give credibility to the immense international,
intergovernmental and bilateral investment in Timor-
Leste leading up to the successful mission under the
very able stewardship of Ambassador Kamalesh
Sharma.

We have every confidence that the Government of
Timor-Leste will thus be better positioned to engage its
resources and political will in order to take any
outstanding legislative or executive measures. Much
progress has reportedly been made on the very
sensitive issue of border demarcation. We again feel
assured that both Timor-Leste and Indonesia will work
together to resolve and push forward on this issue.
Ultimately, the resolution of this issue has an important
bearing on the status of refugees and displaced persons
and on sustainable peace and security.

While we fully support the democratic process in
Timor-Leste and the engagement of a battalion of
around 300 troops, it must be emphasized that a
timeline aiming at an end to the mission must be
respected. This will ensure that Timor-Leste achieves
full independence and has a smooth transition, marked
by development, in a timely manner.

Much is at stake in the Asian region in relation to
the state of affairs in Timor-Leste. We take pride in the
successful intervention of the United Nations in this
case. We can strengthen this commitment with the
support of the international community for an early and
imminent process of peaceful, democratic and stable
development. We look forward to that day.

