Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I thank Peru for
convening today's open debate on youth, peace and
security, which provides a valuable opportunity to
recognize the important role that youth can play in
building peace and preventing conflicts. I would also
like to thank Ms. Wickramanayake, Secretary-General's
Envoy on Youth, and Mr. Simpson for their passionate
and inspiring briefings. I add a special welcome and
thanks to Ms. Sophia Pierre-Antoine and Ms. Kessy
Ekomo-Soignet, who have ably shown us this morning
that youth are a force to be reckoned with.

Let me begin by sharing some additional inspiration
with a quote from Nelson Mandela, the centenary of
whose birth we celebrate this year. He said:

"To the youth of today, I also have a wish to make:
be the scriptwriters of your destiny and feature
yourselves as stars that showed the way towards a
brighter future".

I think that, after hearing from our briefers this
morning, we can be confident that today's youth are
responding to Mandela's call. Our role is to listen to
them and include them, as well as to support and enable
them in any way we can.

We have a long tradition of youth engagement in
Sweden, and we welcome the independent progress
study on youth and peace and security, "The missing
peace" (see S/2018/86). We are heartened by the
renewed international and multilateral focus on youth.
The concrete recommendations in the study represent
important steps for moving the agenda forward.
Through the adoption of the peacebuilding and
sustaining peace agenda, as well as the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the Paris Climate
Agreement, we have created an ambitious and
absolutely necessary plan for the world in which we
live - a vision of a peaceful and sustainable world.
Youth, peace and security constitute a crucial part of
the implementation of that broad framework and of the
advancement of peaceful, just and inclusive societies.

It is therefore high time that we broke with the
destructive narrative of young people as drivers of
conflict or as victims. Instead, we must harness their
full potential and leadership as effective peacebuilders
in all aspects of sustaining peace. We need to build upon
young people's knowledge, strengths and enthusiasm to
contribute to peace and a better future, and enable their
meaningful civic and political participation. The World
Programme of Action for Youth underlines that young
people can be dynamic agents of peace and help guide
national action and international support.

A prerequisite for youth engagement is the
political, social, cultural and economic empowerment
of youth and the protection and fulfilment of their
universal human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Ensuring the political and social rights of young people
promotes trust in the system at an early age, thereby
laying the foundation for a strong and long-standing
social contract. The progress study presented today
by Mr. Simpson demonstrates how young peoples'
leadership is crucial in promoting peace, inclusion and
dialogue. Ensuring the full and effective participation
of youth is therefore essential for the advancement
of national peacebuilding processes. I would like to
highlight the following four points on how we can best
move this agenda forward.

First, we must all engage and invest in youth. That
means enhancing the quality of dialogue with youth.
Increased financing for youth, peace and security is
needed, including through more aid in fragile settings,
in conflict and post-conflict situations, and for youth
participation and empowerment. The Peacebuilding
Commission can play an important role by including
ways to engage youth meaningfully, during and in
the aftermath of armed conflict, in its advice and
recommendations for peacebuilding strategies.

Secondly, youth should be heard and seen. We need
to recognize the diversity of youth in our analysis and
engagement, while ensuring that we systematically
disaggregate data by age, gender, socioeconomic
background and geographical location.

Thirdly, we must leave no youth behind. It is
important to recognize that the exclusion of, and
discrimination against, youth based on age, gender,
disability, socioeconomic circumstances, religion,
sexual orientation or gender identity have a detrimental
effect on peace and security. We need to recognize
the specific challenges faced by young women
and men, including acknowledging that persistent
gender inequalities put young women at particular
risk. As highlighted by the study, we need to ensure
that educational institutions are protected, free from
violence and accessible for all.

Fourthly, we must keep pushing to ensure that this
issue remains on our agenda. We welcome continuous
reporting to the Security Council from the Secretary-
General on the implementation of the youth and peace
and security agenda.

As the old saying goes, we do not inherit the Earth
from our ancestors, we borrow it from our children. This
generation of youth is not content to wait. Our children
are coming for their inheritance. They are demanding
that they play their part in shaping the world they will
inherit from us. They are demanding - as Mandela
called on them to do - that they be the scriptwriters
of their own destiny. Our job is to ensure that they can
do so.

