The President: I shall now make a brief
statement in my national capacity.

I would like to thank Ambassador Heller for his
work leading the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) this past year. Under his
leadership, the Committee has played a more
prominent role in global multilateral counter-
proliferation and counter-terrorism efforts. The
mechanisms for coordinating technical assistance
requests have also been significantly improved.

Looking ahead, a further Committee mandate
should recognize that the preliminary reporting
exercise is now almost complete. With just a handful of
non-reporting States left, the Committee would benefit
from taking a more analytical approach and addressing
the complex issues in implementing resolution 1540
(2004) that these reports and dialogues between the
Committee and States have revealed. The Committee
and its experts should develop their role as
coordinators of relevant technical assistance, matching
donors with recipients. The Committee should
concentrate on assistance gaps and on establishing
where it can add value to other efforts in counter-
proliferation and counter-terrorism fields. For example,
the comprehensive review of the status of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) showed that
bio-security was among the weaker areas of
implementation.
Turning to the Counter-Terrorism Committee, I
am grateful to Ambassador Apakan for his final
briefing as Chair. I pay tribute to his work to improve
the Committee's effectiveness, particularly its outreach
and transparency through regular open thematic
briefings and through the regional workshops
conducted by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED). Looking ahead to the
next CTED mandate, the Directorate should build on
its success and continue to adapt to the evolving threat
of terrorism. In particular, we would like to see more
focus on the drivers of radicalization and on how States
can better counter Violent extremism.

The Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions regime is,
and will continue to be, a vital counter-terrorism tool
that enables the international community to disrupt
terrorist activity on a much greater scale than through
domestic measures alone. That is why we need to
continue to work to ensure that the regime remains
credible as a tool to maintain and restore international
peace and security.

Turning to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999), I would like to thank
Ambassador Mayr-Harting for chairing the Committee
over the past two years. His leadership has been
instrumental in driving the regime forward in a positive
direction. The Committee has worked hard this year in
implementing the advances to the regime introduced by
resolution 1904 (2009), not least in conducting a
successful review of those sanctioned and working
with the newly appointed Ombudsperson. But the hard
work is not over. The regime must continue to evolve
to address the challenges it faces. The United Kingdom
remains committed to this process and looks forward to
contributing to further reform efforts over the coming
year.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Spain. I
remind all speakers to restrict their remarks to less than
five minutes.

