Mr. Ahmed (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
extending a hearty welcome to Senator Biden, who is
here with us today. Allow me also to thank Special
Representative Jacques Paul Klein for his
comprehensive briefing on the current situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The information he provided
has been very helpful.

Against a backdrop of visible and encouraging
signs of peace taking root in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the Security Council acted last June to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) until 1 June 2001.

We note that the security situation has, to a large
extent, stabilized; that the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons is accelerating; and that
elections have been conducted safely and successfully.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General
suggested in the background information he gave that
the end of 2002 should be the target date for the
completion of UNMIBH's core mandates. In that
context, we would like to make the following points.

I would first like to speak about overall progress.
Progress in Bosnia and Herzegovina is linked to the
region's development. With the changes in the political
leadership in Croatia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia there have been significant new
developments in the region this year. We are
encouraged by the positive developments, and we hope
that much faster progress will be achievable.

Secondly, I wish to mention State border services.
The inauguration of the State Border Service at
Sarajevo airport in June this year was a much awaited
development. We have noted its usefulness and positive
effects from the report of the Secretary-General.
However, we are concerned that due to a lack of
funding, the State Border Service cannot be extended
beyond the current four points to the other eight points
planned. As Bosnia and Herzegovina has become a
major transit point of illegal migration, there is an
urgent need to expand the State Border Service to
assert control over trafficking in human beings and
trade in illicit goods.

Thirdly, I wish to refer to refugees and internally
displaced persons. We are encouraged by the
accelerated return of refugees - including
minorities - to their pre-war homes and the solving of
a large number of property return and repossession
cases. We appreciate the role of UNMIBH in
supporting the return process. We note with concern
that refugees and internally displaced persons are
returning only to find that their homesteads have been
destroyed or rendered uninhabitable during their
absence. To sustain the current pace and increase the
rate of return, the reconstruction of destroyed villages
must be undertaken. This requires increased funding
and support from the international community.

Fourthly, I wish to speak about the judiciary. The
judicial system assessment programme (JSAP) of
UNMIBH has produced a useful analysis and
recommendations for improving the judiciary of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which was one of the
Mission's major mandates. We believe that its report
and recommendations will be invaluable in addressing
the structural and procedural weaknesses, and that they
will contribute to the improvement of the overall
judicial process, including the independence ofjudges
and prosecutors in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Finally, we take note the signs of progress in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, although the pace of that
progress has been painfully slow. However, we would
also like to keep in mind that it is extremely difficult to
overcome age-old inter-ethnic tensions and come
together in a useful partnership for nation-building
after a series of major crises. We give much credit to
the Bosnian leadership and the international
community for whatever progress has been achieved.
We believe that it will now be possible to pursue the
goals at a much faster pace with the change in the
political situation in the region.

