Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome you,
Mr. Minister, as Chair of the Security Council meeting.
We thank Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for his substantive briefing
on developments in the regional situation. We regret to
note the intransigence in the Middle East settlement
process. There remain considerable differences in the
approaches of the parties. An atmosphere of mutual
mistrust prevails.

As a result, there is an impasse. For almost a
year, the negotiation process has been stalled. That is a
very bad and dangerous trend, given the extensive
transformations and changes in the Middle East and
North Africa. That should not distract us from our
common task, which is to promote a Middle East
settlement. In order to restore trust, above all the
parties need to avoid steps that prejudice the outcome
of a final settlement. They need to refrain from any
manifestations of violence, in particular against
civilians, and to demonstrate in practice their
willingness to compromise. In that regard, it is crucial
that settlement activities, above all in East Jerusalem,
be ended.

We believe it important to underscore that
negotiations should be resumed on the well-known
international legal basis, including Security Council
resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Road Map.
Any attempts to undermine that basis will not bring the
sides closer to starting constructive dialogue.

Apart from that, we would like to underscore the
Arab Peace Initiative. Given the role played by the
League of Arab States and its Committee in the Middle
East peace process to promote that Initiative, we
support close coordination between the Quartet and
that regional organization. In fact, that is how we view
a common and targeted international approach to
resolving the key issue of the Middle East. We see the
ultimate aim of the negotiating process as achieving
the inalienable right of the Palestinian people to build
their own viable and independent State, with its
territorial integrity and East Jerusalem as its capital,
living in peace and security with Israel, within
internationally recognized borders based on the 1967
lines and potential agreed land swaps.

The implementation of any future Palestinian-
Israeli arrangements will be called into question unless
there is a single partner on the Palestinian side. For that
very reason, Russia supports Palestinian steps to
achieve national reconciliation. We are ready to
contribute to the successful implementation of the
plans for intra-Palestinian unification and to provide
comprehensive assistance to a future Palestinian
Government.

We are seriously alarmed by the ongoing tension
in the Gaza Strip and the continued plight of the
peaceful Palestinian people. We strongly advocate the
complete lifting of the Israeli blockade of the Strip.

A complete, comprehensive and just settlement in
the Middle East is possible only by covering all tracks,
including the Syrian and Lebanese tracks. We advocate
unconditional and strict compliance with the relevant
Security Council decisions to restore peace and
security in the region and to normalize Israel's
relations with its neighbours.

In such conditions, we believe that the ongoing
mediation role of the Middle East Quartet is needed
more than ever in the interests of finding an acceptable
formula for the resumption of the negotiation process
and the definition of parameters for a settlement, which
must be achieved through dialogue among the
interested parties.

