Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Egypt condemns and deeply deplores extrajudicial
assassinations of Palestinians by the Israeli army, in
contravention of all humanitarian considerations and
the norms of international humanitarian law, the latest
of which was the assassination of Abdel Aziz
Al-Rantisi.

With such illegal acts, Israel's Government does
not help or contribute to the desired progress in the
efforts to achieve a political settlement of the Israeli-
Palestinian dispute. With such irresponsible acts, Israel
deepens rejection and distrust of its policies and
prompts further confrontation, violence and counter-
violence, which jeopardize all efforts to achieve any
just settlement of the conflict.

The international community has worked for
years to reach an agreed basis for the Israeli-
Palestinian settlement. By now, everybody understands
that each time there is a possibility of a breakthrough
in the situation or movement towards the potential
implementation of some of the elements necessary to
launch the settlement process, Israel takes measures to
abort the possibility and any potential for movement.
In that context, Israel undertakes extrajudicial killings
or attempts to change the terms of reference for the
settlement.

The elements of a political settlement are well
known to all. Their objectives are agreed among all the
international parties and are designed to achieve a just
and comprehensive settlement of the dispute. The
demand for a full Israeli withdrawal to the borders of 4
June 1967 is the basic and primary element of the
settlement. Achieving a just and practical settlement of
the problem of Palestinian refugees is another central
issue that must be addressed in negotiations among the
two parties and in accordance with the resolutions and
vision of international legality.

The road map is the internationally agreed
machinery and, through its various phases, the means
towards a settlement. It must be implemented without
dictates, selectivity, deviation in any form or
undermining of its principles in a manner not
consistent with those principles or in contradiction of
the elements of final status negotiations. Not only are
its phases mandatory in their implementation, but also
negotiations must be undertaken by the parties on all
their aspects in a way that would secure that
implementation under the sponsorship of all parties
directly concerned.

Any Israeli withdrawal from the Palestinian
territories must be coordinated with the Palestinians
and followed up by other measures in order to
implement the concept of two neighbouring States
living side by side in peace and security and within
guaranteed borders. A viable Palestine must be situated
on the Palestinian territory occupied since June 1967,
on the basis of the terms of reference, including
resolutions 242 (1967), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003)
and other United Nations decisions, and of the
principle of land for peace and other agreements
reached earlier by the two parties to the conflict.

The steps to implement the road map require the
renunciation of violence and counter-violence and,
inevitably and ineluctably, an end to the blockade and
to the suffering of the Palestinian people. They require
the renunciation of unilateral measures, including
separation walls designed to usurp the Palestinian
territories and to colonize them through settlements
established at their very heart. Egypt rejects such
designs and calls on the international community to
defy them.

Finally, we call on the Security Council today to
reject and condemn all extrajudicial killings and
assassinations. We call on the Council once again to
reaffirm the agreed terms of reference by pursuing its
ongoing efforts, to which Egypt has effectively
contributed, to secure for the peoples of Palestine,
Israel and the Middle East in general the right to live in
peace, security and cooperation, free from domination,
coercion and the acquisition of the territory of others
by force.

