Mr. Covic (Serbia and Montenegro) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation provided by the delegation): I
would like to thank the Security Council for responding
positively to our initiative and for convening today's
Council meeting on Kosovo and Metohija.
We are gathered here today because of the
hideous murder and wounding of innocent children
swimming in a river near their homes in Kosovo and
Metohija. The dead were killed only because they were
Serbs, and in order to send a message to all Serbs now
living in Kosovo and Metohija that they must leave and
that there is no chance for reconciliation and the sort of
multi-ethnic society that Security Council resolution
1244 (1999) and all of us foresee.

That massacre is by no means unique. Since
peacekeepers arrived in Kosovo and Metohija
following the bombing campaign of 1999, there have
been 6,013 attacks against Serbs and their cultural
heritage and property. One thousand and twenty-one
Serbs have been killed in those attacks. Fifty-two
sacred Christian relics have been destroyed in those
attacks, including 10 monasteries and churches dating
from the fourteenth century. Fifty-five other Orthodox
places of worship have been damaged or desecrated.

We in Serbia are determined to cooperate with the
international community, not only in Kosovo and
Metohija but also in the region as a whole. In southern
Serbia, for example, we have jointly build a model of
pacification and reconciliation. From the time I was
entrusted with the post of President of the Coordination
Centre for Kosovo and Metohija, we have tried hard to
cooperate with the international community and these
institutions in the province, in a spirit of partnership
and mutual confidence.

Through the most recent escalation of
terrorism - the wounding and murder of children - in
addition to the daily intimidation and persecution of
the remaining Serbs in the province, Albanian
extremists and terrorists are sending a message to the
new Special Representative of the Secretary- General:
every single decision he makes that does not meet their
expectations will result in fresh violence and in the
destabilization of the situation in Kosovo and Metohija.

Nevertheless, this brutal murder cannot but make
us all wonder whether this massive effort by the
international community will work, and if it can work.
Are the forces of evil and of nationalism just too strong
to be overcome? I appreciate the appointment by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General of a
special prosecutor to bring the perpetrators to justice.
We will do all we can to help him. At the same time,
we all must accept that crimes such as this one are not
unique. They are part of a pattern of activity by a
determined minority of the Albanian population, which
seeks to drive all Serbs out from Kosovo and Metohija,
and, of course, discourage any refugees and internally
displaced persons from returning, in order to bring the
ethnic cleansing of the province to completion.

Is this an overstatement? I do not think so.
Albanians who fled Kosovo and Metohija before
Milosevic's regime returned to their homes in Kosovo
and Metohija in a flash, rescued and assisted by the
international community. The whole process was
completed in just a few days. Serbs who fled Kosovo
and Metohija have been advised not to return in groups
but individually, due to reasons of security - or, to be
more accurate - reasons of insecurity. At its current
pace, the process of the return of Serbs and other non-
Albanians to the province will take over 100 years.

Albanians, who suffered terribly under
Milosevic's regime and who could be our key
interlocutors, are watching in silence the brutal
retaliations being carried out by their extremists
compatriots.

I strongly believe that not all Albanians approve
of this brutality and savageness. I base this belief on
the tragic fate of those Albanian leaders who paid with
their own lives for their disapproval of such crimes. It
is therefore clear to me why the majority of Albanians
have remained silent and why only a few Albanians,
mainly politicians, have faint-heartedly condemned
these crimes, while at the same time recalling Serbian
crimes of the past.

UNMIK and KFOR have not done as much as
they could have under these distorted circumstances. I
am trying to understand the inertia of the
representatives of the international community. I can
understand it, but I cannot forgive it.

An UNMIK police officer was recently
assassinated, and numerous brutal attacks have been
carried out targeting international peacekeepers. If one
reads carefully between the lines, one can discern that
the following message is being sent to the officers of
the international mission: "Think hard before you do
anything. We are watching you. Any of you can be
killed." Thus the staff of the United Nations Mission
and all officers and personnel that are part of the
international troops in Kosovo and Metohija have
become hostages of Albanian extremism and terrorism.

This disturbing outcome might have been avoided
had the international community, immediately upon
termination of the armed conflict in Kosovo and
Metohija and of the bombing campaign against
Yugoslavia, applied the same standards in condemning
Serbian and Albanian crimes. So far, with a single
exception, only Serb perpetrators have been brought
before the judges of The Hague Tribunal. Albanian
assassins have thus been silently amnestied and
become untouchable; they have been made into
national heroes.

I believe that it is high time for the international
community to look back and to evaluate the results of
its own actions. We all must recognize, without any
prejudice or fear, that the actions of Albanian extremist
and terrorist groups represent the main threat to the
stabilization of Kosovo and Metohija and to the region
as a whole.

Is the international community committed to
justice and fairness at any cost? Is it truly determined
to succeed in Kosovo and Metohija?

The United Nations Mission, headed by Mr. Harri
Holkeri, must now either accomplish what his
predecessors have failed to achieve or acknowledge its
defeat. In this difficult endeavour, Mr. Holkeri can
count on our full support and assistance.

If we want to succeed, we must take vigorous and
decisive measures that will lead to the fulfilment of the
agreed objectives: the full and consistent
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), major progress in the return of internally
displaced persons, and security and freedom of
movement for all ethnic communities.

Despite the commitment shown thus far by
Belgrade and the Government of the Republic of Serbia
with regard to the establishment of a functional multi-
ethnic society in Kosovo and Metohija, we are
legitimately concerned that Albanian extremists and
terrorists will use all available means to prevent the
fulfilment of these endeavours. Serbia has carried out
all of the measures to which it has committed itself in
order to bring the process of stabilization in Kosovo
and Metohija to completion.

The following urgent steps need to be taken to
normalize the situation in Kosovo and Metohija.

First, the international Mission must send a clear
message regarding its key objectives by implementing
fully resolution 1244 (1999) and by building a multi-
ethnic and tolerant community with a solid economic
foundation and functioning provisional democratic
institutions.

Second, the international Mission has to ensure
that the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) is
equitable vis-a-vis all parties and all ethnic groups, and
that it does not favour one party or one ethnic group to
the detriment of another.

Third, the international security forces, if they are
not expanded, must at least be kept at the current level.
For purposes of prevention, their presence must have
greater visibility and be better targeted. They must be
reorganized in order more effectively to address the
problem of Albanian terrorist groups that are supported
by organized crime.

Fourth, KFOR and UNMIK must ensure, from the
side of the province, the full protection of the
administrative line between central Serbia and Kosovo
and Metohija, in full cooperation with the army and
police of Serbia and Montenegro.

Fifth, international law enforcement officials
must take the lead and be more efficient in
investigating ethnically motivated crimes and in
bringing their perpetrators to justice.

Sixth, UNMIK and KFOR should provide for the
full protection of witnesses, so that they can testify in
court against persons indicted for criminal acts and in
connection with organized crime. Citizens must be
encouraged to testify against criminals without fear or
ethnic bias.

Seventh, the thorough and energetic disarmament
of all citizens of Kosovo and Metohija must be carried
out.

Eighth, it is necessary to ensure that all countries
take the same approach to the Albanian National Army
(ANA), an organization which the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General has
proclaimed to be a terrorist organization. The ANA is
variously defined as a liberation organization and as a
terrorist organization. This could be very dangerous. It
must be placed on the list of terrorist organizations,
and international standards in the fight against
terrorism must fully be applied to it.

Ninth, in the light of the crimes committed by
individual members of the Kosovo Protection Corps, a
thorough investigation must be carried out, leading to
its abolishment. Time and again, its key members are
implicated in crimes such as the bombing of the
railroad bridge near Zvecan and assisting armed
insurrection in Macedonia. Their very existence shows
a certain hypocrisy: sorrow for the death of innocent
Serbs, but unwillingness to tackle some of the root
causes of the crimes. So long as that organization
exists, true reconciliation will not be possible.

Tenth, perpetrators of war crimes must be
indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and extradited to the Hague,
regardless of their present positions.

Eleventh, in tackling security challenges in the
province, such as organized crime, terrorism and so on,
the security forces in Kosovo and Metohija must
cooperate more closely with the security forces in the
region, and with the security forces of Serbia and
Montenegro in particular.

Twelfth, Albanian political leaders must be urged
to implement their formal support for returns, the
democratization of society, the rule of law and inter-
ethnic reconciliation by providing all necessary
assistance to all citizens in Kosovo and Metohija,
regardless of their ethnicity.

Thirteenth, adequate measures must be taken
against all officials of the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government - regardless of their ethnicity -
who do not provide full and public support for the
aforementioned measures.

And, fourteenth, officials of the international
presence in Kosovo and Metohija who refrain from
carrying out the aforementioned measures in the fight
against inter-ethnic violence, terrorism and organized
crime must be held liable for their actions and be
adequately reprimanded.

For all the proposed measures and standards, it is
necessary to develop a clear plan of set and measurable
tasks and responsibilities, specifying those in charge of
their implementation. Similarly, it is necessary to set
precise time frames, follow through on their realization
and objectively assess the results accomplished.

If the international community fails to eradicate
the instability in a powerful and surgical manner and if
the measures it undertakes are weak and insignificant,
it will be responsible before history for a resurrection
of fascism in one part of Europe and the creation of a
monstrous mono-ethnic Albanian para-State in the
territory that is legally recognized as part of Serbia -
that is, Serbia and Montenegro - by United Nations
documents. That would be to validate an act of
violence by means of an act of violence.

Let me bring this statement to closure by
admitting that hope in me has not died. Otherwise, I
certainly would have taken the floor today as the
former President of the Coordination Centre for
Kosovo and Metohija. I profoundly regret that my hope
cannot bring the children assassinated in Gorazdevac to
life, nor can it comfort the crippled ones. However,
there is one thing it can certainly do: it can keep the
door of dialogue open for a bit longer.

