The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Sudan in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mohamad
(Sudan) took the seat reserved for him at the
Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2008/506, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

Members also have before them the report of the
Secretary-General on the deployment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur in
document S/2008/443.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
2

In favour:
Belgium, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Indonesia, Italy, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Panama, Russian Federation, South
Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Viet Nam

Against:
None

Abstaining:
United States of America


The President: The result of the voting is as
follows: 14 votes in favour, none against and
l abstention. The draft resolution has been adopted as
resolution 1828 (2008).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.


