Ms. Kaag (Netherlands): The Kingdom of the
Netherlands reiterates its condolences on the death
of former President of the United States of America
George Herbert Walker Bush.

(spoke in French):

At the outset, allow me to thank the President of the
Republic of Cete d'Ivoire, Mr. Alassane Ouattara, for
having convened this important debate.

(spoke in English)

I also wish to thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Antonio Guterres, and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
for their contributions to today's debate.

As we have heard, Cote d'Ivoire is an excellent
example of a country that is no longer on the Security
Council's agenda, but instead represents a valued
member of the Council. In bringing its experience to
the table, cote d'Ivoire provides valuable support to
other countries and the Council, as highlighted in the
examples given by the country's President. Like Cote
d'Ivoire, the Kingdom of the Netherlands believes that
it is essential for the Security Council to focus more
sharply on equitable post-conflict social and economic
development, reconstruction and reconciliation, as part
of the broader international peace and security agenda.

The Council was created to improve the lives of
people - to provide men, women and children with
an opportunity to live their lives in peace and security
and to enjoy sustainable development. And peace and
security are so much more than the absence of armed
conflict. When we ignore that fact, we see war-torn
societies reaching fragile peace deals, only to fall back
into armed conflict when international attention drifts
away. And, as members of the Security Council and the
international community, we find ourselves discussing
missions, mandates and budgets to fix things that
should not have been broken in the first place.

It is in all of our interests to realize that sustainable
peace and conflict prevention require an integrated
approach, one that is sustainable and includes social
and economic development from the outset - that is
essential. But let me underline that the Kingdom of the
Netherlands believes that the most successful form of
prevention is to make sure that there is no need for the
Council to address a particular country situation. That
requires the collective effort of States, the entire United
Nations system and international institutions, be they
financial or social, to tackle the root causes and prevent
instability from going down the line.

Conflict prevention is the cornerstone of the
integrated foreign policy of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands, and it has been a priority during our
tenure on the Council. We have invested in timely risk
analysis on climate change, as well as the failure and
impact of the failure to respect human rights, which
is needed to help not only prevent conflicts from
starting or emerging but also to ensure a sustainable
transition from conflict to peacebuilding and durable
peace. The Joint United Nations-World Bank study
entitled Pathways for Peace: Inclusive Approaches to
Preventing Violent Conflict, highlights the importance
of addressing inequalities and exclusion in ensuring
sustainable peace. I would like to add environmental
sustainability to that list. Three points are crucial in
that respect.

First of all, environmental sustainability is
no longer optional within the menu of economic
development. Over the past year, the Security Council
has seen, in many countries, that climate change, food
insecurity and water stress increase tensions, which
ultimately may lead to conflict. Therefore, efforts to
build up the economy after conflict must take those
challenges into account to ensure resilience, energy
transformation and innovative approaches to achieve
those goals. That is particularly relevant when it comes
to food security, which needs no further elaboration.
This year, all countries around the table have shown the
courage and political will to recognize that fact through
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2417 (2018), on
conflict and hunger. In that regard, I commend the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
for taking up its mandated task earlier this year with
respect to Yemen and South Sudan, the latter a country
that turned seven years old this year and is home to
7 million people at risk of severe food shortages.

Butthereisalsomorethatwecandoas aninternational
community if we want to more systematically respond
to food insecurity and the risk of famine. We need to
safeguard agriculture-based livelihoods and secure the
means to produce food - even or especially 4 during
conflict. That requires innovative partnerships that
also include the private sector and, of course, financial
institutions.

A second point we would like to address is inequality.
Economic development must provide opportunities for
all. Women and girls can and will be powerful agents of
socioeconomic change, but we must provide them with
equal opportunities, especially access to education,

inclusive financing and land rights. As for children, the
great challenge is to equip all children in developing
countries - but particularly those in conflict or under
threat of conflict - with the skill sets they need, no
matter the group they belong to or the region they come
from.

An instrument that is often forgotten but very
helpful in reducing inequality in post-conflict societies
is the provision of psychosocial support to all those
who have suffered trauma as a result of conflict. The
Netherlands is proud to announce that it will host
a conference on that particular theme in the latter
half of 2019, drawing attention to the importance of
psychosocial support and the political will to back it,
as well as the financial means and capacity to provide
assistance to those who need it the most and are the
most vulnerable.

Finally, following the principle of leaving no one
behind, in order to ensure that everyone can participate
and no one is truly excluded, societies need to develop
strong and inclusive institutions, strengthen the rule of
law and demonstrate respect for human rights for all.

Access to justice is also the focus of the ministerial
meeting which will be held in The Hague on 6 and
7 February 2019. It is part of the third Justice Task
Force Conference, which the Netherlands co-chairs
with Sierra Leone, Argentina and the Elders.

The rule of law and strong, inclusive institutions
are good for business and for attracting and retaining
investments. It is what makes it possible for a country
to make the transition from an economy of war to
an economy of peace. Respect for human rights is
instrumental in all of that. We have seen time and time
again that disregard for human rights leads to conflict.
That is why we believe the Security Council should
request timely briefings about human rights situations
of concern. And it is why we supported human rights
briefings on Syria, North Korea and Iran.

I would like to conclude by stating that the
Kingdom of the Netherlands stands with Cote d'Ivoire,
and indeed with Secretary-General Guterres, in its
quest to reform the United Nations system. It is our
quest to promote and ensure the implementation of an
integrated approach by all of us and the system, along
with the three outlined pillars. We have the tools to
embark upon that task - the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs), particularly SDG 16 on peace, justice
and strong institutions. They are the ultimate prevention

agenda. Together, it is incumbent upon us to promote
a proactive United Nations system that acts to prevent
conflict in a timely manner through improved risk
analysis and early warning, one that acts to resolve
conflict, including through better peacekeeping. We
need a United Nations system that acts to sustain peace
by ensuring that root causes are properly addressed in all
strategies and mandates and by treating the wounds of
conflict through transitional justice and accountability
for the perpetrators of human rights abuses or through
support for those who have suffered the most.

Those will always be the priorities of the Kingdom
of the Netherlands. I would like to take this opportunity
to express my sincere and personal commitment to
pursue those goals long after our Security Council
membership. We will not stop. We will remain strong
and steadfast, as always, as a partner in peace, security
and justice.

