Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): | would like to begin by extending my congratulations and thanks to all the members of the Security Council for the consensus that emerged around the text that we have just adopted. As Chair of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central African Republic, the Niger also congratulates and thanks France, as penholder, for all its efforts to put forward a text that met with universal support during the constructive negotiations among our experts. I also take this opportunity to welcome and reiterate my delegation's full appreciation and encouragement to the Government of the Central African Republic for the positive progress made in recent months in implementing the benchmarks and all its ongoing efforts to restore peace and stability in the country. In a security context that remains complex and marked by various challenges in implementing the February 2019 agreement due to the actions of certain armed groups, in particular the Retour, reclamation et rehabilitation group, a new stage has just been entered with this latest 12-month sanctions regime and a further easing of the arms embargo. Even if they do not fully meet the expectations of the Central African authorities, it is clear that the pragmatism of these two key provisions is a real cause of approval with regard to the upcoming elections and the need for a measured approach to strengthening the logistical capacities and arms management of the Central African Republic. In that regard, on behalf of my delegation, I would like to congratulate the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic and all Central African Republic's partners on the infrastructure and training provided in that area. In January, we unanimously underlined that the sanctions regime should not represent an objective, but rather reflect our commitment to the country's firm transition towards stability and peace (see S/PV.8712). The resolution unanimously adopted today by the members of the Council affirms that momentum and is a significant step towards meeting the expectations of the authorities of the Central African Republic based on the progress made. In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my delegation's appeal regarding the need to maintain and strengthen support to the Government of the Central African Republic, in coordination with all its partners, in its efforts to stabilize the country and promote its socioeconomic recovery, and to encourage the country's authorities to strengthen regional cooperation. The meeting rose at 10.30 a.m.
