Mr. Buyoya (spoke in French): I would like to
begin by warmly congratulating China on its accession
to the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of November, and I particularly welcome the Council's
topical choice of agenda items, which demonstrate its
indisputable interest in Africa.

On behalf of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, I thank
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his detailed
and comprehensive report (S/2018/1006), which paints
a clear picture of the efforts that have been undertaken
in the operationalization of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-S Sahel) Joint Force and proposes possible
solutions to the challenges that have been identified.

I should also like to pay tribute to the G-5 Sahel
and its member States for their sacrifices and steadfast
commitment to achieving the operationalization of
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force in all its components. That
reflects the political will of member States as they
strive to surmount the multifaceted crises plaguing the
region. I especially commend the Permanent Secretary,
Mr. Maman Sidikou, who has skilfully and decisively
put his heart and soul into ensuring that the G-5 Sahel
becomes an institution that matters, and I reiterate
my deepest gratitude to the bilateral partners and
subregional, regional and international organizations
that are working together for the operationalization
of the Joint Force by providing training in various
areas, strengthening capacity-building, restructuring
the Permanent Secretariat and delivering logistical
support. We are convinced that such support is vital
if the G-5 Sahel Joint Force is to achieve the goals that
have been assigned to it.

I also laud the opening of the Sahel Defence
College and the Sahel Security College, which are
institutions that will enable member States to harness
high-quality human capacities over the short, medium
and long terms. I take this opportunity to reiterate my
deepest sympathies to the victims of the heinous attack
targeting the Sevare headquarters of the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force that took place on 29 June, as well as to
their families.

The security situation in the Sahel continues to
deteriorate. There are increasing asymmetrical attacks
against defence and security forces and civilians in the
area of operations of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. It is
imperative that the Force be operationalized as soon as
possible and integrated into a comprehensive approach
that encompasses security, development, improved
governance - specifically vis-a-vis the presence
of State institutions throughout the territory - and
respect for human rights.

I now turn to the African Union's contribution. The
Commission is pursuing its efforts to support the G-5
Sahel on the political, technical and material levels, to
the extent that it is able to do so. The African Union
Peace and Security Council, at its 679th meeting, on
13 April 2017, adopted a concept of operations for the
Force and authorized its deployment for an initial,
renewable period of 12 months. The Peace and Security
Council reiterated its support for the Joint Force at its
of 759th meeting, on 23 March this year. The African
Union supports the idea embodied in the report that the
concept of operations should continue to be tailored to
reflect the realities on the ground.

I also welcome the Secretary-General's emphasis in
his report on the overriding need to establish a support
group for the G-5 Sahel Force. The African Union
remains convinced of the importance of strengthening
ties between the African Union and the G-5 Sahel
Force and making them an integral component of the
African peace and security architecture. In the light of
the growing deterioration of security conditions, the
African Union reiterates its support for the call issued
by the Heads of State of the G-5 Sahel, at their meeting
held on the margins of the African Union Summit in
Nouakchott, to endow the Force with a mandate under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations and
to enable it to enjoy direct United Nations financing.
We find ourselves at a critical juncture and the Force
deserves the support of the international community.
To conclude, I commend the members of the G-5
Sahel for the sacrifices that they have made in their
struggle against terrorism. I thank all partners for their
support, call for greater commitment, and reiterate the
full support ofthe African Union at all levels - political,
technical and material.

