Mr. Alfano (Italy): I want to thank the United
States for calling for today's meeting.
Almost 50 years ago, the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons entered into
force. Thanks to collective efforts, the Non-Proliferation
Treaty has become a pillar of our collective security.
Over the course of the Treaty's existence, Italy has
been a champion of the Treaty. Non-proliferation
is a fundamental good that the international
community and the Security Council have to preserve.
Collective security cannot be guaranteed without
non-proliferation. It is important to have robust and
effective implementation of international law. There
should be accountability.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea
has caused one of the biggest crises of our times.
We have to stand firm and united in order to defend
non-proliferation, which is a common good for all of
us and a guarantee of peace, security, and stability.
Italy condemned Pyongyang's launching of a ballistic
missile over Japan on 15 September, as well as all of
North Korea's missile and nuclear tests. With resolution
2375 (2017), the Council sent a clear and strong
message: further attempts by the regime to defy the
United Nations will backfire. If North Korea wants to
step back from self-isolation, it must stop developing its
missile and nuclear programme.

A different story is that of Iran, which has moved
in a positive direction regarding its own nuclear
programme. The Iran nuclear deal has delivered gains
for global security by imposing strict limits on Tehran's
nuclear programme. In return, we have lifted sanctions.
It serves as a good example of effective diplomacy and
smart sanctions. However, reaching the deal was just the
beginning. Now we must continue to ensure that Iran
does not stray off the path of nuclear non-proliferation.

As the facilitator of resolution 2231 (2015), Italy
will continue to foster the smooth implementation of
that crucial resolution. We are concerned by Iran's
missile tests, which seem inconsistent with the spirit,
if not the letter, of resolution 2231 (2015). That can
exacerbate regional instability and put the progress
made so far at risk.

Unfortunately, we have seen no progress in Syria.
To the contrary, we have witnessed the repeated use
of chemical weapons against innocent people. That
constitutes a horrific war crime. Their use by the regime
and by Daesh must be stopped. Those found guilty of
such war crimes have to be sanctioned accordingly.
Therefore, we need to redouble our efforts to identify
anyone who has played a role in the use of chemical
weapons against the defenceless civilian population.

I have a few more words on the use of sanctions.
As Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006), on North Korea, Italy has
focused on the concrete effectiveness of sanctions. It is
important to monitor their implementation in order to
get a precise picture of compliance by the sanctioned
party and address weaknesses in the enforcement
of sanctions. We have also placed emphasis on
strengthening technical assistance and capacity-
building, providing Member States with the necessary
tools to implement the sanctions.

Moreover, we have worked to increase political
awareness of the sanctions framework. In order to
achieve that goal, the Committee has intensified
its outreach activities and has facilitated regular
exchanges of information among Member States,
the Committee and the Panel of Experts. So far, six
outreach meetings have taken place for each United
Nations regional group. We have already scheduled an
open briefing for the entire United Nations membership
on 9 October. Thanks to that outreach, an increasing
number of States are now reporting to the Committee
on the implementation of the sanctions. We are seeing
the results of our joint work.

At the same time, Italy is engaged with our partners
from the European Union to adopt resolution 2375
(2017), on North Korea, into our legal system as soon
as possible and identify more autonomous, restrictive
measures.

To conclude, we want to ensure that the sanctions
have an impact on the proliferation programmes of the
regime. However, we also want to avoid negatively
affecting the humanitarian situation because, as an
international community, we care about the fate of the
people of North Korea.

