Mr. Kovanda (Czech Republic): Some three months
ago, Mr. Josef Zieleniec, my Foreign Minister, highlighted
in his statement to the General Assembly some success
factors of those peace-keeping operations that have worked,
and he contrasted them with some of the struggling ones.
He said:

"We must draw the necessary lessons." (Ofiicial Records of the General Assembly, F arty-ninth Session, Plenary Meetings, 15m meeting, p. 15)

This is exactly what the Secretary-General and his
collaborators have done by summarizing and assessing the
experiences that have transpired in our efforts to maintain
international peace and security over the past few years.

Why such a synthesis was called for is clear from the
Secretary-General's statistics on the upsurge of these
activities since 1988 - a period during which the number
of peace-keeping operations has increased from 5 to 17.
These statistics imply that during this period the number of
military personnel deployed in the average peace-keeping
operation has just about doubled, and the annual cost of
the average peace-keeping operation has increased by a
factor of almost five. It would seem that the average
peace-keeping operation is much more resource-intensive
today than six or seven years ago.

The question is, of course, whether "average peace-
keeping operation" is a useful concept. Are the foregoing
inferences, while they are correct, relevant? Some insights
might be garnered from disaggregating extant peace-
keeping operations by size.

Today, the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) is in a class by itself. Disregarding the
rapidly diminishing United Nations Operation in Somalia
(UNOSOM. II), UNPROFOR, with its almost 40,000
people, is by an entire order of magnitude larger than the
next group of operations. This next group includes the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda, and until
recently it included United Nations Operation in
Mozambique - each with some 5,000 people. The
United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus, the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force and the
United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observer Mission have about
1,000 people each, and the remaining nine operations
each feature a few dozen to a few hundred people.

Now, when we exclude UNPROFOR and UNOSOM
II from the total sample the analysis of the changing size
of peace-keeping operations looks quite different. Outside
these two operations, we are fielding only some 20,000
people in peace-keeping operations, and the average size
of each has actually decreased - from around 2,000
personnel in 1988 to fewer than 1,400 today.

The Secretary-General disaggregates peace-keeping
operations qualitatively, as he analyses the changes in the
nature of conflicts that they deal with. One important
change is the shift from purely international conflicts,
which were the predominant concern of the Security
Council in earlier years, to conflicts that either are
domestic ones outright or follow on the heels of the
disintegration of a larger State.

This type of conflict entails different characteristics.
Adversaries do not include only well-defined armies
facing each other along a well-defined line. Rather,
ill-defined and uncoordinated armed groups often operate
throughout the territory, not only fighting their armed
adversaries but also preying on or outright attacking
civilian populations.

 

This situation calls for a different, far more complex,
response of peace-keepers, and, by implication, a different
mandate. The Secretary-General makes the very interesting
distinction between classical peace-keeping operations and
multifunctional ones. In multifunctional operations,
peace-keepers have much more to do: in addition to their
traditional task of monitoring buffer zones and cease-fires,
they provide humanitarian relief, protect humanitarian
operations of other agencies and non-governmental
organizations and, even more important perhaps, their
political role is heightened: they nurture in myriad ways the
implementation in the field of a settlement reached at a
conference table. The list of specific tasks - and the report
does contain one - is indeed long.

Two big examples of multifunctional operations are
provided: Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Somalia. We note
that the success of the first of these operations has been
rather limited - limited so far largely to preventing the
expansion and dousing the intensity of the fighting - while
the second operation has been, in political terms at least,
largely unsuccessful. This lack of success may well have
been caused by burdening the mandates of these operations
with tasks that implicitly require the use of force, mandates
that were thus based on the logic of peace-enforcement
rather than of peace-keeping. The Secretary-General
suggests that such tasks included protecting humanitarian
operations during continued warfare, protecting civilian
populations in safe areas, and pressing for reconciliation
rather faster than the parties could handle.

Those are very serious points, and since it is the
Security Council that draws up the mandates of peace-
keeping operations, albeit on the recommendation of the
Secretariat, they deserve our serious reflection. For it is
probably not a coincidence that precisely the two largest
peace-keeping operations, which together skew the overall
statistics, are, on the one hand, the most typical
multifunctional ones and, on the other, among the less
successful ones. In studying the lessons they offer we will
be touching on the limits of the possible in peace-keeping
operations. One immediate lesson is that simply continuing
to increase the size of a peace-keeping operation leads to
diminishing returns. What I mean is that even the largest
peace-keeping operation cannot enforce peace, whilst
enforcement may be a task beyond our capacities
altogether. It may indeed be that when enforcement is
needed we well-nigh have to look to the mechanism of
farming out the task, such as to groups of States, as
outlined in the sub-chapter on enforcement action.

Nevertheless, of the several instruments at our
disposal for safeguarding peace and security,
peace-keeping is still one of the principal ones, the one
employed most often and the one with which we have the
greatest experience.

And to what ends? Once we treat UNPROFOR and
UNOSOM. as special cases, we end up with a mixed bag
of results. We have the "classics," the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO), the United
Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan
(UNMOGIP), the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus (UNFICYP), the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) and the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), in place for 15, 20, 30, even
45 years or more, in situations where the United Nations
has well-nigh run out of steam, ideas, often even
initiative, and where any further change is most likely
going to depend on events beyond the control of this
Organization. We are in a holding pattern. The Secretary-
General might as well remind us that international
problems cannot be solved quickly or within a limited
time. We should not lose sight of the fact that a peace-
keeping operation is not an end in itself but rather a
means toward the political settlement of a conflict. And
if the settlement is nowhere on the horizon, does the time
never come when we pack up and go?
Of the more recent operations, some are clearly
successful, and the United Nations Operation in
Mozambique (ONUMOZ) is an outstanding example of
these - and let me stress that it was also a
multifunctional operation par excellence; others are
grinding away towards a resolution more or less fuzzily
outlined on the horizon. Reflecting upon them indicates
very clearly one important point: they are all different,
every one of them is sui generis. None of these peace-
keeping operations is even four years old, and fully half
of them are less than two years old. But even within this
group, being able to chalk up accomplishments in El
Salvador, Namibia and Cambodia, in addition to
Mozambique, is in and of itself a source of
encouragement and pride.

Allow me merely to touch on some of the different
instruments for strengthening peace and security
mentioned in the report.

We agree with the Secretary-General - and, indeed,
who would not? - that preventive diplomacy is
preferable to resolving a conflict that has turned violent.
The domestic nature of most conflicts is of course a

 

difficulty here. We share the opinion that States should be
automatically willing to accept the good offices of the
United Nations, however far we may still be from this
doctrine. Resorting to Article 2, paragraph 7 of the Charter
is one way of legally buttressing these United Nations
efforts. We would, however, hope that flagrant violations of
human rights might in and of themselves constitute a good
enough reason for the United Nations to step in. We draw
attention to the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE), which has agreed that the principle of
non-interference does not apply to situations affecting
human rights protection.

For preventive diplomacy one needs, so to speak,
"preventive diplomats," of which there is a dearth. It is
perhaps of interest that the OSCE is developing a database
of qualified, capable personalities. This is an idea the
United Nations might wish to adopt, and it might perhaps
even cooperate with the OSCE in utilizing its resources.

A number of important issues are discussed in the
sub-chapter on peace-keeping. We are often frustrated by
the lack of information, even as we do acknowledge the
value of information the Secretariat provides us at just
about every informal consultation of the Council. Still, we
will continue to be bewildered every time we hear from
other sources, for example from the press, of developments
which clearly affect the situation on the ground, and which
the Secretariat is not in a position to confirm or deny. The
need for full substantiation of statements is clear;
nevertheless, one wonders whether the omission, albeit
unwitting, of important facts, does not sometimes have the
same effect as the commission of informational blunders.

Unity of command is a principle we wholeheartedly
support. Everyone else does too. So where is the problem?
We would appreciate an evaluation of why the principle has
been breached in some instances. Was it a manifestation of
a Govemment's fickleness? Was it a result of excessive
sensitivity to domestic public opinion - and who but the
local politician can be the arbiter of that? Or was it perhaps
a manifestation of lack of trust in the existing command?
And, if so, are we doing all we can to appoint only the
highest-calibre, universally respected soldiers to
commanding posts?

We have taken note of the Secretary-General's
disapproving remarks in this sub-chapter concerning the
Security Council's alleged increased propensity for
micro-management. Other critical remarks addressed to the
Council occur elsewhere in the document, and we reserve
the right to discuss these important issues on some other
occasion.

The sub-chapter on disarmament contains very
important points on what the Secretary-General has
privately described as "macro-disarmament": dealing with
weapons of mass destruction. My Government is very
keen on being a part of these efforts, but we feel other
opportunities might be even more suitable for their
in-depth discussion. For the record, though, let me stress
the importance we attach to the forthcoming conference
of the parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT), and to the early entering into
force of the chemical weapons Convention.

As for micro-disarmament, my country supports
efforts to limit the arms trade. The position and policies
of my country since 1990 are well known. Suffice it to
say that micro-disarmament as an issue cannot be
separated from the world arms trade, with all the
complexities that that entails. We contribute information
to the United Nations Register of Conventional Weapons,
and we also support efforts to reduce civilian casualties
from land-mines and have taken important national steps
to this end.

As for sanctions, setting clear-cut criteria for
imposing and lifting them would perhaps be desirable. We
see a difference here between the political role of setting
such criteria in every individual case and the technical
role of determining whether the criteria have been met.
We really ought to avoid giving the impression that the
Security Council is, so to speak, moving the goal posts
while the game is on, even if developments in the target
country do not follow our original expectations.

Sanctions are indeed a double-edged sword. Let us
clearly state that well-targeted sanctions do have an
important role to play. On the other hand, though, we
know that they often stimulate the mobilization of
domestic resources; in the short run, at least, they often
strengthen rather than weaken the intended political
target; they may inspire the population's mistrust in the
international community. Gaps in a sanctions regime have
a multiplier detrimental effect on their overall
effectiveness and can exacerbate their counterproductive
aspects, giving rise to ingenious ways of further obviating
their intended role.

The effect of sanctions on third countries is the
unfairest side effect. No argument can be found for
justifying the suffering of a third country that arises

 

strictly from the accident of its geographical proximity.
Quite frankly, though, we know of no simple solution and
are grateful to the Secretary-General for his efforts, though
they have so far been fruitless, in exploring some novel
avenues.

Despite certain doubts we all have about the
effectiveness of sanctions and their impact on vulnerable
segments of the civilian population, they are nevertheless
one of the very few instruments we have at our disposal.
We do, however, by and large support the Secretary-
General's recommendations contained in paragraph 75 of
his report.

In a separate chapter, the Secretary-General discusses
cooperation with regional organizations. Two of the forms
such cooperation can take is co-deployment and joint
operations. My delegation is particularly taken by the four
principles he stresses for such cooperation, namely,
establishing an agreed mechanism for consultations;
respecting the primacy of the United Nations; clearly
defining the division of tasks; and maintaining consistency,
for instance of standards for peace-keeping operations.

Elsewhere in the document, the Secretary-General
discusses in a fresh way enforcement action by groups of
States. Recalling the war in Korea usefully reminds us that
this concept was not invented recently, even though it is
only recently that it has been employed with any frequency.
What we would recommend is some reflection as to
whether the same or similar principles that apply to
peace-keeping cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations should not also explicitly apply
between the United Nations and the ad hoc groups of States
entrusted with enforcement.

In this regard, we would like to see an additional
principle emphasized - the principle of transparency. Two
elements should be considered here. First, there is a need
for regular information to be provided by United Nations
sources on the performance of the regional organization or
of the group of States, information that would pay
particular attention to the enforcer's impartiality. The
second element is the need for up-to-date information
provided by the regional organization or group of States
itself to the Security Council. These principles are, by and
large, being observed today, but we would like to see them
become a truly integral and routine part of our
decision-making.

In conclusion, let me thank the Secretary-General and
his team for the extraordinary document they have
presented. My not touching on every one of its aspect
suggests how rich it is, rather than a lack of interest on
our part. The Security Council, dealing as it does day in
and day out with the world's fires, seldom has the time or
opportunity to sit back and contemplate the broader
picture. The urgent usually pushes the important off our
agenda. The document we are discussing today provides
us precisely with the important, with the broader picture,
and we will draw on it for a long time to come, I am
sure.

Let me at this point also pay homage to the
thousands of men and women whose dedicated work has
allowed the Secretary-General to observe that

"More progress has been made in the past few years
towards using the United Nations as it was designed
to be used than many could ever have predicted"
(S/Z995/Z, para. 105),

and especially to salute those who in this effort have laid
down their lives.

