Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this timely briefing. I would also like
to express my gratitude to the Secretary-General,
to Mr. Mogae, the Chair of the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission for South Sudan, and to
Ms. Sunday for their very informative briefings.

Japan remains deeply concerned about the ongoing
hostilities and the dire humanitarian situation in South
Sudan, which has been exacerbated by famine. Many
lives are at stake. The members of the Security Council
and international partners must continue to extend
lifesaving support to the innocent people of South
Sudan. In addition to the $22.4 million in humanitarian
and reconstruction assistance announced in January,
Japan decided last week to contribute an additional
$6 million in response to the Secretary-General's call
for international support to address the famine.

For international assistance to be effective it must
reach those in need. To that end, safe and unhindered
access is essential. We are troubled by the many reports
of restrictions on humanitarian access, including
on work permits, that only increase the suffering of
innocent people. Worse still, aid providers continue to
be targeted in such incidents as the tragic killing by
unknown gunmen on 14 March of personnel from the
International Organization for Migration. Japan calls on
President Kiir to honour his previous commitments and
take immediate action on the ground, including through
improved humanitarian access at the local level and by
working to bring about a cessation of hostilities. The
primary responsibility to protect civilians rests with
the Government of South Sudan. We urge that concrete
progress on that front be made.

There is no alternative to a political process
aimed at achieving genuine peace. Japan reiterates
its full support for the collective commitment and
close coordination on South Sudan demonstrated by
the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and the United Nations in their joint
statement in January. Japan welcomes the Secretary-
General's ongoing engagement at this critical time.
We also appreciate the strong involvement of both
President Konare and President Mogae, and we support
their call for South Sudan to make the national dialogue
as inclusive, free and transparent as possible. The
Council should continue to be united in supporting
those engagements and efforts. As part of the efforts
to promote inclusivity and reconciliation, Japan is
considering providing support to grass-roots peace
initiatives through the United Nations Development
Programme. The successful holding of a national day
of prayer on 10 March with broad participation was a
step in the right direction. The onus is now on President
Kiir and the Government. We strongly urge President
Kiir to build on that spirit in pursuit of a genuine and
inclusive national dialogue process. Other parties
should also renounce violence and cooperate in that
national endeavour.

Japan takes note of some signs of progress on the
deployment of a regional protection force, including
regional countries' reaffirmation of their commitment
to participating in the force, and by the visits by troop-
contributing countries' reconnaissance teams and
enablers to South Sudan. But there are still challenges
to be resolved regarding the force's full deployment.
We need further progress on land provision and airport
coordination in order to ensure that it can function
effectively. We again call on the Government to
fully cooperate with the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, including with regard to the regional
protection force.
Notwithstanding our recent decision to end the
activities of the Self-Defence Force engineering unit,
Japan remains unwavering in its commitment to peace
and stability in South Sudan. Japan will support efforts
towards an inclusive national dialogue and work with
the parties concerned for the smooth and effective
operation of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan, including the early deployment of a regional
protection force. Japan will also continue to provide
development cooperation and humanitarian assistance
to those in need, thereby contributing to nation-building
in South Sudan.

