Mr. Saikal: Given the time limitations, I will
deliver only part of the statement of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People. The full version will be circulated shortly.

As we meet at the quarterly debate on the
question of Palestine, the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
is compelled to sound the alarm on the downward
spiral in all aspects of the situation of the Palestinian
people under the nearly half-century Israeli military
occupation, which is causing so much human
suffering, derailing the prospects for a two-State
solution and undermining the pursuit for peace. As the
humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate - with
socioeconomic conditions in the blockaded Gaza Strip,
in particular, reaching the lowest point since the Israeli
occupation began in 1967 - the continuous building
and expansion ofillegal settlements has also reached an
unprecedented level, effectively confiscating more than
50 per cent of the territory of the State of Palestine,
undermining its contiguity and viability.

At last week's Arria Formula meeting, we all
heard the briefings of international and Israeli experts
describing how settlement construction and expansion
is not only a breach of numerous relevant resolutions
adopted by the Council and the General Assembly, but
also a direct violation of article 49 of the 1949 Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War and the 2004 International Court of
Justice advisory opinions on the construction of a wall
in occupied Palestinian territory. We also heard about
the massive impact of the Israeli settlement campaign
on the Palestinian people's human rights.

Despite repeated international calls for a cessation
of all settlement activities, Israel continues to
methodically plan, tender and build new settlements,
expand existing ones, attempt to legalize settlement
outposts, expropriate land and demolish Palestinian
homes and other structures in unprecedented numbers,
as well as to declare increasing sections ofthe Palestinian
territory to be State land, military zones, national parks
and archaeological sites. Israel's systematic policies
increasingly deprive Palestinians of their own land
with impunity, in violation of international law and
in contradiction to its stated commitment to the two-
State solution. The settlement enterprise, sustained
and enabled by an entire network of bypass roads
and infrastructure only for Israeli settlers, is not only
impairing the daily lives of Palestinians and violating
their rights, but it is fragmenting the Palestinian territory
in hundreds of separate, disconnected enclaves, eroding
the two-State solution based on the 1967 borders.

As has been amply documented by the
United Nations and others 4 including Israeli
organizations 4 those illegal practices constitute grave
violations of the individual and collective inalienable
rights of the Palestinian People, particularly their rights
to life, freedom and self-determination. The practices
also violate the Palestinian people's economic, social
and cultural rights, preventing them from exercising
sovereignty over their natural resources, and hampering
their right to sustainable development.

The Committee underscores the responsibility of
States and private entities to not contribute to Israeli
violations of Palestinian human rights, particularly
as it relates to settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, in line with their
obligations under international law. In that regard, the
Committee encourages Member States to implement
Human Rights Council resolution 31/36, of 24 March
2016, requesting the High Commissioner for Human
Rights to produce a database of business enterprises
involved in the activities of the illegal settlements, in
line with the United Nations Guiding Principles on
Business and Human Rights. The Committee further
welcomes the stance taken by the European Union on the
labelling of products manufactured in the settlements.

In several resolutions, the Council itself has
described Israel's settlements in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem as a serious obstruction to peace, calling
on Israel - to no avail - to cease their construction
and to dismantle existing settlements. It is now time for
the Council to take action, to remove all obstacles to
implementing international law and the long-standing
parameters for a solution, and to move decisively
towards a just and durable solution that will allow the
Palestinian State, within the 1967 borders and with East
Jerusalem as its capital, to live side by side, in peace
and security with Israel. Stressing that the political,
physical and socioeconomic division of Gaza and the
West Bank is another major obstacle to advancing the
prospects for peace, the Committee reiterates today the
call on Israel to lift the Gaza blockade.

The international community cannot continue
managing this conflict, as in the past; it is clear that
the situation is rapidly deteriorating, as indicated
by the number of civilian victims of violence, and as
reported yesterday by several international human
rights organizations at the meeting of the Committee's
Working Group. The Committee condemns all forms
of violence against civilians, by which Palestinians
are disproportionally affected, and calls for action to
ensure their protection and accountability, including
for unlawful killings, in accordance with international
law. The Committee also urges Palestinians to move
decisively forward on the path of national reconciliation.

The international community, especially the
Council, has to demonstrate strong political will and
ingenuity to break this untenable impasse and signal
to the world that the United Nations is serious when
it talks about peace between Israel and Palestine.
The Committee reiterates that an end to the Israeli
occupation and the realization of the rights of the
Palestinian people, including to self-determination and
independence, remain top and unavoidable priorities
for the international community and should be pursued
with courage and determination.

