Mrs. Byaje (Rwanda): I thank you, Sir, and your
delegation for organizing this important debate. Allow
me also to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; Her
Excellency Ms. Amina Mohamed, Cabinet Secretary
for Foreign Affairs and International Trade of Kenya;
and His Excellency Ambassador Smail Chergui,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union (AU), for their briefings.

This debate is indeed timely in the light of the
numerous relapses and the two conflicts raging in our
beautiful continent, Africa. We therefore believe that
recommendations generated by discussions of this nature
can significantly contribute to the improvement and
streamlining of practices in peacebuilding and provide
stakeholders with adequate responses aimed at curbing
the proliferation of conflicts. The parallel reviews of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture - the
report of the Advisory Group of Experts (S/2015/490)
and the report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (S/2015/446) - and the global
study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
coupled with the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/ 1), afford the United Nations with the opportunity to
rethink how to adequately and strategically engage in
the effort to sustain peace.

If we look at the trajectory of my own country,
Rwanda, during the past 22 years - that of a failed
State in a post-conflict situation, which has become
one of the many contributors to peacekeeping
operations - we can rightly state that peacebuilding
is an important process, not only in dealing with the
aftermath of conflicts but also in laying the foundations
that sustain peace, thereby contributing to long-term
conflict prevention. However, as the recently concluded
review of the peacebuilding architecture has indicated,
peacebuilding is both a political and technical process
and the United Nations continues to struggle to close
critical gaps as it tries to apply existing top-down
technical strategies to the political realities on the
ground, which has led to its inability to fill the gaping
hole identified in 2005.

For countries on the Peacebuilding Commission's
(PBC) agenda, as well as for other countries in which
peacebuilding activities are ongoing, the relapses into
conflict lead one to question whether local political
mechanisms, capacities and conflict dynamics have been
taken into account in the formulation of peacebuilding
programmes. The deteriorating developments in some
countries in Africa are, unfortunately, very concerning,
especially with regard to those that had achieved a
degree of progress earlier. There is a need for the
international community, in general, and the United
Nations, in particular, to adopt targeted post-conflict
measures that address the root causes of a particular
conflict, while, at the same time, respecting the
specificity of each situation.

We share the views expressed in the concept
note (8/2016/586, annex) relating to how supporting
institution-building and ensuring national ownership
have helped to lay the foundation for sustainable peace.
We also believe that the processes of democratization,
the rule of law, unity and reconciliation, as well as
inclusive social economic development, help to build a
society resilient to conflict and should be viewed as key
pillars when addressing the root causes of conflicts.

It is regrettable, however, to note that the Council
tends to react more to ongoing conflict rather than deal
effectively with vital aspects such as prevention. While
other United Nations specialized agencies have played
a greater role in those areas, the Security Council
could still play a more proactive role, especially in
countries on its agenda and/or where peace operations
have been deployed. In that respect, the report of the
Advisory Group of Experts summarily concluded
that sustaining peace is not a peripheral activity for
the United Nations, but a core task implicit in the
Charter of the United Nations, which should be applied
across the whole United Nations spectrum. The report
further states, in its conclusion, that the Peacebuilding
Commission needs to be revitalized so as to increase
its ability to better support efforts to find sustainable
and durable solutions. Those include the enhancement
of its advisory and coordination role, the marshalling
of resources and continued advocacy on behalf of the
countries on its agenda, as well as acting as a bridge
between the principal organs of the United Nations,
including the Council.

We therefore call for continued advocacy on behalf
of the countries on the agenda and deem it imperative
to help underscore the political and socioeconomic
progress made to attract assistance and/or investment
aligned with national priorities. However, such priorities
cannot materialize without predictable and sustainable
financing. It is deplorable to note that in some of the
countries on the agenda, many of the peacebuilding
projects have either collapsed or failed owing to the
absence ofa sustained funding model, as many of them
had short financing cycles that could not be pursued
beyond the immediate aftermath of the conflict. To
offset this problem, we hope to see a more enhanced
and more flexible Peacebuilding Fund playing a greater
role in this regard.

Despite the challenges in specific country
configurations, we are nonetheless encouraged by the
efforts deployed by the country-specific configuration
Chairs, particularly the increased number of
visits to countries on the agenda to interact with
various stakeholders. These practices could provide
opportunities to increase awareness of the situation at
hand and where necessary contribute to the accuracy
ofthe information at the disposal of the United Nations
that could lead to taking appropriate action.

