Mr. Kassem: It is once again a great pleasure for
me to address Council members, as well as the
Ministers and Ambassadors of Member States whose
presence today testifies to their interest in seeing the
violent conflict and suffering of the past four years in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo brought to an
end.

I should like to begin by thanking the President of
the Council, Ambassador Belinga-Eboutou, for his
assistance in preparing for today's meeting on the
Expert Panel's fifth report (S/2002/ 1146). I should also
like to express the gratitude of the Panel to all Council
members for the invaluable support and assistance that
they have provided us during our current mandate.

I should like to express our deep appreciation to
the Governments of Burundi, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Kenya, the Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, South
Africa and Uganda for meeting with the Panel during
its stay in the region. I should also like to express our
special thanks to the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) as well as to the Offices of the
Representatives of the Secretary-General and of the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
throughout the region for their help. In addition, the
Panel wishes to thank the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations at the Secretariat for its continued support.

Since the signing of the Pretoria and Luanda
Agreements, much progress has been made towards
achieving peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The parties to the conflict and those who have
mediated the recent agreements have made bold
commitments and must be further encouraged and
supported. Yet, the Lusaka peace process does not
address the crucial economic dimension of the conflict.
Successes on the political and military front will
ultimately prove unsustainable if the economic issues
that contribute to prolonging armed conflict are not
resolved. That risk can be seen in the recent armed
confrontations along the eastern border of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the
northeast. The latest flare-up in fighting is motivated as
much by economic advantage as it is by political gain.

Three distinct groups, which the Panel has chosen
to describe as elite networks, have carved out separate
spheres of economic control in various areas of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo during the past four
years. Those areas have been controlled, respectively,
by the Rwandan army, by the Ugandan army and by the
Kinshasa Government, which has depended on the
Zimbabwean military to defend it.

The elite networks' grip on the economy of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo extends far beyond
precious natural resources to encompass territory, fiscal
revenues and trade in general. Their exploitation
activities involve highly organized and documented
systems of embezzlement, tax fraud, extortion,
kickbacks and false invoicing. They also include the
asset-stripping of State companies and secret profit-
sharing agreements. Many of those activities are
orchestrated in a manner that closely resembles
criminal operations.

The networks collaborate with organized criminal
groups, some of them transnational organizations, in
order to maximize profits. They draw on those groups
for discreet support in military and commercial
operations. They also use them to carry out money-
laundering, illegal currency transactions, counterfeiting
operations, arms trafficking and smuggling, all of
which are highly profitable and some of which also aim
at political destabilization.

The war economy directed by those networks
functions under the cover of armed conflict, the
manipulation of ethnic tensions and generalized
violence, generating enormous profits from areas the
size of many European countries for the benefit of
small coteries of powerful individuals or the
commercial wing of military institutions. It drains the
Democratic Republic of the Congo's public treasury of
revenues at the national and local levels, leaving the
population without services and undermining the
country's prospects for economic recovery and
reconstruction. It opposes transparency, accountability,
competition and regulation. It undermines stability and
the restoration of State authority. It has provoked
cycles of aggression and the proliferation of armed
groups, which in turn have led to patterns of
displacement, malnutrition and mortality on a scale
never before witnessed. Competition among a single
network's members, who can be political and
commercial rivals, fuels more instability and violence.
The networks' core members have the authority
and the means to intimidate and to wield force, which
are vital to monopolizing sources of revenue and to
ensuring that they can act with impunity. Their power
and influence enable them to shape national policies -
diplomatic, military and/or commercial. They have the
capacity to subvert the peace process in order to protect
their economic interests and to ensure continued
control over revenue-generating activities.

The use of national armies is only one of many
means at the disposal of the networks for exercising
economic control. The networks' strategies and
operations continue to grow more covert and more
opaque as international attention to them increases.
Paramilitary groups, military-backed companies with
civilian facades and foreign soldiers, who have quietly
integrated into rebel armies and local defence forces,
are a few of the tactics now being used by the
networks, which have anticipated the consequences of
growing international pressure for the withdrawal of
foreign forces from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Security voids and violent conflict among a
myriad of armed groups of unclear or shifting
affiliation could offer pretexts for incursions or for new
deployments. They are also reminders that the role of
armed groups should be taken into account in efforts to
halt the exploitation, including through the
implementation of effective and responsive
demobilization programmes.

In the course of seven months of field work, the
Panel has gathered extensive information, first-hand
testimony and documentation on the exploitation
activities of the networks' members. Knowledgeable
sources and a long paper trail have permitted the Panel
also to identify numerous intermediaries that help in
marketing minerals and other commodities; the
institutions that provide financial services; the
companies that buy, process and resell the extracted
resources; and the criminal organizations that provide
transport, arms and other services. All share complicity
in this conflict-driven trade.

The States where these individuals and
enterprises are based are likewise responsible when
they take no action - for example, to investigate,
prosecute and sanction or to enforce compliance with
guidelines for corporate behaviour. However, in its
recommendations, the Panel has focused on a very
limited number of individuals and companies about
which it has gathered the most detailed testimony and
documentary evidence. Some of the names will be
familiar; they have appeared in the Panel's previous
reports.

The Panel hopes that its report can be used as a
constructive tool by the Council and by international
mediators to motivate the parties to fully honour their
obligations under the recently signed agreements. Like
its investigations, the Panel's recommendations are
intended to be well-balanced and aim foremost at
promoting peace and stability. The Panel believes that
reconstructing and reorienting the region's economies
are essential to peacemaking and peace-building. It has
recommended that the international community
emphasize a peace dividend in the form of economic
incentives, which could serve to encourage
Governments' adherence to peace agreements and to
spur confidence-building and reconciliation.

The first tier of the peace dividend could be a set
of agreements or initiatives on quick-disbursing aid for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the other
Great Lakes countries involved in the conflict. That aid
would be destined for reconstruction and rehabilitation
programmes that benefit local populations.

The second tier could be a set of agreements on
regional economic integration and trade, which could
emerge from regional discussions, including the
planned international conference on peace, security,
democracy and sustainable development. More
incentives and means will be needed to promote
regional integration, which would marginalize criminal
and military-driven trade in favour of legitimate
commercial development. Recently signed agreements
may signal that the time for organizing this conference
is approaching. The international community, and the
United Nations in particular, can take a leading role in
convening that conference.

The Panel has also called for intensive aid to be
provided to rebuild and reform the State institutions of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, from the army
and police to the customs service and the various
ministries and agencies associated with natural
resources. Through assistance commitments for post-
conflict reconstruction, the international community
could help to establish legitimate and accountable
civilian administration in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. International
agencies and institutions could also collaborate in
future efforts to review the validity of concessions and
contracts signed during both wars in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in accordance with the
resolution passed at the inter-Congolese dialogue
conference, held last April in Sun City, South Africa.
Certain measures should likewise be taken to
deter or curb criminal exploitation and to help begin to
reduce armed confrontation and the resulting
humanitarian catastrophe. The Panel has proposed a set
of disincentives, some of which are linked to
compliance with the recent peace agreements. Those
include restrictive measures, such as travel bans and
the freezing of assets, phased cuts in official
development assistance, verification of violations by
businesses of the guidelines of the Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Development for
multinational enterprises, and ongoing scrutiny of
exploitation activities by a monitoring body that would
report regularly to the Security Council.

Economic exploitation remains the most potent
motive and means for continued armed conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The actions that
the Panel has recommended to curb exploitation, which
is leading to increased criminalization of the
economies of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and of the region at large, are an essential part of what
the Panel envisions to be a holistic and viable peace
process. They will require the systematic and sustained
involvement of the international community. Decisive
action by the Council is now needed to build on the
momentum of certain military and political gains, to
consolidate what could become durable peace in the
Great Lakes region and to begin rebuilding the region's
economies.

The Panel has tried, to the best of its ability, to
produce a detailed, rigorous and well-documented
report that sheds light on the many actors implicated in
economic exploitation, as well in the violence and
conflict that the competition for economic control
continues to fuel. Its fact-finding activities have been
helped by many courageous individuals, including
those who remain in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in the region. The Panel takes very
seriously the possibility that its sources, whose
confidentiality the Panel intends to protect at all costs,
could be targeted for reprisals.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
Panel's recommendations are intended, above all, to
protect the Congolese nation's most precious resource,
its people. The toll of the conflict and the exploitation
in human lives and suffering continues to mount,
adding urgency to the need for action.

