Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We underscore the importance
of this topic and are grateful for the holding of this
afternoon's meeting on the constant and pernicious
threat of terrorist acts to international peace and
security, which overwhelming justifies the reason that
it is indeed a priority for the Security Council. In that
regard, I thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and
Executive Director Coninsx for updating us.

Absolutely nothing justifies the barbaric and
inhuman criminal acts of such scale against the
lives of innocent people, for whom the dark rational
underpinning of such acts is foreign and used as
an instrument to spread fear and insecurity. The
Dominican Republic condemns in the strongest terms
all terrorist acts in all their forms and manifestations.
We remain united in the face of the collective suffering
of the victims and survivors of the terrorist attacks,
atrocities and cowardly attacks perpetrated throughout
the world, including this year's events resulting in 51
deaths in New Zealand and nearly 300 in Sri Lanka.

It is in the memory of the victims and the resilience
of the survivors of terrorism that we embrace our
humanity and find the strength to fight together with
determination and resolve an evil that affects us all.
We remain faithful to our principles and aware and
respectful of fundamental rights, including those of
women, children and family members as the victims of
foreign terrorist fighters.

In the light of the most recent reports indicating
the territorial defeat of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham and the terrorist group's aspiration to achieve
global relevance through its regional affiliates by
inspiring attacks and transforming itself into a covert
global network, we echo the urgent need to step up our
resolve and resources to address the challenges posed
by the prosecution and repatriation of detainees and
internally displaced persons.

Reports on the spike in the number of refugees
in camps alerts us to the scale of the problem faced at
the humanitarian, human rights, security, logistical,
legal, jurisdictional and other levels, as exemplified
by the case of Al-Hol camp, which only this year has
seen its population increase sevenfold to more than
70,000 people.

We echo the concern about and threat posed to adult
detainees and, to a greater degree, minors and young
people, who are often traumatized by, and exposed
to, radicalization in prison while affected by poverty,
marginalization and stigmatization, which makes the
process of social reintegration more difficult and the
risk of future violence and their recruitment into one of
those terrorist groups more likely.

In that regard, we commend the work of the United
Nations systemforhavingdevelopedthekeyprinciples for
the protection, repatriation, prosecution, rehabilitation
and reintegration of women and children with links to
United Nations- listed terrorist groups - a useful tool
that can facilitate the development and implementation
of policies and actions in line with international law.

We are also aware of the noxious relationship
between terrorism and transnational criminal
organizations involved in the trafficking of drugs,
people and natural resources, which only further puts
our ability to combat them to the test and requires
strengthening and increasing existing international
cooperation among the relevant authorities. We are
concerned about the number of foreign terrorist
fighters, estimated by some Member States to number
between 24,000 and 30,000, and the challenge that that
poses to countries in which their presence is felt and
those of transit and origin.

Lastly, we urge Member States, with the support
of the United Nations system, to continue to strengthen
their strategies for the prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration of suspected terrorists and returning and
relocating foreign terrorist fighters and their families,
while paying particular attention to approaches sensitive
to gender-related issues and violence against children.

