Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretaries-General for their briefings today. I want
to congratulate you, Mr. President, and Kuwait on
organizing this first meeting with the League of Arab
States under this agenda item. We agree with others
that sustainable long-term peace and prosperity is best
achieved through coordinated efforts. As the regional
situation continues to evolve, the League of Arab
States has shown resolve and perseverance in working
to strengthen regional security and stability. Stronger
cooperation will enable us all to confront the urgent
challenges that we share in the region and that demand
the international community's immediate attention.

To begin with the Sudan, the international
community must support the demands of the Sudanese
people for a better future. We expect the Transitional
Military Council to act on their demands and engage
in dialogue to agree on a swift transition to civilian
Government. We utterly condemn the use of force
against peaceful protesters, and we encourage all
partners, including in the League of Arab States and
especially those with influence over the Transitional
Military Council, to support the African Union's
mediation efforts and the calls for an end to violence
and a swift transfer to civilian rule. Stability will come
with an inclusive agreement, not with violence and
exclusion. We will continue to engage with all sides to
that end.

On Syria, the United Kingdom's position remains
clear. Peace through a negotiated political settlement
is absolutely essential for the sake of the people of
Syria and the region. We have all recently seen again
horrifying scenes of civilian infrastructure, including
hospitals and schools, being bombed in Syria, this
time in Idlib. We cannot shirk our responsibilities as
members of the Council. Working with the United
Nations Special Envoy for Syria and with the League
of Arab States, we have to redouble our efforts to seek
a negotiated political settlement in line with resolution
2254 (2015), which remains the only sustainable solution
to the conflict. The United Kingdom will not resume
engagement with Syria or consider reconstruction until
a credible, substantive and genuine political process
is firmly under way. And I echo the comments of the
United States Ambassador on the importance of the
League of Arab States' suspension of Syria.

With regards to the Middle East peace process, the
United Kingdom remains committed to a two-State
solution, leading to a safe and secure Israel living
alongside a viable and sovereign Palestinian State,
based on the 1967 borders and with Jerusalem as the
shared capital of both States. We have consistently
called and continue to call for an immediate end to
all actions that undermine the viability of a two-State
solution, including terrorism, anti-Semitic incitement,
settlement expansion and the demolition of Palestinian
property. We should all encourage all parties to abide
by international law and promote peace, stability
and security.

Turning to Libya, the United Kingdom remains
deeply concerned about the deteriorating security and
humanitarian situation. The protracted and worsening
violence benefits no one and serves only to demonstrate
that there is no military solution. We call on all involved
in the conflict to commit to an immediate ceasefire,
allow unfettered humanitarian access and resume
political talks. Achieving that will require compromise
on all sides. We remain fully supportive of the United
Nations-led political process and the efforts of Special
Representative Salame as the only way to achieve
security and stability in Libya.

It has now been four years since the devastating
conflict in Yemen began. Without a political settlement,
the horrific suffering of millions will continue. The
United Kingdom fully supports the United Nations
and Special Envoy Martin Griffiths as he continues his
efforts to secure agreement by the parties to the conflict
to implement the Stockholm agreements. We encourage
both parties to continue to engage constructively with
the Special Envoy and Lieutenant General Lollesgaard.

We are deeply concerned about the reports of
explosions and fires on vessels in the Strait of Hormuz,
one of the world's most important shipping lanes.
Freedom of navigation is vital to the global economy
and all of our interests.

The challenges facing the region are immense. All
of us sitting around this table today must show agility
and prioritize practical action in working together to
address them. We believe that the United Nations and
the League of Arab States can achieve more when they
work together in that spirit.

