Mr. Biagini (Italy): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate Kazakhstan on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January, and thank it for convening this very timely
and important meeting. We also welcome the adoption
of the presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/2) on
this occasion.

We align ourselves with the statement just delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

Regional partnerships play a primary role in
addressing the security and development challenges
facing Afghanistan. The countries and the peoples
of Central Asia share a common history of rich and
interdependent relations in the political, cultural and
economic domains, with Afghanistan at its core 4 the
heart ofAsia, in the true sense ofthe term. The complex
patchwork of transnational threats, challenges and
opportunities facing the Central Asian region is today
having a direct impact on the situation in Afghanistan
and on the prospects for long-term civilization and
development. I would like to address three main aspects.

First of all, I note the threats to security from
terrorists and violent extremist groups operating
in Afghanistan. In the framework of the NATO-led
Resolute Support Mission, Italy continues to stand side
by side with our Afghan partners in order to enhance
the capabilities of the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces. At the same time, in our view, there is
a need for a broader strategy that adequately addresses
the complex and transnational nature of the terrorist
phenomenon. A constructive role for all regional
neighbours and stakeholders is therefore essential
in countering the threat of terrorism and violent
extremism, including by denying such groups any form
of safe haven. The next meeting of the Kabul Process,
which we fully support, can provide the necessary
political momentum to those common efforts, which
must be accompanied by renewed commitment to
making progress on an Afghan-led and -owned peace
and reconciliation process.

Secondly, the threat of terrorism and its sources
of financing is also very closely linked to the issue
of drug trafficking. We are very concerned about the
latest developments reflected in the recently published
report of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) entitled Afghanistan Opium Survey 2017,
which notes a very large increase in opium cultivation.
Italy supports various initiatives in that regard, such
as the UNODC regional programme for Afghanistan
and neighbouring countries. We are also engaged in
successful triangular cooperation in order to enhance
the capabilities of Afghan police officers in the area of
counter-narcotics.

Thirdly, on regional integration and economic
development, we strongly support the National
Unity Government's vision for Afghanistan as a
crossroads for trade and infrastructure in Central Asia.
Interconnectivity is key to achieving sustained growth
and development in Afghanistan and in the region.
Italy is therefore proud of its long-term commitment to
making that vision a reality - including by channelling
a great part of its long-standing civilian assistance to
Afghanistan to the financing of strategic transport and
communication infrastructure projects, in particular in
the western region of the country.

Regional mechanisms and organizations can play a
crucial role in all of those areas and provide a platform
to develop regional capacities and build mutual
confidence. In that regard, we commend and support
the role and initiatives of the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia.

I would like to conclude by reiterating the need
for a comprehensive approach to the stabilization
and prosperity of the region by linking security
and development.

The meeting rose at 2.05 pm.
