Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): Egypt associates itself
with the statement delivered by the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

At the outset, I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for convening this debate, and for providing a
thought-stimulating concept paper (S/2014/725, annex).
This meeting bears testimony to the need to intensify
our collective efforts to ensure that the Council truly
acts on behalf of the entire membership in discharging
its mandate in accordance with Article 24 of the Charter.
Enhancing the transparency, inclusivity, openness
and democratization of the Security Council's work
is indispensable for the credibility of the Council in
carrying out its mandate, and ensures its effectiveness
and ability to address the rising challenges.

We commend the efforts to hold more open
meetings, interactive dialogues, Arria Formula
meetings, monthly wrap-up sessions. Nevertheless, in
our view, there is still a need for further improvements
in the Council's working methods, particularly in the
following areas. First, it is fundamental to reaffirm that
the work of the Council is a collective responsibility.
Equal participation and contribution from all Council
members, permanent and elected, in the conduct of
activities and the formulation of outcomes is a principle
to be safeguarded. It can be enhanced through a more
substantive and genuine intra-Council dialogue,
exchange of information and communication.

Secondly, the Council should benefit from a more
participatory distribution of responsibilities among
its Member States, with the objective of a further
democratization of its decision-making process. All
members of the Council should be enabled to take the
lead as penholders, while ensuring a timely exchange
of information and early engagement in consultations.

Thirdly, as a considerable amount of the Council's
work takes place in its subsidiary bodies, the need
for greater transparency and inclusiveness in their
work is self-evident. Full engagement with the wider
membership, and as appropriate other institutions
and organs, are requisite steps towards that goal.
We also believe more efforts can be done to ensure
the representativity of subsidiary bodies, the early
appointment of new chairpersons and the setting of
modalities for the handover of chairmanship would be
very beneficial.

Fourthly, we recall with appreciation the note by
the President (S/2013/630) regarding consultations with
the troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs).
As a major TCC, Egypt strongly calls for enhancing
engagement decision-making phases of relevant
Council action, including any pertinent change to the
mandate or operation of the mission.

Egypt has pronounced itself earlier with regard to
the important initiatives to regulate the use of the veto
in situations of mass atrocities, where we expressed
our readiness to address any new constructive
approach to reform the Security Council within the
intergovernmental negotiations, as an integral part of
a comprehensive package, in accordance with General
Assembly decision 62/557.

Both of the issues flagged in the concept paper
of our open debate today - due process in sanctions
regimes and the follow-up to Security Council referrals
to the International Criminal Court (ICC) - are timely.
We note in that regard that the Special Rapporteur on
the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism
has indicated that the non-deliberative nature of the
process has raised concerns that the regime is open
to misuse. There is merit in considering granting the
Ombudsperson greater authority so as to make the
appeal process similar to judicial proceedings.

The issue of the follow-up to Security Council
referrals to the International Criminal Court has to
be addressed through a balanced approach, bearing
in mind the different positions and points of views
of Member States and parties. That issue cannot be
considered in isolation from other pertinent aspects of
the relation between the Council and the ICC. I would
like here to recall cases where the Council has not
responded to requests by groupings, such as the African
Union, for using the Council's authority, under article
16 of the Rome Statute, to defer an investigation or
prosecution in specific cases for a period of 12 months.
Egypt believes that the tools available at the Council's
disposal for the peaceful settlement of disputes under
Chapter VI should not be overlooked before resorting
to coercive measures.

