Mr. Ryan (Ireland): May I also welcome the
Foreign Minister of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Mr. Leonard She Okitundu, the Personal Envoy
of the President of Rwanda, Mr. Patrick Mazimpaka,
the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of Uganda,
Mr. Amama Mbabazi, and the Minister of Finance of
Burundi, Mr. Charles Nihangaza, and thank them for
their participation in this discussion.

May I also convey, on behalf of the Government
and the people of Ireland, our sympathy and
condolences to the Governments and the peoples of
Colombia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Switzerland, and to the families of the murdered
representatives of the International Committee of the
Red Cross.

The report of the Panel of Experts is being
reviewed carefully by the Irish authorities. We support
an extension of the mandate of the Panel to allow it to
continue its work, and we look forward to receiving a
comprehensive addendum to this report. We hope, in
particular, that this will provide the international
community with a fuller picture of the complexity and
the extent to which the exploitation of resources in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo contributes to
sustaining the conflict in the region. This would deepen
the understanding of the international community of
the range of issues which feed the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and assist our
efforts to support the parties in advancing the peace
process.
Sweden, as Presidency of the European Union,
will be making a statement later in today's debate.
Ireland subscribes fully to the position of the European
Union. I make the following points in my national
capacity.

The remit of the Panel was broad, focusing on
illegal exploitation and the link between exploitation
and the continuation of the conflict. The report of the
Panel of Experts makes some very serious allegations
against all parties to the conflict. Today's meeting has
given those countries against which allegations are
made an opportunity to respond.

We have heard the concerns of some parties
named in the report that the information is
unsubstantiated or incorrect. Nonetheless, the
allegations are of a sufficiently serious nature to merit
thorough investigation by the relevant national
authorities. The Irish Government expects the parties
concerned to carry out such investigations and to
extend every cooperation to the Panel of Experts in its
future work. No effort must be spared by the relevant
authorities to ensure that activities which undermine
the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are halted and that the Congolese people can
finally be allowed to benefit directly from the natural
wealth of their own country.

In this regard, I welcome Minister Mbabazi's
announcement of his Government's decision to
establish an independent judicial commission of
inquiry which will work openly and transparently to
investigate the allegations relating to Uganda. I also
welcome Minister Nihangaza's declaration of his
Government's decision to investigate allegations and to
cooperate with the Panel during its extended mandate.

At the same time, the concerns expressed by
some parties named in the report cannot be dismissed
out of hand. An extension of the mandate of the Panel
will allow it, over the coming months, to pursue
further, in a thorough manner, issues which it did not
have the opportunity to address in depth in the final
report. It will also facilitate further discussion with
parties that have expressed concern with the final
report. We strongly encourage all parties to engage in
further full and frank dialogue with the Panel as it
updates its report and assesses progress. We remind
those parties that have not extended full cooperation to
the Panel of their obligation to do so. Failure to do so
would seriously undermine their international standing.

This report is but one element in the wider efforts
of the international community to end the conflict in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. As the Panel
proceeds with its work over the coming months, we
will be looking at the impact of such activities in the
context of the peace process and how the work of the
Panel can support that process. In particular, we will
look to progress from the parties on the three core
issues set out in the Lusaka Agreement. The first is the
preparation and adoption of a precise plan and schedule
which, in accordance with the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement, would lead to the completion of the orderly
withdrawal of all foreign troops from the territory of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The second is
the preparation for immediate implementation of
prioritized plans for the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration, repatriation or resettlement of armed
groups. The third is progress in the inter-Congolese
dialogue.

The Security Council mission to the region later
this month will provide the Council with an
opportunity to engage with the parties on the wider
dimension of the conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, focusing in particular on the three core
elements of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. We urge
the parties to maximize the potential of that visit for
concrete progress and to use the occasion of the visit to
engage closely with the members of the Council on the
core obstacles to peace in the region.

