First of all, I would like to acknowledge the presence of Minister Drame. We would like to express our condolences for the deaths of the 25 members of the Malian security forces. All of us going through the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic - one of the greatest threats to humankind ever recorded, having exceeded the fateful number of 1.2 million people infected and more than 70,000 deaths worldwide - must join in the demand for a ceasefire in all conflicts and appeal to everyone to work together to overcome an unprecedented crisis that affects us all equally. I want to express our deep gratitude to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, for joining us today via video-teleconference, a modality to which we have all had to resort, and hope that his leadership skills will assist him in successfully tackling this new challenge. Although our immediate attention has been focused on COVID-19, the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/223) gives us reasons for optimism, specifically in terms of the progress made in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, as well as Government actions taken to address the situation in the centre of the country. In this regard, we are encouraged by progress made in the political arena, with the conclusion of the inclusive national dialogue and the dialogue's contributions, which have resulted in a more positive dynamic in the implementation of the Agreement, including on such critical matters as the holding of legislative elections, a constitutional referendum, the redeployment of the reconstituted armed forces and State administration throughout the country. We also consider actions and trends contributing to and highlighting the essential role of women at all levels of society to be positive steps forward. In particular, we commend the holding of a high-level workshop on the participation of women in the decision-making bodies of the peace process and the broader political system, and we refer to the number of women candidates in the legislative elections, 426 out of a total of 1,417. We would add that that number could be higher. The deployment of the first reconstituted units of the Malian armed forces to Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu, with essential support from MINUSMA, is great news. MINUSMA's adaptation plan, which has allowed for the supply of critical elements, must be maintained to provide needed security for citizens and representatives of the State and to contribute to the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process. Despite this positive news, communal violence continues at alarming levels, requiring the Government to intensify its actions aimed at restoring public order and security and at reducing the current vacuum that has allowed for the creation of groups responsible for such atrocities as the recent massacre in Ogossagou and for the usurpation by these groups of the inherent State functions with little or no accountability. Finally, we urge the continued strengthening of regional and international cooperation, particularly within the framework of the Group of Five for the Sahel, for the fight against terrorism, which has not stopped claiming the lives of hundreds of 7/26 members of the security forces, keeping in mind the various interconnected matters that stand in the way of Mali's long-awaited return to peace and security.
