Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan): I
would like to begin by thanking High Representative
Valentin Inzko for his briefing to us this morning and
for his forty-fifth report to the Council (S/2014/3l4, annex).

Listening to the High Representative and reading
his report is sobering. While there are some positive
developments highlighted, particularly where the people
are concerned at the municipal level, like the formation
of plenums soon after the February protests, much of
the enmity that existed in Bosnia and Herzegovina
before and during the war still remains. That is most
evident at the level of senior officials, especially those
who argue, with increasing vigour, for the dissolution
of the State.

The Bosnian War was a war that at least three of us
at this table experienced firsthand. It was a cruel war
that achieved absolutely nothing, in which for most ofits
duration a mechanized army inflicted massive violence
against a largely defenceless civilian population. It was
as pathetic as it was criminal - a war which brought
inexcusable pain to the Bosnian people and in which
the victims who survived it suffer still. It was a war
that wounded everyone somehow, and in which the
battlefields were not the streets of Sarajevo, Mostar or
Tuzla, but rather, to borrow from Denis Mukwege, the
battlefields over which the war in Bosnia were fought
were the very bodies of the victims themselves: the
rapes, the enforced pregnancies, the torture and all that
killing. And for what? For one ethnicity or another?
My delegation has never heard of a human value called
ethnicity. Or was the war waged because, as we were
told then, those prosecuting it were the real victims
once? If every people believed they were justified
in breaking customary international law because of
crimes committed against their parents, grandparents
or forebears, the Council would remain in permanent
session and the world would be ungovernable.

We concede that the oppression and persecution
of any people today ought to be resisted by those very
same people and that resistance ought to be lawful too.
No one would dispute that. But citing an oppression
that simply does not exist or that existed some 50, 60 or
hundreds of years agom, is no basis today for adopting
policies laden with obstruction and division, the effect
of which can only ultimately imperil peace.

There are still enough Croats, Serbs and Bosniaks
in Bosnia and Herzegovina who want nothing more
than a life where they can prosper together in something
like normal circumstances. They want to be part of the
European Union. They know that further division would
be bad for them and that if left unresolved, the present
state ofpolitical polarization does not augur well either.
As we saw dramatically at the beginning of the year,
what they want most is functional Government.
We agree with the High Representative. The
international community must look deeper into why it
is the tensions persist and what could be done to reverse
the gradual deterioration of the political condition. The
General Framework Agreement for Peace provides
no legal basis for secession by the Republika Srpska,
and so every effort must be invested to forge a serious
discussion on the historical narratives and about the
reckoning required before a deeply felt reconciliation
becomes possible.

Twenty years ago, the Council met urgently, almost
every day, on the crisis in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Now, two decades later, we must begin to wake up and
pay closer attention again to the problems facing this
important country, knowing full well what the ultimate
consequences could look like if the steady deterioration
were to remain unchecked.

