Mr. Lee See-young (Republic of Korea): I would
like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for your
initiative of organizing another open debate today on one
of the most important and urgent issues before the United
Nations. This being our last opportunity to address the
Council under your presidency this month, we wish to
pay tribute to you for your exemplary contribution of
bringing about greater transparency in the work of the
Council, as illustrated in the number of open meetings
and briefings of the Council under your distinguished
presidency. We also thank Secretary-General Kofi Annan
for his inspiring statement at the beginning of this
meeting and in particular for the practical steps he
suggested, with which my delegation fully concurs.

Contrary to the general expectation of peace after the
end of the cold war, armed conflicts have persisted in
many parts of the world at the national, regional and
subregional levels. Any form of war has grave
humanitarian consequences, but in this post-cold war
decade, intra-State conflicts have proven particularly
tragic and devastating. In such places as the Great Lakes
region of Africa and the Balkans, we have witnessed
large-scale ethnic cleansing, the dislocation of vast
segments of the population and the devastation of civil
institutions and the socio-economic infrastructure - all
leaving huge numbers of refugees and displaced persons
in horrendous conditions.
The reality is that the international community as a
whole, and the United Nations in particular, have not
always been successful during the post-cold war era in
preventing such conflicts and atrocities in many corners
of the globe. It is therefore clear that now, more than
ever, the Security Council, pursuant to its primary
responsibilities under the Charter, should make further
serious efforts to reinforce its role in conflict prevention
to avert such human tragedies.

Having said this, I would like to focus my comments
on the following points to which my delegation attaches
particular importance. The first is the need for the
Security Council to develop an effective early warning
mechanism for conflict prevention and, if necessary, to

 

take specific measures for early response. In this
connection, my delegation concurs with the Secretary-
General's recommendation contained in his report
S/1999/957 for a more proactive use of a preventive
monitoring presence in areas of potential conflict and for
the deployment of preventive peacekeeping missions. We
believe that the experiences of the United Nations
Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP) can be further
built upon.

Secondly, it is our view that the Security Council and
the Secretary-General have primary responsibilities under
the Charter to play a central role in taking initiatives for
conflict prevention. The Secretary-General should be
encouraged, in close consultation with the Council, to make
greater use of preventive actions as an indispensable tool in
coping with potential conflict situations. In this regard, the
Security Council and the Secretary-General could strengthen
their collaboration in monitoring and assessing potentially
combustible situations and in elaborating measures to
prevent armed conflicts before they ignite.

The Secretary-General could also draw upon his
experience in countries like Guinea-Bissau and Liberia to
set up an effective mechanism within his authority to
monitor ongoing and potential conflicts, devise preventive
measures and make recommendations thereon, as necessary,
to the Security Council.

In this context, my Government welcomed the
establishment of the United Nations Trust Fund for
Preventive Action by the Secretary-General and has
continued to contribute to the Fund since its inception in
1997. We call upon other Member States who have not yet
done so to make their financial and other resources
available to this Fund in order to enhance the Secretary-
General's capabilities to take much-needed preventive
measures.

Thirdly, we believe that strengthening the international
legal framework will also serve as a deterrent to future
conflicts. We are encouraged by recent trends and
developments in the international community to combat
collectively the culture of impunity. My delegation was
particularly pleased to see the adoption of the Statute of the
International Criminal Court at the Rome Conference last
year. The Security Council has also set unprecedented
examples by establishing ad hoc Tribunals for the Former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda. Along these lines, we agree with
the Secretary-General that it is necessary to consider
enforcement measures to facilitate the arrest and surrender
of those accused by these Tribunals.

Fourthly, my delegation, taking into consideration
the need for a more comprehensive and integrated
approach to conflict prevention, considers it very
important to promote and strengthen cooperation among
the Security Council, other United Nations organs and
specialized agencies and intergovernmental and non-
governmental organizations. Equally significant in this
context is the increasing importance of close cooperation
and coordination between the United Nations system and
regional and subregional organizations and forums such
as the Organization of African Unity (OAU), the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Organization of American States (OAS),
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), the Asian Regional Forum (ARF) and so forth.

Last but not least, we see that armed conflicts are
too often the manifestation of unsustainable social,
political or economic situations. Thus, short-term
palliatives have more often than not failed to address the
root causes of conflicts. The effective prevention of
conflicts therefore requires that the international
community devote greater resources to longer-term
initiatives for development and good governance, making
collective efforts to remove the root causes of conflict and
promote capacity-building in countries and regions of
potential conflict.

We hope the many constructive viewpoints and
suggestions put forward in the course of today's debate
will be reflected in one way or another in the Presidential
Statement to be adopted by the Council at the end of this
meeting.

I would like to conclude by reiterating my
Government's strong support for and firm commitment to
the common cause of preventing international armed
conflicts by strengthening the role of the United Nations,
and the Security Council in particular. As we stand at the
cusp of a new millennium, the international community is
now called upon to rise above narrow self-interest and a
short-sighted world view and to seek a global, long-term
common interest with a View to preventing armed conflict
and building lasting peace and prosperity for all
humankind.

