The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Ukraine for his kind words addressed
to me.

I will now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Mali.

In my introductory statement, I drew attention to
the fact that today's debate coincides with the meeting
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in Dakar, and I emphasized the urgent need
for measures to convert the operational conclusions of
the inter-agency mission into concrete action.

At this stage, I would like to raise four points,
which in the view of my delegation deserve special
attention in the framework of today's debate.

First, a global, regional and integrated approach
is urgently needed in the search for lasting solutions to
the most pressing needs and problems of West Africa.
The leaders of the West African subregion realized
early that a country-by-country approach did not make
it possible to understand the complexities of the many
challenges West Africa faces. The Fall report was a
timely confirmation of this fact, as it clearly
established that the problems confronting the subregion
are not only national issues but also transnational ones.
The repercussions of the Sierra Leone conflict amply
attest to this. It goes without saying that the
effectiveness of this comprehensive and integrated
strategy - which aims only to complement the
national approach and to bring the United Nations
closer to the realities on the ground - depends on the
support that the Security Council will give it.

In this regard, we are very grateful to the
Secretary-General for the establishment of the Office
of a Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for West Africa. This decision will be a useful
contribution in giving the Security Council greater
awareness of regional dynamics, in improving its
reaction time and in promoting an effective partnership
among the United Nations, ECOWAS and the other
regional actors. I therefore want to assure the
Secretary-General of the complete support of the
authorities of the subregion in the implementation of
the mandate that he has given to the office.

I also want to mention and welcome the fact that
UNAIDS and the European Union have already
established a regional approach to West Africa.

My second point is that the urgent need for a
solution to the crisis of refugees and displaced persons
in West Africa presupposes that appropriate measures
must be taken. In this regard, we are of the View that it
is essential to ensure safe access to persons affected by
the conflicts and to promote good conditions for their
return to secured areas in their countries of origin. In
this context, we encourage the strengthening of the
presence of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs in Guinea and Liberia. We also
urge the international community to give the needed
support to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in order to provide
assistance to persons affected by conflict in the
subregion.

Nonetheless, it remains a fact that a lasting
solution to the crisis of refugees and displaced persons
lies in the definitive settlement of the conflicts. I will
not repeat here the initiatives and the actions taken by
ECOWAS to resolve these conflicts. I will confine
myself to emphasizing ECOWAS's commitment to
giving priority on every occasion to a comprehensive
political solution.

Thirdly, the objective of each of the countries of
the West African subregion is to build from within and
from outside a viable political and economic
framework that is based on strengthening and
consolidating the rule of law, promoting a real policy
of education and health, and fighting poverty - in
sum, good governance. This objective deserves to be
supported by the international community and by the
United Nations.

In this context, it is essential to strengthen local
capacities for conflict prevention and to give needed
assistance to ECOWAS for the implementation of its
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management,
Resolution, Peacekeeping and Security. It is also
essential to help the development efforts of the
countries of the subregion and to support their
processes ofintegration.

Fourthly, it is urgently necessary to improve the
coherence of the work of the Security Council and
other intergovernmental bodies of the United Nations
system in West Africa. It is important to take measures
to develop cooperation and coordination among the
intergovernmental bodies of the United Nations system
that are capable of having a positive influence on the
situation in West Africa. To this end, we could
envisage the establishment of joint mechanisms to see
to it that the action and the decisions of these bodies
and of the Security Council complement each other and
are mutually reinforcing, while fully respecting the
scope of their respective mandates.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

