Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): As a
founding Member of the United Nations, Ecuador
advocates a peaceful solution to international conflicts
and disputes and emphatically rejects the threat or use
of force as a mechanism to resolve them.
Unfortunately, in recent days my country, like the
entire international community, has seen the occupying
Power resorting once again to violence instead of
dialogue and subjecting the civilian population to death
and despair. Ecuador considers the military offensive
carried out by the Israeli army in Gaza unacceptable
and disproportionate.

On behalf of the President of the Republic, Rafael
Correa Delgado, I would like to express the deep
condolences of the Government and people of Ecuador
at the deaths of hundreds of civilians, especially
children, who have been victims of the military
activities.

We associate ourselves with the many statements
by different Governments, and with the calls for an
immediate ceasefire as an initial measure that would
make it possible to reach a peaceful, negotiated
solution to the conflict. It is imperative that the
international community, through this Organization and
its Security Council, adopt the measures set out in the
United Nations Charter with a view to guaranteeing
full respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law in the conflict area.

In that respect, my Government believes it is
urgent to open all the recognized border crossings into
and out of the Gaza Strip so that the Palestinian
population can have access to humanitarian assistance,
including food and medicine, in order to prevent a
worsening of the current emergency humanitarian
situation, extreme vulnerability and famine. Ecuador
would like to particularly express its support and
gratitude to the United Nations agencies and to all
governmental and non-governmental organizations that
continue to provide assistance to the civilian
population and asks them to remain vigilant until peace
is re-established in that area.

Ecuador believes that any comprehensive
solution that would make it possible to establish a
lasting peace in the Middle East cannot be a military
one. It must be political and be carried out in full
compliance with Security Council resolutions, but
above all with the ongoing commitment to the
recognition of and respect for international law and
with a constructive dialogue that would promote the
future development of its peoples.

In that respect, my country reiterates its call to
the members of the Security Council to adopt all
measures necessary for an immediate cessation of
hostilities, a solution to the humanitarian crisis and, in
particular, a lasting solution and a durable peace in the
region. For Ecuador, a durable peace naturally includes
the right of the Palestinian people to exercise self-
determination and to have a contiguous territory and an
independent State.
Once again, we call on the Security Council to
act steadfastly and decisively. International public
opinion is awaiting a strong response from the United
Nations. A failure to respond would call into question
the legitimacy and effectiveness of this organ of the
United Nations system.

However, we also believe that the responsibility
of the Security Council does not exclude action by the
other organs of the United Nations, such as the General
Assembly, in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter.

Along those lines, Ecuador would also like to
support the initiative to convene a special meeting of
the Human Rights Council to identify human rights
violations made during the recent attacks.

