Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): The full
version of my statement will be made available.

I would like to express my appreciation to you, Sir,
and the Russian presidency.

I align myself with the statement made by the
representative of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.
The systematic violations of Palestinian rights and
international law, including the demolition of homes,
the forced displacement of Palestinian civilians, the
arrest and detention of Palestinians, including children,
and the incessant violence, terror and provocations by
Israeli settlers and extremists, including at sensitive
religious sites, particularly at the Al-Aqsa mosque
compound in occupied East Jerusalem, have persisted
unabated. Over the years, the Israeli regime has
continuously intensified its illegal, oppressive measures
against the defenceless Palestinian civilian population,
including, inter alia, the use of excessive force against
children and women, causing more death and injury
and depriving them of their right to protection.

The increasing number of illegal settlements
in Palestinian territory, which constitute not only
grave breaches of the Fourth Geneva Convention, but
war crimes, as defined by the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, have long demonstrated
that the Israeli regime has never had any interest in
peace with the Palestinians and that its participation in
the peace process has beenjust a cover to hide its policy
of aggression.

At the same time, the illegal blockade on the Gaza
Strip is causing massive deprivation, hopelessness and
a grave humanitarian crisis. The destructive impact of
such Israeli violations is immense as reflected in the
rising tensions, deteriorating socioeconomic conditions
and deepening despair among the Palestinian civilian
population living under the nearly half-century
Israeli occupation.

While these crimes and policies are worsening,
the extremely fragile situation on the ground must be
addressed seriously to avert further destabilization.
It is unfortunate that they are being perpetrated with
impunity and that the international community has yet
to take any measure to address them. Regrettably, the
Security Council continues to be paralysed, failing to
uphold its obligations despite the clear global consensus
on both the illegality of Israeli policies and practices
on Palestinian territory. The Security Council should
uphold the Charter of the United Nations, international
law and its obligations to respect and ensure respect
of the latter, including through necessary measures to
compel the Israeli regime to end its war crimes and
human rights violations against the Palestinian people,
its illegal foreign occupation of another people's land
and the plight of the Palestinian refugees.

The other crises in our region, such as the those
in Libya, Iraq, Syria and Yemen, are all examples of
crises being stoked through invasion, illegal foreign
intervention, terror, extremism and violence. Those
problems have persisted and deepened because the
international community has failed to do its part in
dealing with root causes and the erroneous actions of
outsiders and naive trans-regional actors.

The unjustified invasion by the Saudi-led coalition
in Yemen has been ongoing for over 500 days. The
tragic and horrific air strikes by Saudi jet fighters on
a funeral hall packed with thousands of mourners in
Sana'a, on 8 October, was another single incident out
of thousands over the past 18 months, which have
killed or permanently maimed thousands of civilians,
including women and children, displaced more than
3 million persons and turned the situation in Yemen
from one of deprivation into one of devastation. All
those horrendous and heinous attacks, which display
a total disregard for human life and international and
international humanitarian law are occurring under the
watch of Security Council, which is failing to take any
action to stop them.

The President (spoke in Russian) I give the floor to
the representative of Norway.

