Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): At the outset,
I would like to express my sincere appreciation to you,
Madam, and the Rwandan presidency for convening
this important meeting. I also extend my appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his insightful briefing and to
Ambassador Tekeda Alemu, Permanent Representative
of Ethiopia, who spoke on behalf of the Chairperson of
the African Union (AU).

The draft presidential statement that we will adopt
today appropriately stresses the necessity of addressing
the root causes of conflicts in Africa and provides for
useful measures, not only at the national but also the
regional and international levels.

Africa has shown leadership in its effort to prevent
and resolve conflicts in the region. The commitment
of African leaders has borne fruit. The number and
intensity of conflicts in the region have been reduced in
the past decade. However, peace and security challenges
in Africa still constitute the majority of the work of the
Security Council, and the international community must
remain resilient in tackling the root causes. Addressing
the root causes is a broad agenda that encompasses the
political, socioeconomic, humanitarian and governance
areas.

The early prevention of conflicts cannot only
prevent casualties, but also provides an opportunity to
enjoy the fruits of economic development. Sustainable
development should be secured as a top priority, with
a long-term perspective. We recognize the mutually
reinforcing linkage between development and security.
In that sense, it is encouraging that Africa has shown
remarkable economic progress for the past decade. Per
capita real gross domestic product has increased by
30 per cent, and foreign investment has tripled over
the past 10 years. African States and the international
community should make efforts not to lose the current
stream of economic development.

The building of strong and effective national
institutions should be addressed, given the fact that a
large numberofnewcivilwarshaveoccurredincountries
that had already had civil wars. Institution-building
efforts should be carried out to incorporate the
principal of national ownership, the inclusion of diverse
stakeholders, the participation of women, the inclusion
of new, integrated approaches in targeted sectors, and
the strengthening of civilian capacity and cooperation
between the AU and the United Nations.

It is notable that overall governance in Africa has
been enhanced. However, African Sates are encouraged
to share lessons learned in post-conflict process, as the
cycle of conflict takes similar forms in many places.

African States should also meet their primary
responsibility to end impunity with the utmost urgency.
Ending the culture of impunity is a prerequisite for the
prevention of conflicts. In that regard, as a party to
the Rome Statute, we value the important role of the
International Criminal Court.

Despite that great progress, Africa still faces
challenges when it comes to conflict-prevention
efforts. Challenges include the unique diversity and
complexity of the situations, the diverse stakeholders
involved in the conflict, a lack of political will and
insufficient resources and capacities for the prevention
and resolution of conflicts. Those challenges still
hinder the early and effective prevention of conflicts.
Focus should be put on the effective implementation
of the current mechanisms. At the national and local
levels, locally driven solutions tailored to the specific
conditions prevailing should be promoted. Homegrown
conflict-resolution mechanisms rooted in local practice
can fill the gap and meet local needs for justice, peace
and reconciliation. Institutions of national pride and
integrity, such as a forum of elders, can offer a path to
conflict prevention, reconciliation and peacebuilding.
Homegrown solutions can provide the best answers
to conflicts involving diverse ethnic and cultural
backgrounds.

At the regional level, African leadership and
ownership of the region's peace and security challenges
is imperative. We note and commend the African
peace and security architecture. We also recognize the
constructive initiatives of the regional and subregional
organizations in coming up with creative alternatives in
conflict prevention and resolution.

The concept of a neutral international force, initiated
by the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, has finally borne fruit with the introduction
of an Intervention Brigade within the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Effective burden-sharing with
regional and subregional organizations is not only cost-
effective but also leads to successful results.

The conflict-prevention tools used by the United
Nations Office in West Africa are a good example of
good offices and mediation activities being conducted
in close cooperation with the AU and the Economic
Community of West African States. Yet African States
must show greater commitment and a stronger will in
the context of conflict prevention by providing more
resources to regional and subregional initiatives.

At the international level, we note that the strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the AU has
been growing steadily through the holding of annual
consultations between the AU Peace and Security
Council and the United Nations Security Council. That
is a good indication of the political will of the Security
Council, given that the AU Peace and Security Council
is the only regional organization with which the Security
Council meets annually. It is also a good sign that some
of the recommendations made by the AU Council form
the basis of the Security Council's deliberations, as was
recognized in resolution 2046 (2012), on the Sudan.

However, the political relations between the two
organs can be improved by building confidence and
securing predictability. In addition, the Security
Council should enhance its communication with
regional and subregional peace and security bodies.

As part of our own efforts to build a stronger
partnership with African States, the Republic of Korea
has been organizing the Korea-Africa Forum with the
AU since 2006. The Seoul Declaration adopted at the
third Forum, hosted last October, deals with peace and
security, trade and investment and development issues,
with a view to deepening the Korea-Africa cooperative
partnership. We are supporting capacity-building in the
areas of security, poverty eradication and economic
growth. We hope that those bilateral efforts will
contribute to addressing the root causes of conflict in
Africa.

