Mr. Shutenko (Ukraine): 1 thank Under-Secretary-
General Feltman, Mr. Vale de Almeida, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union, and Ambassador
Cardi of Italy, in his capacity as Facilitator for the
implementation of Security Council resolution 2231
(2015), for providing factual and substantial reports on
the status of the implementation of both the resolution
and the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA),
and for providing detailed presentations on the work
conducted in that area over the past six months.

We highly commend the concerted efforts of the
Secretariat, the European Commission, the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the Facilitator's
team to ensure the full and proper implementation of
those crucial instruments, which have contributed to the
strengthening of non-proliferation and export-control
regimes in general. In particular, Ukraine fully supports
the IAEA's long-term mission of the verification and
monitoring of Iran's nuclear-related commitments,
with the goal of reaching the overall conclusion of the
matter. During the past six months, we witnessed a
continuation of the smooth and effective functioning of
the procurement channel mechanism, with the approval
of several proposals to supply Iran with relevant goods
and technologies.

As a staunch supporter of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Ukraine
stresses the importance of diligent compliance with
the JCPOA, which aims at striking a balance between
the legitimate right to develop nuclear energy and the
need to stem the proliferation of nuclear weapons. That
historic nuclear deal fully respects such a balance. With
its nuclear-weapons past, Ukraine remains committed
to the goals of the Non-Proliferation Treaty and fully
respects the restrictions and prohibitions introduced by
the relevant Security Council resolutions.

Iran has been proving its intention to use nuclear
technologies exclusively for peaceful purposes. At
the same time, we also acknowledge the existence of
varying interpretations regarding the applicability
of resolution 2231 (2015) to its ballistic missile tests.
Referring further to the third report of the Secretary-
General (S/20l7/515) on the implementation of that
resolution, I wish to recall that the existing restrictions
on arms-related transfers as well as the assets-freeze
and the travel-ban provisions stipulated by annex B of
resolution 2231 (2015) should be fully adhered to.

While recognizing that report to be an informative
document that is based on public and open information
and States' notifications, we consider that it is important
to ensure that any concern it contains does not provoke
further tensions but rather would be addressed and
resolved through negotiations.

In that context, let me reiterate Ukraine's openness
and readiness to continue constructive interactions with
the Secretariat, including with regard to the incident
that occurred in January in the airport in Kyiv, when
an attempt to smuggle components of military goods to
Iran was prevented by the Ukrainian law enforcement
authorities. As soon as the pre-trial investigation of
that case is finalized, all additional information will be
shared in due course. We fully support the intention of
the Secretary-General to continue examining all cases of
concern and obtaining additional verified information.

Having stressed the imperative of full compliance
with the relevant obligations, I would like to
re-emphasize the importance of further outreach on the
Iranian issue. The proper and diligent implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015), with all of its annexes, will
be a key contribution to regional and global security
and stability.

