Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to join previous speakers in thanking Under-
Secretaries-General Valerie Amos and Alain Le Roy for
their very valuable briefings. I would also like
especially to welcome the participation in today's
meeting of Ms. Pillay and Mr. Daccord.

The great number and complexity of
contemporary conflicts, the lack of respect for the
norms of international humanitarian law and the use on
civilian populations of increasingly sophisticated
weapons with indiscriminate effects are factors that
have increased the challenges facing the Security
Council and constitute the basis for evaluating the path
that the international community must take in dealing
with those matters of crucial importance.

The Council must implement concrete, effective
and forceful actions to tackle these situations. That is
crucial for those who suffer the pain of armed conflict
and is a requirement for States such as Mexico that are
convinced of the preponderant role that the Security
Council is called on to play.

Resolutions 1894 (2009) and 1882 (2009),
promoted by Austria and Mexico in 2009, undoubtedly
constitute significant progress, but we continue to
witness attacks of various kinds on the civilian
populations in different regions. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Somalia, Darfur, Chad,
Afghanistan, Iraq, Gaza, Sri Lanka and Kyrgyzstan, to
mention a few examples, the protection of civilians
demands our prompt attention, because of both the
variety of situations and the complexity of the
scenarios, which require appropriate responses from
the Security Council.

We are especially concerned with two specific
aspects, given their impact on civilian populations -
first, the denial of humanitarian assistance, and second,
the use of explosives in densely populated zones.

Parties in armed conflicts barely comply with the
obligation to permit and facilitate access of civilian
populations to humanitarian assistance, subjecting
them to greater risk. Compounding the difficulty are
attacks on humanitarian workers in conflict zones and
on facilities used in the delivery of assistance. The
instruments of international humanitarian law are very
clear about the obligations of States and parties in
conflict to allow safe, timely and unhindered access to
humanitarian assistance.

Regarding the use of explosives, the fact that
there is no specific ban on the use of certain weapons
does not mean that those weapons are permitted. We
must condemn the use of explosives in areas where
civilian populations are concentrated because of their
indiscriminate effects and the attendant risks. We must
add that the widespread availability of small arms and
light weapons supplied by illicit traffic has direct
adverse consequences on civilian populations.

It is essential to move forward in the effective
implementation of Security Council sanctions regimes,
particularly arms embargoes, and, more broadly, to
enforce the international obligations of the relevant
Palermo Protocol and the United Nations Programme
of Action on the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. We also believe it is necessary to deepen our
analysis of the impact of certain explosive weapons,
such as cluster munitions, landmines and improvised
explosive devices, among others, in densely populated
areas.

We believe that the international instruments in
the area of international humanitarian law, in particular
the four Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their
Additional Protocols, as well as customary
international law, give us a solid basis of principles and
standards designed to protect all of those who do not
take part in hostilities or who have stopped
participating. It is crucial that they be respected by all
parties in conflict, regardless of who they are or the
nature of the conflict in question.

Violations of international humanitarian law may
be war crimes, and it is States themselves that have the
primary obligation to prosecute their alleged
perpetrators. If they cannot or are unwilling to do so,
the International Criminal Court has jurisdiction to
receive such cases. Its existence must not only be an
incentive to strengthen national legal systems, but also
an effective mechanism for addressing crimes when
national judicial structures have been destroyed by
conflict.

Our obligation to respect and enforce respect for
international humanitarian law requires us not only to
make use of the instruments at our disposal to ensure
peace, security and international justice, but also to
formulate a robust culture of respect that does away
with impunity and repairs the harm inflicted on
civilians in armed conflict.

During my delegation's presidency of the
Security Council in June, we held a debate on the
promotion and strengthening of the rule of law (see S/PV.6347), at which, through the adoption of a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2010/l l), we
recognized that "respect for international humanitarian
law is an essential component of the rule of law in
conflict situations" and reaffirmed that "the protection
of the civilian population in armed conflict should be
an important aspect of any comprehensive strategy".

I wish to conclude by expressing the support of
the Mexican delegation for the presidential statement
adopted earlier (S/PRST/2010/25), including the
updating of the aide-memoire, which is itself a useful
tool for the establishment of a common basis for the
responsibility of the Security Council and Member
States to protect civilians in armed conflict. We hope
that the Security Council will in the future adopt more
forceful measures in response to the humanitarian
impact of the use of explosives in densely populated
areas and areas identified by the Secretary-General in
his report on this issue.

