Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): Senegal
is pleased to see you, Mr. President, in your capacity
as Minister for Justice of the Kingdom of Spain,
presiding over this Security Council meeting devoted
to international judicial cooperation in the fight
against terrorism, which is an extremely pertinent and
relevant theme.

My country also takes this opportunity to resolutely
condemn the murderous wave of attacks over the
weekend in Cairo, Istanbul, Aden and Mogadishu. We
express our sympathies and solidarity to the affected
countries. Senegal solemnly and unequivocally
reiterates its condemnation of all terrorist acts in all
their forms and manifestations, regardless of where
they take place or who the perpetrators are.

Iwould also like to thank today's briefers-Mr. Jean-
Paul Laborde, Executive Director of the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate; Ms. Dorcas Oduor,
Deputy Director of Public Prosecutions in Kenya;
and Mr. Robert Strang, Executive Secretary of the
International Institute for Justice - for the quality of
their presentations.

Since terrorism knows no borders, we must face it
in collective and determined solidarity by developing
optimal coordination at the international level. It is
in that spirit, but also in respect of the rule of law,
democracy and human rights, that we must combat this
scourge, particularly through effective and enhanced
international judicial cooperation. It is therefore
essential that States adopt adequate and comprehensive
legislation to prevent and combat acts of terrorism.

In that regard, allow me to recall that, under
resolution 1373 (2001), adopted on 28 September 2001,
the Security Council established close links between
international terrorism and transnational organized
crime, drug trafficking, money-laundering, illicit arms
trafficking and the illegal transfer of nuclear, chemical
and biological materials. That is a clear reminder of the
need for States to develop cooperation mechanisms.

It is undoubtedly such willingness to cooperate that
is at the root of the existence of today's strong legal
framework, which includes 19 instruments, without
mentioning the various initiatives and actions carried
out by the international community. Unfortunately,
such a legal arsenal has not yet made it possible to halt
the scourge of terrorism, which manifests itself in new
and increasingly complex and unpredictable forms that
are harder to prevent and counteract. That is due to the
gaps in international cooperation, particularly in the
judicial field, as terrorism thrives on the use of modern
communication and propaganda tools to broaden its
scope and targets.

Moreover, judicial cooperation remains the weakeast
link in the international fight against terrorism. That is
due, inter alia, to the absence of adequate means and
training ofjustice actors. Procedures that are often slow,
complicated and inadequate lack the speed required for
an effective fight against terrorism. In addition, we also
lack a specific international resolution on international
judicial cooperation - a gap that must be bridged
as soon as possible, as we did a short while ago this
morning by adoptinng resolution as 2322 (2016).

Judicial cooperation remains a prerequisite
if we are to overcome the difficulties inherent in
the investigation and prosecution of terrorist acts,
especially when certain elements of the case - such
as evidence, suspects and witnesses - are spread out
over several jurisdictions, or if we are dealing with
electronic evidence, which is particularly complex to
preserve. Mutual legal assistance and exchanges of
information on terrorist networks and their operations
should be intensified and facilitated.

Moreover, it is important, if not urgent, for States
to introduce deliberate Violations of the ban on the
financing of terrorist organizations or individuals for
whatever purpose into their national legislation as a
serious criminal offence. In order to effectively address
the financing of terrorism, States must, within the
framework of international judicial cooperation, give
themselves the means to freeze the assets of persons
and organizations engaged in acts of terrorism and to
counteract the maneuvers of those who collect funds
for such acts. Such funds come from transnational
organized crime, including trafficking in arms, people,
drugs and artefacts, illegal trade in natural resources
stones and precious metals, kidnapping, extortion
and theft.

Moreover, abandoning the traditional principle
of double jeopardy for terrorism in the execution of
arrest warrants and the incorporation of universal
jurisdiction into national law for a global and uniform
prosecution of criminals must also be fully integrated
into judicial cooperation.

On another aspect, we find that terrorist groups
benefit from international transport facilities, the
spread of combat zones, the porosity of borders,
and information and communication technologies.
They expand their sphere of influence and action by
recruiting combatants from various geographical
areas. The subject of resolution 2178 (2014), of which
Senegal was a co-sponsor, is also an aspect that must
be addressed within the framework of international
judicial cooperation.

Timely cooperation and action, in accordance with
international obligations, can assist States in preventing
foreign terrorist fighters from entering conflict zones
and in developing effective strategies to deal with
repatriated persons. That would therefore preserve,
through judicial and police authorities, essential
evidence for the judicial process.

The counter-terrorism fight should be a consolidated
struggle on a global scale. It is important that we all
show the same level of commitment, no matter where
the threat is detected. In that regard, Africa must receive
special attention in the implementation of resolution
2322 (2016), both because of its various vulnerabilities
and because of the numerous terrorist groups that
thrive there. As an illustration, the nature and number
of criminal activities perpetrated in recent years in the
strip of the Sahel have not ceased to evolve, with regular
changes in location and targets, which demonstrates the
level of flexibility and the capacity for adaptation by
terrorist groups that are operating in the region.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
vigorously reaffirm the need to constantly adapt the legal
arsenal and judicial systems to the evolving terrorist
threat. Judging terrorist offences is today reserved just
for the competence of national courts. International

jurisdictions cannot hear, for instance, certain terrorist
acts when they present constitutive elements of crimes
falling within their purview. That limited effectiveness
in treatment merits being underlined and taken into
account in our quest for a global response to the threat
of both global terrorism and violent extremism.

