Mr. Motomura (Japan): Mr. President, I thank
you for convening this meeting. At the outset, I would
like to express my deepest appreciation to the outgoing
chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock, and his staff, for their
excellent work since the Committee's inception. The
international community owes him a debt of gratitude
for his dedicated leadership in the fight against
terrorism since the attacks of 11 September 2001. At
the same time, I am pleased to congratulate the new
Chairman, Ambassador Arias, and to express my
confidence that, under his guidance, the CTC will
continue to work effectively in combating terrorism.

Japan continues to stress the importance of the
following three elements in the fight against terrorism.
First, we must deny potential terrorists the means
of engaging in terrorist activities. That is to say, we
must take strict measures to cut off sources of funding
and to stem the flow of weapons to terrorists. In
particular, in the light of their huge destructive
potential, strict non-proliferation measures are crucial
to prevent weapons of mass destruction from falling
into the hands of terrorists. We call upon the CTC, in
cooperation with relevant international organizations,
to give due attention to this area. Strengthening
coordination between the CTC and the Security
Council committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) is also important. The latter committee,
under the leadership of its Chairman, Ambassador Juan
Gabriel Valdes of Chile, has achieved considerable
progress in this regard. I would also like to point out,
however, that the information included in the
consolidated list of the 1267 Committee needs to be
further enriched, so as to enable Member States to
better identify suspicious assets and accounts.

Secondly, we must deny safe haven to terrorists.
Preventing and combating terrorism require that the
international community act in concert and implement
measures in a unified manner. The counter-terrorism
conventions and protocols are playing an essential role
towards that end. We appreciate the efforts of the CTC
to encourage Member States to accede to those
conventions and protocols and would like to urge that
the expertise of the relevant international organizations
also be mobilized to facilitate that goal. The special
meeting of the CTC held last month provided an
excellent opportunity to share information regarding
the standards, codes and best practices of relevant
international organizations. As a contracting party to
all 12 counter-terrorism conventions, Japan is prepared
to provide information and assistance in solving
problems, including legal issues, based on its own
experience with respect to the conclusion of those
conventions.

Thirdly, we must strive to overcome vulnerability
to terrorist activities. Naturally, terrorists go after soft
targets, which means that it is becoming all the more
important to improve domestic security measures. The
CTC must remain focused on capacity-building efforts
by countries, and the donor community should
strengthen its support for the activities of the CTC.

I have to stress that international terrorism is by
no means a product born of a clash between
civilizations; it is always a barbarous assault on the
civilized world, born out of cynicism, nihilism and
anarchism. Terrorism threatens world stability and the
lives of people everywhere. Those who feel
sympathetic towards extremist terrorist groups should
realize that terrorism is antithetical to the values we all
share. In disseminating this truth, I believe we can
contribute to overcoming vulnerability to terrorism.

