Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to express
appreciation to Ambassador Meza-Cuadra for his
briefing on the implementation of resolution 2341
(2017), on the protection of critical infrastructure from
terrorist attacks, one year after its adoption. We found
the briefing to be very comprehensive and informative.

With the growing threats of terrorism and violent
extremism, the vulnerability of critical infrastructure
to terrorist attacks has indeed been a source of great
concern. The devastating economic and security impact
of such attacks on some of the infrastructures that we
normally take for granted in our daily lives, such as
water, electricity, telecommunication and internet,
transportation, banking and finance, is too ghastly
to contemplate.

Of course, the airline industry has often been the
primary target of terrorists, and a series of measures
have already been put in place to enhance aviation
security. However, the airline industry remains
vulnerable to terrorist attacks and there is therefore a
need for greater international cooperation in closing
any loopholes that could be exploited by terrorists.

All countries big or small are indeed vulnerable
to these kinds of threats. As we live in a volatile
neighbourhood that is facing threats of terrorism and
violent extremism, attacks against critical infrastructure
by terrorists are not remote possibilities for us. They
are real threats and they have already happened in our
region. That is why Ethiopia supported the adoption
of resolution 2341 (2017) and has been working to
implement the provisions of the resolution.

We all know that terrorists and other criminals
have developed the capacity to launch coordinated
and sophisticated attacks on critical infrastructure.
Public institutions, private businesses, factories and
industries, roads and bridges, shopping malls, sport
centres, among others, have increasingly become
targets of attack aimed at disrupting normal economic
activities. Cyberterrorism to cause damage to computer
systems and telecommunication infrastructures has
also become a real danger.

The protection of critical infrastructure can be said
to have been partly addressed by international treaties
and conventions related to civil aviation, maritime
security and nuclear weapons. However, there had not
been any resolution dedicated to this issue prior to
the adoption of resolution 2341 (2017), which was an
important step to effectively counter terrorist attacks
against critical infrastructure. Resolution 2341 (2017)
remains a very important instrument as it recognizes
all those threats and the need for ensuring the reliability
and resilience of critical infrastructure, as well as the
need to protect it from terrorist attacks for the benefit
of national security, public safety, the economy of the
concerned States and the welfare of their population.

The resolution directed the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), with the support of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
to continue, as appropriate, within their respective
mandates, to examine Member States' efforts to
protect critical infrastructure from terrorist attacks
as relevant to the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001), with the aim of identifying good practices,
gaps and vulnerabilities in this field. Accordingly, we
note that CTED has included this approach under its
assessment in its comprehensive visits. For instance, as
one of the countries that was visited after the adoption
of resolution 2341 (2017), we witnessed how CTED
assessed Ethiopia's legal and institutional frameworks
and administrative measures in its efforts aimed at
protecting critical infrastructure from terrorist threats.

From our work in the CTC, we have also seen from
the reports of different comprehensive visits how CTED
was trying to include this subject in their assessments.
In this regard, we appreciate the work of CTED in
supporting Member States to develop or further
improve their strategies for reducing risks to critical
infrastructure from terrorist attacks and in assessing
and raising awareness of the relevant risks and in taking
preparedness measures, including effective responses
to such attacks.

The resolution also encouraged the CTC, with
the support of CTED and the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF), to continue
working together to facilitate technical assistance and
capacity-building and to raise awareness in the field
of protecting critical infrastructure from terrorist
attacks, in particular by strengthening its dialogue
with States and relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations and working closely with
relevant bilateral and multilateral technical-assistance
providers, including by sharing information. We hope
to see more steps taken along these lines.

In this vein, the collaboration among relevant
entities at the United Nations, including the Office of
Counter-Terrorism and CTED, and the designing of
tailor-made programmes on the protection of critical
infrastructure by CTITF in line with the potential
threats and risks Member States face could certainly
be very helpful. It is our firm believe that in addition to
what Member states do on their own, it is also through
effective international cooperation that the protection,
security and resilience of critical infrastructure can
be enhanced.

