Mr. Zainuddin (Malaysia): My delegation
wishes to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
open debate of the Security Council on the threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist
acts. I believe that this debate provides an excellent
opportunity for Member States to revitalize their
solidarity and contribute ideas to strengthen the leading
role of the United Nations in conducting global anti-
terrorism efforts.

Let me take this opportunity to affirm our
solidarity with the Government of India and to convey
our heartfelt condolences to the families of victims of
the recent terrorist attacks in Mumbai and our deepest
sympathies to those injured and affected in any way by
the carnage that resulted from those cowardly acts.

We reiterate our categorical condemnation of
those terrorist acts and all other acts of terrorism,
irrespective of its motivation and objectives, in all its
forms and manifestations, including State terrorism.
The terrorist attack in Mumbai clearly demonstrates
again how terrorism directly threatens regional peace
and international security.
International terrorism by its very nature is
borderless. Terrorist groups, in fact, make use of
advances in technology, transportation and
globalization to exploit the weak links in transborder
situations to plan, raise funds and eventually mount
their asymmetric attacks, more frequently now on
civilian targets. Therefore, we cannot overemphasize
the need for the international community to intensify
cooperation and for the United Nations to provide a
stronger leading role to narrow down and eventually
obliterate the space for these terrorist activities.

In this regard, my delegation is encouraged by the
improvements in the work methods under the United
Nations counter-terrorism regimes, especially those of
the subsidiary bodies established pursuant to Council
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004).
We welcome the adoption of resolution 1822 (2008)
and the short-term goal of the 1267 Committee to make
the Consolidated List a living document while, at the
same time, responding to calls by the general
membership for the listing and de-listing process to
guarantee more stringent criteria for due process,
including the human rights of terrorist suspects.

My delegation also welcomes the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee in completing the
Preliminary Implementation Assessment of all Member
States, while avoiding putting too much of a reporting
burden on the Member States.

Nevertheless, the subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council for counter-terrorism need to
rigorously evaluate their effectiveness and to
constantly improve ways to facilitate the effective
implementation of resolutions. We should avoid a
situation in which Member States are turned off by the
requirements of the subsidiary bodies or, much worse,
in which the subsidiary bodies work on their own, in a
total disconnect from the general membership of the
United Nations.

We continue to be confronted almost daily by
news of some form of terrorist acts involving greater
numbers of civilian casualties. My delegation regrets
that the international community is still struggling to
adopt a universally accepted definition of terrorism
when there is agreement that we cannot accept or
tolerate these terrorist acts. To use the analogy of the
six blind men and the elephant, while we address the
same enemy, we fail to agree on how to define it. We
feel that this is important because without this
definition, we are unable to address this scourge
comprehensively. As a result of our inability to agree in
this regard, international counter-terrorism cooperation
is compromised by narrow national perceptions and
conflicting political expediencies. Agreement on a
universal definition should help to create full solidarity
behind comprehensive international action against
terrorism.

My delegation also wishes to re-emphasize its
strong conviction that all the best efforts and resources
expended to wage war on terrorism would be futile if
the environment that breeds terrorism is left
unchecked. As a country that has gone through this
experience, particularly during the communist
insurgency, Malaysia remains convinced that the best
way to fight terrorism is to address its root causes. No
prison or detention camp would be big enough if
terrorist recruitment continues to thrive in
environments of utter despair and indignity in
situations of colonization, foreign occupation, the
wrongful seizure of land and destruction of homes,
illegal settlement, ethnic cleansing, abject poverty or
lack of hope for protection and redress.

In the same vein, attributing terrorism to a
particular religion or nationality is a misguided effort,
as no religion propagates terrorism and no nationality
is predisposed to it. My delegation calls on the
international community to reject any attempt to link
Islam and Muslims to terrorism.

Mr. President, we welcome the identification of a
new direction, as reflected in your concept paper for
this debate (S/2008/738), to the effect that religions are
victims of terrorism and socio-economic handicaps are
indeed a factor favouring the spread of terrorism. We
definitely have a new challenge confronting us: to
mend the atmosphere of mistrust, serious infringement
of human rights and civilizational and cultural division
caused by terrorism and counter-terrorism actions.
Furthermore, the United Nations should definitely take
a firm lead in future counter-terrorism efforts both
within the Security Council and within the General
Assembly.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reaffirm
Malaysia's commitment to lending its fullest
cooperation to all States and the United Nations in the
fight against terrorism. Malaysia believes that
terrorism can be eliminated only through full
cooperation and solidarity among all members of the
international community in a comprehensive counter-
terrorism effort.

