Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): In my statement
yesterday (see S/PV.8225) I urged the Security Council
not to stand idly by and watch as a spectator while
chemical weapons were being used in Syria. In our
opinion, the Council should act, condemn, protect, and
hold to account those responsible. Those elements are
all reflected in draft resolution (S/2018/32l) put forward
by the United States, and that is why the Kingdom of the
Netherlands voted in favour of that draft resolution. We
thank the United States delegation for drafting the text.
We appreciate the earlier rounds of negotiations and
the flexibility displayed at yesterday's late-night round.
Together with others, we are extremely disappointed
that an attempt to set up an effective mechanism of
attribution on the use of chemical weapons has failed
once again.

Today we witnessed the twelfth overall Russian use
of the veto concerning Syria, including six pertaining
to chemical weapons. As I said yesterday, ifthe Russian
representative claims that the chemical-weapons
attack in Syria is a fabrication, he should not veto the
draft resolution. By vetoing this draft resolution, the
Russian Federation assumes a heavy responsibility for
continued impunity and the horrible use of chemical
weapons in Syria. Because of this permanent member,
the Council is not even able to condemn the use
of chemical-weapons attacks this past weekend in
Douma, during which the White Helmets once again
demonstrated their unwavering commitment to their
life-saving work in the most difficult circumstances.

With regard to the draft resolution proposed by the
Russian Federation (S/2018/175), the Netherlands will
vote against it. That draft resolution falls short in every
possible way. It seems that the Russian Federation
is unable to support an independent and impartial
investigative mechanism. It seems that it can accept
a mechanism only in which itself can decide when,
where, how and by whom the investigation would be
conducted, while leaving the mandate attributed to the
Council subject to its veto.

This cannot be the end of the issue. The Security
Council cannot remain passive in the face of the
atrocities being committed in Syria. We must continue
to work for an effective attribution mechanism, inside
and outside the Security Council. Impunity must
not prevail.

