Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), which I am pleased
to do in accordance with paragraph 56 of resolution
2255 (2015).

I am also grateful to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, and
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) for their support of the work of the 1988
Sanctions Committee and continued assistance to its
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team.
I would also like to thank the previous Committee
Chair, Ambassador Kairat Umarov from Kazakhstan,
for the work and efforts of his team over the past
two years.

As the Council is aware, the main goal of the 1988
Committee is to deter the Taliban from continuing to
support Al-Qaida and its affiliates and to deter Taliban
attacks against the Government of Afghanistan through
the use oftools such as global asset freezes, global travel
bans and global arms embargoes. At the same time, the
1988 Committee, through the sanctions regime, helps
facilitate conditions to promote Taliban dialogue with
the Afghan Government, resulting in a peaceful and
stable Afghanistan.

We have witnessed positive steps and many efforts
in that direction in the form of a series of discussions
between the relevant parties, with the launching of
an intra-Afghan dialogue in Moscow in February
and its second round, held in Doha. In an effort to
support that process, on 6 April the 1988 Committee
adopted a nine-month travel ban exemption, ending on
31 December, for 11 listed Taliban members to attend
talks in the interest of promoting reconciliation and
the prospects for peace in Afghanistan. The exemption
to the ban was accompanied by a decision to grant a
limited asset freeze exemption for the financing of
exempted travel. The Committee fully supports the
nine-month travel ban exemption for listed Taliban to
attend talks that are in the interest of promoting the
prospects for peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan.

As Committee Chair, I would remind Member States
likely to host the peace process of their obligations,
pursuant to resolution 2255 (2015), to provide follow-
up reporting to the Committee on completion of travel
and the costs incurred therefrom. I would also like
to express some caution and concern regarding the
continued strong links between the Taliban and the
Haqqani Network and Al-Qaida.

The concern about the Taliban's broad alignment
with terrorist groups is compounded by the issue of its
continued participation in terrorist acts and its deep-
seated involvement in the cultivation, production and
trafficking of narcotics, which has strong negative
effects both in Afghanistan and globally.

It is also worth noting that, as underlined by
resolution 2255 (2015), in order to maintain continued
and close cooperation with the Government of
Afghanistan, which would contribute to further
enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of the
sanctions regime, on 12 March Ambassador Raz,
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan to the
United Nations, and Ambassador Hamdullah Mohib,
National Security Adviser of Afghanistan, briefed the
Committee on progress in the peace process.

While there are structures and frameworks in place
for the implementation ofthe 1988 sanctions regime, the
effectiveness of the implementation depends not only
on internal but also regional and international actors.
The Committee therefore encourages Member States
to play a more active role in providing information
that would help keep the sanctions list as up to date as
possible and to assist the Committee in enhancing the
effectiveness of sanctions measures.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
remind members that the Security Council, in
presidential statement S/PRST/2017/ 15 , decided that the
implementation of the measures outlined in resolution
2255 (2015) required no adjustment at that time.

Moreover, I would like to remind the Council that
the mandate of the Monitoring Team was last extended
in 2015 through resolution 2255 (2015) and is set to
expire in December. Meanwhile, within the sanctions
regime imposed by the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, resolution 2368
(2017) extended the work of the Monitoring Team
to December 2021. It is therefore imperative for the
Security Council to start to consider extending the work
of the Monitoring Team, in pursuance of its mandate
relating to Taliban sanctions, to align with that of the
1267 Committee, until the end of 2021.

Finally, the Committee looks forward to continuing
its close engagement with UNAMA, with the
Government of Afghanistan, and with the States of the
region during my chairmanship of the 1988 Committee
in 2019 and 2020.

