Mr. J erandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I should
like first of all to express the satisfaction of my
delegation at seeing you, Mr. Minister, presiding over
this meeting of the Security Council today. We would
also like to welcome Mr. Mari Alkatiri, and to express
to him Tunisia's support for all that is being
accomplished in East Timor. Our thanks also go to the
World Bank and the United Nations Development
Programme for their commitment to East Timor in
particular, and to the consolidation of peace in general
throughout the world.

I should also like to thank Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello for his statement on developments in the
situation in East Timor and on the progress achieved
with regard to a post-independence international
presence. I should also like to express once again the
satisfaction of my delegation with his remarkable
accomplishments in East Timor, and to thank him for
the honour that he has brought to our Organization.

I would like to begin by stressing how important
it is for us to support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General regarding the form that a post-
independence United Nations presence should take.
The most important requirement is to preserve what the
United Nations, its institutions, non-governmental
organizations and the entire international community
have already achieved in that country. We must
continue to provide such support, especially during the
next stage, which will be just as important as those that
have gone before, with a View to laying a solid
foundation for a new East Timorese society.

We believe that two concepts in particular are
extremely important when we take decisions intended
to promote the well-being and stability of that country:
exit strategy and peace-building. We are convinced that
we must not be hasty in disengaging from East Timor.
We therefore call upon all the parties to give their
support to a progressive process that will lead to the
establishment of a stable, democratic State, with the
assistance of the United Nations, donor countries and,
in particular, the countries of the region, whose role is
very important for subregional stability and security.
We support the Secretary-General's request to extend
the mandate of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor until independence is
declared, in order to ensure continuity in our efforts.
My delegation is pleased to endorse the
recommendation of the Constituent Assembly that
stipulates that East Timor will become independent on
20 May 2002.

To that end, we support the structuring of the
tasks to be accomplished by United Nations personnel
over a period of at least two years after East Timor
becomes independent. We expect the tasks defined in
paragraphs 61 and 76 of the Secretary-General's report
to be gradually transferred to the Timorese, so that in
due course they will be able to take charge of their own
destiny in all fields, as described by Mr. Sergio Vieira
de Mello in his statement.

Of course, the integration of East Timor into its
own regional environment is of great importance. It
must have cooperative relations, especially with
Indonesia, and - as Indonesian and Timorese leaders
have said - those relations must be forward-looking.
There are many historical, human and economic factors
in favour of a shared destiny for the two countries. We
should encourage them to move forward in that
endeavour.

