Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Mark Lowcock; Abbe
Donatien Nshole, Secretary-General of the Conference
Episcopale Nationale du Congo; and Ms. Jeanine
Bandu Bahati, Coordinator of the Encadrement des
Femmes Indigenes et des Menages Vulnerables, whose
briefings illustrate and help us to better understand the
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

We also express our gratitude to the Netherlands
for having undertaken the initiative to hear these
briefings in order to focus the attention of the members
of the Council on the humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Peace, stability and development in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are among Equatorial Guinea's
priorities during its membership of the Security
Council. We are resolutely committed to supporting
and playing a constructive role in the peace process in
that sister country of Central Africa, the Great Lakes
region and southern Africa.

The full normalization of the political situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo will be
complicated if the data on the humanitarian situation
remain so devastating. The number of internally
displaced persons now exceeds 4.5 million - the
highest number in all of Africa. More than 13 million
people depend on humanitarian aid to survive, while
more than 7 million live in severe food insecurity
and more than 2 million children are malnourished.
These figures are very alarming and should attract
the attention of the international community with a
view to providing urgent humanitarian aid. Failure to
do so will have even more catastrophic consequences.
The cases of human rights violations and abuses are
still alarmingly high. Most cases remain unpunished,
while their perpetrators campaign freely with a high
probability of repeating their offenses. The upsurge
in violence in Ituri province contributes greatly to
the deterioration of the situation. The authors of these
horrendous crimes must face justice.

Although there has been some progress, the security
situation in the country still presents some challenges.
The achievement of lasting peace, prosperity and
development in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
remains an arduous task and has a long way to go. That
is an important aspect in remediating the deteriorated
humanitarian situation. It therefore needs the continued
support of the international community, especially in
financing the activities of humanitarian organizations.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea insists on the
guaranteed implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Region, formulated on 24 February
2013 in Addis Ababa, and that its signatories and
guarantors take the necessary steps to ensure its
effective implementation, to which the neutralization of
the armed groups that operate in the east of the country
is critical.

In accordance with the conclusions of the thirtieth
ordinary session of the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the African Union of Addis Ababa
in January, and the communique issued following the
tripartite meeting, held in Kinshasa between Presidents
Denis Sassou Nguesso of the Congo, Joao Lourenco of
Angola and Joseph Kabila Kabange of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo on 14 February, Equatorial
Guinea welcomes the progress that has been registered
in the political process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, with the commitment of President Kabila
and the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to complying with the electoral calendar
established on 5 November 2017 and the agreement
of 31 December 2016. The progress made by the
Independent National Electoral Commission in
registering voters and acquiring voting machines are
steps in the right direction.

Equatorial Guinea reiterates once again its appeal
to both the Government and the main opposition
parties to resolve their differences through frank and
inclusive dialogue and to pool their efforts to achieve
peace, stability and development in the country. The
international community must provide constructive
assistance to those efforts and the path freely chosen
by the Congolese, while the sovereignty of the country
must always be respected. The countries of the
region - which we commend for their solidarity i must
also contribute to these efforts.

The important role played by the African Union,
alongside the United Nations and the European Union,
must be supported by the work of such regional
and subregional organizations as the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Economic
Community of Central African States, the Southern
African Development Community to achieve better
coordination.

In conclusion, I should like once again to underscore
the important work being done by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for peace, security and stability
in that sister country. We encourage it to spare no
effort at this time of great challenges leading up to the
elections scheduled for 23 December. In that regard, the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea unreservedly supports
the renewal of the Mission's mandate.

