Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I wish to briefly take the
floor in order to thank all delegations for their very
constructive, flexible and strong support during the
consultations on this resolution, as well as to express
our full satisfaction with the outcome. Once again, the
Council is rallying strongly and united behind one of
the most important missions of the United Nations.

We are convinced that this text meets all the
expectations expressed in the report (S/2008/159) of
the Secretary-General and in the briefing by Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno on 12 March. The
Secretary-General recommended that the Mission's
mandate be sharpened. Indeed, the resolution was
conceived and discussed in that spirit. In fact, not only
are we extending the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for a
further 12 months, we are also offering the Mission
clear guidance on the priorities to take forward within
the mandate in the coming months: enhanced
coordination of, and leadership on, international
efforts; strengthened cooperation with the International
Security Assistance Force; political outreach; national
reconciliation; governance; humanitarian assistance;
the promotion of human rights; elections; and regional
cooperation.

The resolution also highlights what we have
perceived as the main feature of the 12 March debate:
the need for all the activities of the Mission and of the
international community at large to be guided by the
overarching principle of reinforcing Afghan ownership
and leadership.

Finally, we are pleased with the focus of the
United Nations on some crucial horizontal issues,
namely, the protection of civilians, children and armed
conflict, women and peace and security. It is now the
duty of the entire international community to translate
the resolution into concrete support for UNAMA, in
particular for the efforts of the newly appointed Special
08-27820
Representative of the Secretary-General. I am
confident that he will receive from all Member States
and from the Headquarters of the United Nations the
necessary resources and political support to fulfil his
daunting task.
