Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First and foremost, I would like to wish our
colleagues a happy Victory Day, which marked the
beginning of the foundation of our Organization 73
years ago.

Concerning the International Criminal Court (ICC)
and Libya, the situation in Libya remains complex.
We believe that the path to national reconciliation and
restoring the country's unity and State institutions lies
in a broad intra-Libyan dialogue. Russia supports the
efforts to advance the political process, which should be
coordinated under the auspices of the United Nations.
We hope that the action plan for Libya developed through
the United Nations will be implemented effectively.

We take note of the fifteenth report of the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court on the investigations
of the situation in Libya, as well as the fact that during
the reporting period, members of the Office of the
Prosecutor of the ICC visited Libya for the first time in
five years to conduct investigative activities. That is in
fact the most noteworthy event mentioned in the report.
There have otherwise been no substantive changes,
unfortunately. The work of the ICC remains selective
in its approach. Every arrest warrant issued has been
directed at people from Muammar Al-Qaddafi's circle.
Not one case dealing with the alleged crimes committed
by insurgents and terrorists has been initiated so far.
The ICC long ago distanced itself from investigating
issues related to civilian casualties resulting from the
NATO strikes. The Court continues to worry about the
army's operations in the Derna area, but for some reason
the Prosecutor has said nothing about the mujahidin,
who for all practical purposes are holding the local
population hostage.

The report once again draws attention to the
catastrophic situation of refugees and migrants in
Libya. There can be no question that more attention
should be paid to combating the criminal networks
that are linked to the illegal migration through Libya.
We completely agree, but that situation should be
approached comprehensively, including by identifying
the purchasers of human commodities in the countries
of destination that receive migrants.

We feel that once again the report attempts to
present the Libyan dossier as a kind of burden imposed
on the Court by the Security Council. We believe that
with an attitude like that, using the services of the
Court is pointless. Our delegation is determined to do
whatever is necessary to enable the members of the
Council to avoid repeating the unsuccessful experiment
of referring Security Council issues to the ICC.

