Mrs. Haley (United States of America): Today's
meeting was called to discuss the issue of violence in
the Middle East. We are all concerned about violence
in the Middle East. The United States deplores the loss
of human life. But there is a lot of Violence throughout
the region, and I will note that the double standard
is all too common in the Chamber - and working
overtime today.

Last week, Iranian forces attacked Israeli positions
in the Golan Heights by launching rockets from Syria.
That was a reckless provocation and an escalation that
must be stopped. It is an example of regional Violence
that should occupy our attention here in the Security
Council. Also last week, Iranian proxy forces in Yemen
launched missiles into Saudi Arabia. It was not the
first time they have done that. That too is regional
violence that should occupy our attention here in the
Security Council.

In recent days, Hamas terrorists, backed by Iran,
have incited attacks against Israeli security forces and
infrastructure. That is Violence that should occupy our
attention too. The common thread in all of that is the
destabilizing conduct of the Iranian regime * a regime
that insists on promoting violence throughout the
Middle East, while depriving its own people of basic
human rights.

The United States welcomes a discussion on that
violence in the Middle East. We welcome discussing
the ways we can cooperate with each other to put an
end to that Violence. There is far too little discussion in
the Security Council on Iran's destabilizing presence in
Syria, its promotion of Violence in Yemen, its support
for terrorism in Gaza and its dangerous and illegal
weapons build-up in Lebanon.

However, in the minds of some, today's meeting
was not called to discuss any of those examples of
Violence in the Middle East. Today's meeting was
called to discuss the Violence that some suggest was
connected with yesterday's opening ofthe United States
Embassy in Jerusalem. For some people, the Embassy
opening is said to be a reason to engage in violence.
How is that justified? As our President said when he
announced the decision in December, the location of
our Embassy has no bearing on the specific boundaries
of Israeli sovereignty in Jerusalem or the resolution of
contested borders. It has no bearing on Jerusalem's holy
sites. It does not prejudge whatever the parties might
negotiate in a peace agreement. It does not undermine
the prospects for peace in any way. And yet for some
this is supposedly a cause for Violence.

But let us remember that the Hamas terrorist
organization has been inciting violence for years,
long before the United States decided to move its
Embassy. In recent days multiple news organizations
have documented the Hamas incitement in Gaza. They
have reported that Hamas maps and social media show
the fastest routes to reach Israeli communities in case
demonstrators make it through the security fence.
They have reported on Hamas messages broadcast over
loudspeakers, urging demonstrators to burst through
the fence and falsely claiming that Israeli soldiers
were fleeing when in fact they were not. The same
loudspeakers are used by Hamas to urge crowds to "get
closer, get closer to the security fence".

Hamas has attacked the Kerem Shalom crossing,
the biggest entry point in Gaza for fuel, food and
medical supplies. That is how determined they are to
make the lives of the Palestinian people miserable. They
light Molotov cocktails attached to kites and attempt
to fly them into Israel to cause as much destruction as
possible. When asked yesterday why he put a swastika
on his burning kite, the terrorist responded, "the Jews
go crazy when you mention Hitler". That is what is
endangering the people of Gaza. Make no mistake:
Hamas is pleased with the results from yesterday.

I ask my colleagues here in the Security Council,
who among us would accept this type of activity on
their border? No one would. No country in the Chamber
would act with more restraint than Israel has. In fact,
the records of several countries here today suggest they
would be much less restrained. Those who suggest that
the Gaza Violence has anything to do with the location
of the American Embassy are sorely mistaken. Rather,
the violence comes from those who reject the existence
of the State of Israel in any location. Such a motivation,
the destruction of a United Nations Member State, is so
illegitimate as to not be worth our time in the Security
Council other than the time it takes to denounce it.

Yesterday's opening of the American Embassy
in Jerusalem is a cause for celebration for the
American people. Moving the United States Embassy
to Jerusalem was the right thing to do. It reflects the
will of the American people. It reflects our sovereign
right to decide the location of our Embassy, a right that
everyone in the Chamber claims for their own country.
Importantly, moving our Embassy to Jerusalem also
reflects the reality that Jerusalem is the capital ofIsrael.
It has served as Israel's capital since the founding of
the State. It is the ancient capital of the Jewish people.
There is no plausible peace agreement under which
Jerusalem would no longer remain the capital of Israel.
Recognizing this reality makes peace more achievable,
not less. The United States is prepared to support peace
negotiations and a peace agreement in every way. We
want nothing more than peace, a peace in which peoples
of all faiths are free to worship in Jerusalem, and a
peace in which the rights of all people are respected
and the future prospects of all people are bright. That
peace will only be achieved ifit is rooted in the realities
that too many choose to deny. The United States action
yesterday promoted the reality and the desire for peace.
It is our sincere wish that the nations of the world
will join us in this pursuit of credible, realistic and
enduring peace.

In conclusion, I want to take a moment to mark the
seventieth anniversary of Israel's independence. Here
in the Security Council, on behalf of the American
people, I congratulate our friends in Israel on the
remarkable achievement of 70 years of independence.
From humble and desperate beginnings, a proud people
have realized the prophet Isaiah's vision of a light unto
the nations. May the next 70 years be ones of strength,
of hope and of peace.

