Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Madam President, for
organizing this timely and important debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, and Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs John
Holmes for his presentation on the matter.

Azerbaijan aligns itself with the statement
delivered today on behalf of the European Union. I
would like to make a few additional remarks in our
national capacity.

The engagement of the Security Council,
including its adoption of resolution 1894 (2009), as
well as resolutions on women and children in armed
conflict, has increased attention to protection issues.
Azerbaijan recognizes and welcomes the important
implementation steps taken since the adoption of
resolution 1894 (2009).

At the same time, civilians continue to suffer
from inadequate protection in situations of armed
conflict. A defining feature of most, if not all, conflicts
is still the failure of parties to respect and ensure
respect for their legal obligations to protect civilians.
The heightened vulnerability of civilian populations in
wartime - in particular forcibly displaced persons,
refugees, women and children - brings an element of
urgency to our efforts. In that regard, insistent
measures aimed at ensuring strict compliance by
parties to armed conflict with their obligations under
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law remain crucial and must constitute an absolute
priority.
Particular consideration must be given to the
implications for the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts aggravated by population displacement and
foreign occupation. The impact of conflict on housing,
land and property, as well as forced demographic
changes in such situations, require a more consistent
approach to putting an end to illegal policies and
practices and ensuring the safe and dignified return of
displaced populations to their homes.

It is important that the recognition of the right to
return, along with increased attention to its practical
implementation and concrete measures aimed at
overcoming obstacles preventing return, be applied by
the international community with more systematic
regularity. Ensuring the right to return constitutes a
categorical rejection of the gains of ethnic cleansing
and offers important measures of justice to those
displaced from their homes and land, thereby removing
a source of possible future tension and conflict.

The lack of agreement on political issues should
not be used as a pretext for not addressing problems
caused by continued and deliberate disrespect for
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law in situations of armed conflict and military
occupation.

Therefore, we proceed from the importance of
reaffirming, in regard to such situations, the continuing
applicability of all relevant norms of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
achieving the invalidation of activities aimed at the
consolidation of military occupations, initiating urgent
measures to mitigating the adverse effects of such
activities, and discouraging any further practice of the
same or similar nature.

As far as the international responsibility for
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law is concerned, it is important to note that, in
certain well-known instances, occupying Powers are
responsible not only for the actions of their own armed
forces and other organs and agents of their
Governments, but also for the actions of subordinate
separatist regimes illegally created by them in occupied
territories.

Integral to the existing challenges is the need to
ensure accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, both for
individual perpetrators and for parties to conflict. In
recent years, important steps have been taken for the
protection and vindication of rights and the prevention
and punishment of wrongs. The punishment of crimes
with an international dimension and scope has
demonstrated how effective international justice can be
when there is political will to support it.

It is important to emphasize in this regard that
ending impunity is essential not only for the purposes
of identifying individual criminal responsibility for
serious crimes, but also for ensuring sustainable peace,
truth, reconciliation, the rights and interests of victims
and the well-being of society at large. To hold
otherwise would be tantamount to accepting the
consequences of breaches of the rule of law and human
rights and thus to legitimizing the results of
wrongdoings.

