Mr. Serrano: The candidate countries Turkey,
Croatia, and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, and Serbia; and
the EFTA country Liechtenstein, member of the
European Economic Area; as well as Ukraine and the
Republic of Moldova, align themselves with this
declaration.

When we discussed the situation in the Middle
East in July, the European Union and others expressed
the hope that both parties to the conflict would very
soon engage in direct, substantive discussions of all
final status issues. That hope turned to reality when
direct negotiations between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority started in Washington on 2 September, and
later continued in Sharm el-Sheikh and Jerusalem. The
European Union commended Israelis, Palestinians and
the United States, as well as other Quartet and Arab
partners, for bringing the start of those negotiations
about.

Today we meet at a moment when efforts are
being made to overcome the current deadlock in the
negotiations - which began only a month ago.

There is no alternative to a negotiated two-State
solution. The European Union calls on all parties to
earnestly seek a satisfactory way to keep the
negotiation process active and moving, and eventually
to gather momentum. We welcome the decision of the
Arab Peace Initiative Follow-up Committee to leave
the door open on the continuation of negotiations.

In this context, the European Union deems it
indispensable that both sides show restraint and refrain
from actions that could negatively affect the
continuation of the process. To that end, both sides
must uphold and implement previous commitments and
strive to create an environment conducive to a
successful outcome of the negotiations. The European
Union stresses the need for the Quartet to continue to
play an essential role in the peace process.

The European Union recalls that settlements in
occupied territory are illegal under international law,
constitute an obstacle to peace and threaten to make a
two-State solution impossible. We regret Israel's
decision not to extend the moratorium instituted by its
Government last November. The moratorium has had a
positive impact. We reiterate our call on Israel to end
all settlement activities, including in East Jerusalem.

If there is to be a genuine peace, a way must be
found, through negotiations, to resolve the status of
Jerusalem as the future capital of two States. The
European Union continues to call for a complete halt to
all violence, in particular rocket fire and terrorist
attacks.

When the European Union High Representative,
Catherine Ashton, visited the region at the beginning of
the month, she discussed with the Palestinian Authority
the work it is doing to build institutions for statehood.
The European Union takes note of the assessment by
the World Bank, which stated that if the Palestinian
Authority maintains its current performance, it is well
positioned for establishment as a State at any point in
the near future.

The European Union stresses the crucial
importance of the continuation of the Palestinian state-
building process - including the implementation of
the Fayyad Plan - which the European Union will
continue to support actively.

Political and financial support of the entire
international community is essential. The European
Union urges those who have made financial
commitments to deliver on their promises. All efforts
to achieve Palestinian reconciliation behind President
Mahmoud Abbas must also be accelerated.

The European Union High Representative has
visited Gaza twice this year and has praised the work
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East for its continuous
efforts to provide health, education and social
protection services. The European Union has
welcomed Israeli steps to ease the entry of goods into

Gaza, but reiterates its calls for full implementation of
resolution 1860 (2009) and for the immediate,
sustained and unconditional opening of crossings to
enable the flow of humanitarian aid, commercial goods
and persons to and from Gaza, including goods from
the West Bank. High Representative Ashton's
discussions with the Palestinian Authority have also
focused on how the donors can support exports, in
order to allow the people of Gaza to gain a greater
stake in their economy and their future.

The European Union calls for a solution that
addresses Israel's legitimate security concerns,
including a complete stop to all violence and arms
smuggling into Gaza. The European Union has offered
its assistance towards achieving this objective. The
European Union also calls on those holding the
abducted Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit to release him
without delay.

The European Union also recalls that peace in the
Middle East should be comprehensive and reiterates
the importance of negotiations on the Israeli-Syrian
and Israeli-Lebanese tracks. As regards Lebanon, the
European Union supports the Secretary-General's
recent unequivocal statement reaffirming the
independence of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. The
European Union urges all parties not to interfere in the
Tribunal's work and not to prejudge its outcome.

The European Union reaffirms its full support to
the Lebanese authorities and commends the crucial role
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) in southern Lebanon. It also calls upon all
parties concerned to implement all provisions of
resolution 1701 (2006), to respect the Blue Line in its
entirety and to cooperate fully with the United Nations
and UNIFIL.

These are the elements of the future - State-
building, strong economic development, and security -
and they need to be nurtured, but nurtured in the
context of serious ongoing talks on all final status
issues, which should lead to a two-State solution. The
European Union reiterates its readiness to contribute
substantially to the development of a comprehensive
and sustainable solution, with the State of Israel and an
independent, democratic, contiguous and viable State of
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security.

