Mr. Moura (Portugal): I congratulate you, Sir,
and your country on your presidency of the Security
Council this month.

I thank the Chairs of the Security Council's
subsidiary committees on counter-terrorism for their
comprehensive briefings. I am also pleased to address a
special word to Mike Smith, Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
and to wish him all the best in the future.

We naturally associate ourselves with the statement
delivered a few minutes ago by the observer of the
European Union. I should, however, like to add a few
comments.

First, preventing and countering terrorism continues
to be one ofthe main and more pressing challenges to the
international community as a whole, and to the United
Nations in particular. Solid international cooperation,
on the one hand, and the full implementation of the
United Nations counter-terrorism international legal
instruments, on the other, are indeed crucial elements of
a harmonized and effective response of the international
community to the scourge of terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations.

The United Nations is singularly well placed to
play the key role of coordinating, supporting and
pushing forward the global international efforts in this
endeavour to address the threats and actions of terrorism
through the Security Council and its subsidiary bodies,
the General Assembly and its relevant bodies, and other
United Nations entities, at both the Headquarters and
field levels. Surely, much has been done already, as
we should recognize, but in our opinion there is room
for improvement on specific elements of the counter-
terrorism strategies as they stand now.

As Portugal has consistently stated in previous
briefings of the Security Council, more attention
should be given, first, to enhancing the United Nations
preventive counter-terrorism approaches and agenda;
secondly, to improving and more efficiently articulating
all relevant United Nations system tools, both in New
York and at the field level; and, finally, to addressing the
need to reinforce the compliance of national, regional
and international counter-terrorism efforts with human
rights and rule of law standards. Those, among others,
are key aspects that we believe should to be solidly
implemented in order to address the evolving nature of
the terrorist threat, its ability to spread into different
areas of the world, its intertwinement and increasing
connection with forms of transnational organized
crime, and its capacity to promote radicalization and
recruitment in a global context.

At the local and regional levels, we believe that
further preventive action should be considered namely
in regions such as West, Central and East Africa, where
emerging or potentially emerging challenges should be
further addressed, for example, through more and better
United Nations information sharing and assessment
survey capabilities.

I conclude by commending once again the work
of the Ombudsperson's Office within the framework
of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011). The Ombudsperson's very valuable
contribution to implementing fair and clear procedures
for delisting with respect to that Committee should, in
our opinion, also be made available in the framework of
other relevant Security Council sanctions Committees,
thereby opening the way to an even more credible,
transparent and fair management of their respective
sanctions lists.

