Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Allow me to begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of
March and expressing our appreciation for the
convening of this important meeting on the situation in
Afghanistan. On behalf of the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan, I congratulate Mr. Kai Eide on his recent
appointment and wish him every success in fulfilling
the task entrusted to him. We look forward to working
closely with him and promise to do so. We are thankful
to Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno for his briefing today and
to the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
on the situation in Afghanistan.

Increased terrorist attacks by the enemies of
Afghanistan have led to some ill-judged and misguided
perceptions of the situation in the Afghanistan. Recent
remarks regarding government control or even its
failure in Afghanistan are the result of premature
assumptions, which have the potential to undermine
public support for efforts to achieve lasting peace and
security in the country. We should stay the course with
firm determination and prevent security nuances from
weakening our resolve to achieve our shared goals.

Let us not forget that we, Afghanistan and our
international partners, have made undeniable gains
towards a strong, stable and democratic Afghanistan.
By all standards, the achievements made thus far
reflect remarkable progress. Today, a greater part of
Afghanistan is secure from terrorism and violence. The
fight against terrorists and extremists continues.
Thanks to the support of our international partners, our
security forces have become stronger and more
effective. The Afghan National Army has reached
58,000 troops and has assumed a greater role in the
fight against terrorists seeking to destabilize
Afghanistan and the region.

With the support of our international partners, we

have dismantled more than 120 terrorist bases of

operation and apprehended 1,000 terrorists, including

foreigners. Among the captured are elite commanders

of the Taliban, Al-Qaida rank and file and those
responsible for recent terrorist attacks.

In spite of our achievements, significant
challenges remain. Providing security for our people is
not only our main objective, but also our primary
challenge. Terrorists have increased their attacks
against civilians, schools, religious figures, security
forces and international partners. They have also
broadened the scope of their activities in the region.
New violent fronts have been opened. Those attacks,
which have been carried out by means of hit and run
tactics, should not be seen as a sign of the enemy's
strength, but rather of their frustration resulting from
their inability to engage in direct battles.

The Government of Afghanistan will spare no
effort to improve the security of its people. In that
regard, we continue to maintain a comprehensive
strategy that has both military and political dimensions.
While the military campaign remains the centrepiece of
our efforts to defeat terrorists and consolidate security,
we are according greater attention to political outreach
and furthering the national reconciliation process. We
reiterate our call to individuals with past grievances to
reject violence, abide by the Constitution and join their
fellow compatriots in rebuilding their country. In that
connection, we welcome the readiness of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
to extend its good offices to support our reconciliation
efforts.

The interconnected challenges facing Afghanistan
require mutually reinforcing efforts to consolidate
gains in the areas of security, governance, rule of law,
human rights, development and counter-narcotics.
Strengthening governance and combating corruption
and narcotics remain among our top priorities. We have
initiated new measures to improve governance at the
provincial and local levels. As indicated in the report
of the Secretary-General, the Independent Directorate
for Local Governance has strengthened the links
between the provincial administrations and the central
Government. It has also led to progress in a variety of
areas at the provincial and district levels, including the
sustainable delivery of basic services to local
communities, disbandment of illegal armed groups,
police reform and counter-narcotics.

The Government of Afghanistan has taken
numerous measures to combat corruption. Those
include the creation of an inter-institutional
commission, headed by the Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court, to address corruption in the public
sector; the development of a draft national anti-
corruption strategy; and the signing of the United
Nations Convention against Corruption in August
2007. Nevertheless, the magnitude of the challenges of
fighting corruption and strengthening the rule of law
requires time and resources. We welcome the new
emphasis of UNAMA in support of our efforts to
strengthen governance and the rule of law.

As the report of the Secretary-General asserts,
our counter-narcotics efforts have gained momentum.
Following the increase in cultivation and production of
opium in 2007, we have taken a series of additional
measures to expedite the implementation of our
National Drug Control Strategy. In the recent meeting
of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board in
Tokyo, we reached a consensus with our international
partners on areas in which immediate action should be
taken.

We have prioritized counter-narcotics as a key
pillar of our policy advisory group, which aims to
improve security in the six provinces with the highest
levels of Violence. In October of last year we
designated 50,000 hectares as the national eradication
target for 2008. In addition, to address the mutually
reinforcing link between terrorism and narcotics, we
will provide force protection for eradication
operations. Among other measures taken for a more
effective counter-narcotics effort, our National
Assembly confirmed a candidate for the post of
Minister of Counter-Narcotics just two weeks ago.

Despite the challenges we face, Afghanistan is
continuing its reconstruction and its social and
economic development. Today, more than 85 per cent
of the population is covered by a basic package of
health services. Progress in the education sector has
enabled nearly 6 million children to gain access to
school. Our legal economy has grown by an average of
12 per cent over the past four years, and our per capita
gross domestic product has approximately doubled.
Five million Afghans have returned home in the hope
of a promising future. More than 1,471 kilometres of
roads have been built and 737 kilometres remain under
construction.
In accordance with our National Action Plan for
Women, Afghan women continue to assume a greater
role in the social, political and economic life of the
country. Our citizens enjoy unprecedented rights.
Nevertheless, we acknowledge the challenges in
various sectors and remain committed to addressing
them resolutely.

To consolidate and advance our gains, we will
finalize the Afghan National Development Strategy in
the weeks to come. We welcome the upcoming Paris
conference, to take place in June 2008, at which we
will launch the Strategy, review the implementation of
the Afghanistan Compact and discuss the way forward
with our international partners. We are working closely
with the Government of France in preparation for the
Conference.

The people of Afghanistan continue to live under
difficult humanitarian conditions. The situation has
been exacerbated with the onset of the harshest winter
conditions in more than 30 years, which have caused
more than 900 fatalities, with hundreds of people
suffering from severe frostbite. The severe weather has
also devastated our livestock, which is the main source
of livelihood for vulnerable families in remote parts of
Afghanistan. While expressing gratitude to the
humanitarian community for providing emergency aid
in the worst-affected provinces, we appeal for urgent
delivery of additional humanitarian assistance.

In this connection, we welcome UNAMA's
continued coordinating role in ensuring the timely and
effective delivery of humanitarian assistance, as well
as its readiness to assist the Government of
Afghanistan to create conditions conducive to the
voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable return of our
fellow Afghans from abroad.

The role of the United Nations remains vital for
the implementation of the Afghanistan Compact. We
look forward to the adoption in the coming days of a
resolution that will extend the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. The
extension of the mandate will reflect the continuing
commitment of the United Nations and the
international community to Afghanistan. We are
hopeful that it will also mark the beginning of a
strengthened, better structured and more effective
United Nations role in Afghanistan. The need for
greater coordination of the international community's
reconstruction efforts in Afghanistan is ever more

evident. In this regard, we underscore the importance
of an enhanced coordinating role for the United
Nations in consolidating the international community's
support and assistance to Afghanistan into a cross-
alliance effort. Such coordination is necessary to
improve the effectiveness and efficiency of
international engagement in and assistance to
Afghanistan.

Before concluding, I would like to express my
appreciation to the United Nations and the international
community for their support towards the achievement
of lasting peace, security and stability in Afghanistan.
Together, we have come a long way, but our mission
has yet to be accomplished. With greater coordination
and closer cooperation, we will successfully conclude
the journey which we jointly embarked upon more than
six years ago.

