Mr. Madeira: I thank you very much, Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on a Somalia. I am particularly pleased to do so again with my colleague Ambassador James Swan. Our partnership is proof of the strong cooperation that exists between theAfrican Union and the United Nations, which remains vital to our collective support to Somalia. Let me begin by recognizing that there have been significant developments in Somalia since I last the briefed the Council in May (see S/2020/436). Those developments are, in large part, due to the determination of Somalia's leaders to get together and consult on the bold steps required to strengthen the country's capacity to fight Al-Shabaab and other armed opposition groups, build the State of Somalia and strengthen its institutions and stabilize the country through the provision of essential goods and the services to the people. The emerging resumption of dialogue and collaboration between the leaders of the Federal Government and those of the federal member states is the most salient political development that happened in the period under consideration. If harnessed and facilitated, this development can unlock the great potential of the Somali people to put in the second plan what divides them and build on the factors that bring them together and strengthen the unity and solidarity of their people. I commend the personal efforts of President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo and those of the Presidents of the federal member states, who, through emissaries, direct and indirect contacts, consultations, exchanges and mutual reassurances, have laid the groundwork that made those crucial developments a reality: the Dhuusamarreeb process. In Dhuusamarreeb, we saw President Farmajo meeting bilaterally with President Ahmed Mohamed Islam Madobe of Jubtaland and discussing their issues. We witnessed President Farmajo exchanging views one on one with President Said Abdullahi Mohamed Deni of Puntland, with President Mohamed Abdi Ware of Hirshabelle and President Abdiaziz Hassan Mohamed Laftagareen of South-West State. We saw President Ahmed Abdi Kariye Qoor Qoor preparing the ground and welcoming President Farmajo and all the other Presidents to the big meeting. Those meetings are important and necessary. They should cease to be historical developments. They must be made to repeat themselves with such frequency that they become normal events - regular encounters of leaders united in a common purpose of making their country a better place for all their people. We regret that, for the meeting that started on 15 August, two of those leaders have not been there. We the international partners and friends of Somalia have an important role to play to make peace a necessary presence and transformation a necessary reality. Then Dhuusamarreeb process deserves our unwavering support, as it represents a clear signal of the intent of Somali leaders to work towards a political consensus. This was the missing link, and now it seems to be close. We should not miss this opportunity. The African Union, through the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), is there in Somalia supporting the Somali security forces in ensuring security for those encounters on the ground. While the parties will require more commitment and trust to assure that the Dhuusamarreeb talks are a success, the African Union will continue not only to secure the process but also to offer its political support, where and when needed. The African Union welcomes the developing dialogue between President Farmajo and _ the "Somaliland" leader, Mr. Muse Bihi Abdi. The latest round of talks, held in June, brokered by President Ismael Omar Guelleh of Djibouti, stands as the second this year. More important, this is evidence of Somalia's commitment to dialogue as a means of resolving its national differences. We are equally aware that the talks' joint technical committee is yet to meet again, and we underscore the importance that those talks continue. The resumption of dialogue between the Federal Government and the federal member states has real potential to act as a catalyst for achieving critical national priorities. I am encouraged so far that the resumption of dialogue has already allowed for Somali stakeholders at all levels to engage in frank and inclusive discussions in search of a consensual approach to the issue of elections and its modalities. We partners of Somalia must strive to ensure that the discussions will remain all-inclusive, because it is that inclusivity that lends legitimacy and will determine the consistence and implementability of the consensus that may be reached in the Dhuusamarreeb process. Following the National Independent Electoral Commission (NIEC) report to Parliament on 27 June, AMISOM, at the request of the Commission's Chairperson, has enhanced its discussions on election security, the securing of the new NIEC premises and the African Union Commission's technical support to NIEC prior to and during the elections. I am also pleased to report that AMISOM's police component, which will play a critical role in election security, is regularly engaging its Somali counterparts on areas of support. In that context, AMISOM police are currently training Somali police on the use of mapping tools for election security threat assessments. Despite that support, it remains essential, as part of election preparation, that the important work of the National Electoral Security Task Force resume as soon as practically possible. I remain concerned at the threat of Al-Shabaab across Somalia, which is demonstrated by the extremist group's sustained attacks against Government officials, businesses, civilians, security forces and international personnel. The fight against Al-Shabaab will continue to require concerted efforts. At the centre of peace efforts must be enhanced collaboration, coordination, coherence, improvedinformation-sharing and complementarity between the Federal Government and the federal member states, particularly as Somalia prepares to hold elections. More must be done to degrade Al-Shabaab's operational capacities. It is our assessment that as Somalia's national dialogue continues to edge towards political consensus, Al-Shabaab will seek to derail those efforts. Already Al-Shabaab, in its public statements, has unsuccessfully attempted to undermine the Dhuusamarreeb process and foment national discord. In line with AMISOM's tasks, as stipulated in the African Union Peace and Security Council communique 923 and Security Council resolution 2520 (2020), I can report that despite the ongoing impact of the coronavirus disease, AMISOM has continued to implement the transition plan. Since May, AMISOM, jointly with our partners in the Somali security forces, has been continuing to conduct several targeted operations to disrupt, degrade and disrupt Al-Shabaab's freedom of movement and action. In addition to these operations, we have jointly secured and maintained key supply routes. As part of our transition tasks, we have also mentored various Somali security forces battalions through our ongoing colocation, particularly in Lower Shabelle. In Lower Shabelle, as the Council is aware, recovered areas remain secure thanks to the continued joint operations and the bravery of our Somali security forces and AMISOM soldiers. The African Union, through AMISOM, has been the foundation of progress on security in Somalia since 2007, but with this we have thankfully witnessed the capabilities of the Somali security institutions gradually increase. These increases must continue in earnest so that Somalia is eventually able to take the lead on its security responsibilities by 2021. To that effect, it is with satisfaction that we note that the work towards the revision of the transitional plan is ongoing and the Government has set a clear vision Of what the revision should entail, the strategic priorities it should pursue, the actions that need to be implemented to make each strategic priority a reality and the specific tasks that need to be fulfilled and by whom. Clearly, improved and enhanced coordination and coherence, information-sharing and accountability, transparency and complementarity will be necessary for the adopted revised transition plan to be fully implemented in a timely manner. We are happy that this revision is taking place in tandem with efforts to revitalize the comprehensive approach to security mechanisms, which will be more aligned with the revised transition plan activities. A very positive feature in the current revision is that the elements of all-inclusiveness have been enhanced and the federal member states have been fully included and involved from the outset in the preparation of this new revised transition plan. They are participating directly and actively, and their views are being noted and reflected in the baseline documents that are being produced. Their seats are assured and reserved in the three technical committees tasked with producing the draft revised transition plan. This is of extreme importance, as no realistically sustainable peace operation in Somalia can succeed without the involvement of the regions concerned. As we begin to review the transition plan, under the leadership of the Federal Government, it remains critical that a reviewed plan must focus on practical elements. These must include consensus on priority locations for transition and agreement on the realignment of tasks, particularly for international partners, as called for in African Union Peace and Security Council communique 923. Agreements on those elements will in part inform our collective assessment on what comprehensive support Somalia would require from key internationalpartners in the lead-up to 2021 and post-2021, as called for in both African Union Peace and Security Council communique 923 and Security Council 2520 (2020). In terms of operations, one of the pressing issues that needs to be tackled head-on and addressed as a matter of urgency is the lack of commensurate Somali security forces to take over and hold areas under AMISOM control and those projected for liberation from Al-Shabaab. This is making it difficult for AMISOM forces in various sectors to reconfigure and create mobile forces for targeted offensive operations against Al-Shabaab, as they are forced by circumstance to keep holding and protecting the populations in the towns and habitational centres they have liberated from Al-Shabaab. Therefore, realistic and feasible approaches need to be identified to effectively address the issue of the slow pace of generation of the Somali National Army forces. As I conclude, I should like to draw the Council's attention to the fact that African Union Peace and Security Council communique 923 is broadly in line with paragraph 38 of Security Council resolution 2520 (2020) on the need for a comprehensive, independent assessment. In the spirit of the African Union-United Nations shared vision for Somalia, the African Union continues to call forajoint African Union-United Nations effort in delivering on this important assessment.
