Mr. Flynn (Ireland): First of all, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on having assumed the
presidency of the Council, and to wish you all the best for
the month ahead. I also want to thank today's briefers,
in particular Ms. Mariatu Kamara and Mr. Majok Peter
Awan, for having delivered such important and moving
personal testimony to us here today.

The facts revealed in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2019/509) are stark. Children remain at the
front line of armed conflicts across the world. We have
heard this morning that some 13,600 children have
been released and reintegrated, which is undoubtedly
a positive development. However, that is no cause for
celebration, as the same period saw more than 24,000
grave violations against children recorded across
20 countries.

It is evident that in these times of crisis, our
common efforts to protect all children from aggression
and violence fall far short of where we need to be.
Collectively, we must do more. We believe that the
Council has an important role to play. In the past year
we have seen the Security Council unite to address this
issue, including last July with the adoption of resolution
2427 (2018), which states that children recruited by
armed groups should be treated primarily as victims of
violations of international law, and just recently with
the adoption of resolution 2475 (2019), led by Poland
and the United Kingdom, on persons with disabilities.
That resolution contains important language on the
specific needs of children with disabilities affected by
armed conflict. For our part, Ireland was pleased to
co-sponsor both of those resolutions.

Our collective challenge now, as ever, is moving
towards implementation. One way to do that is to deliver
on the ACT to Protect agenda, launched earlier this year
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba.
A key action on that agenda is to deliver services to
children affected by war. Ireland's international
development policy, launched earlier this year, commits
us to increasing our spending on education, with a
particular focus on emergencies. When violence erupts,
children are frequently denied education, leaving them
open to indoctrination or exploitation. Education is
increasingly being recognized as a vehicle for helping
children to deal with trauma and a means to equip
children with the knowledge and skills necessary to
develop and contribute to rebuilding their communities
and countries. That forms a core part of our third
national action plan on women and peace and security,
which, along with our new development policy, contains
a commitment to delivering on a target of a quarter of
a billion euros to improve global education, especially
for girls in conflict-affected areas.

We are also supportive ofreintegration programmes,
which are fundamental to realizing the rights ofthe child,
ending the cycle of violence and ensuring sustainable
peace. This year, Ireland joined the Group of Friends
of Reintegration of Child Soldiers. Such groups help
to shed light on how the legacy of conflict continues
to affect children long after the guns themselves have
been silenced. We also need to do more, as Special
Representative Gamba said here earlier, to reduce the
devastating impact caused by land mines, improvised
explosive devices and unexploded ordnance.

We must work to ensure respect for international
humanitarian law and, importantly, strengthen
accountability for all violations. Ensuring compliance
with international humanitarian law is all the more
important in a context of the increased urbanization
of conflict, in which the risk of violations is greater.
These Violations, including the denial of humanitarian
access and attacks against schools, medical facilities
and personnel, are utterly unacceptable. The Security
Council must play its role in ensuring accountability
and referring violations to the International Criminal
Court, and the Council must work to ensure that any
referral is accompanied by ongoing support for the
Court, particularly with respect to the execution
of arrest warrants and the provision of adequate
financial support.

In conclusion, we must do more to implement the
resolutions of the Council. We must ensure respect
for international humanitarian law and demand
accountability for its violation. We must continue to
listen to testimonies like those of Ms. Kamara and
Mr. Awan and heed their calls for action. Put simply, we
must do more to protect our children. This is a priority
for Ireland, and with the support of our partners here
at the United Nations in the near future, it is a topic on
which we would work actively as an elected member of
the Security Council for the term 2021-2022.

I thank you again, Mr. President, for having
organized this important debate. I can assure you of
my country's continued commitment to working with
our partners here at the United Nations and globally
to protect children from all forms of aggression
and violence.

