Allow me to thank Ms. Stephanie Williams, Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), for her detailed briefing on the latest political, security and economic developments in Libya for the period under review. I also thank Ambassador Juergen Schulz, Chair of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, for his briefing on the Committee's work. South Africa remains deeply concerned about the prevailing security situation in Libya, the increasingly challenging humanitarian circumstances in the country and the ongoing fighting, in spite of efforts towards a ceasefire and the calls for a humanitarian pause due to the threat of coronavirus disease (COVID-19). It is regrettable that parties in Libya failed to heed the Secretary-General's call for a humanitarian pause to allow local authorities to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic, especially during Ramadan. Allow me to focus on three issues. First, my delegation reiterates that there can be no military solution to the conflict in Libya. All Libyan parties, community leaders and non-governmental organizations should commit to a cessation of hostilities and political dialogue, and avoid ongoing military confrontation. Further, we reiterate the concern voiced by the Contact Group of the Ad Hoc High-level Committee on Libya of the African Union (AU) about the political deadlock and the fighting that continues unabated in Libya. All mediation efforts must be aimed at a Libyan-led and -owned process, with the support of the United Nations and the international community. It is concerning that arms continue to flow into Libya despite the various resolutions adopted by the Council with respect to the arms embargo. Furthermore, South Africa remains concerned about foreign involvement, which perpetuates the conflict, threatens the country's sovereignty and undermines its efforts to establish State authority throughout its territory. Most concerning, however, is the blatant disregard of the Council's authority in the shoddy enforcement of the arms embargo despite commitments made in Berlin early this year. Notwithstanding, South Africa stands ready to support any initiative aimed at strengthening the monitoring of the arms embargo, provided it complies with and falls within the necessary Council measures related to the arms embargo, in accordance with resolutions 2473 (2019), 2509 (2020) and 2510 (2020). Secondly, the Secretary-General has repeatedly emphasized, including in previous reports, that Libya cannot be considered a safe place for the disembarkation of refugees and migrants rescued at sea under international law. Nevertheless, refugees and migrants continue to be disembarked in Libya, mainly after being intercepted by the Libyan Coast Guard. Disembarkation in Libya remains dangerous. South Africa remains concerned about the persistent violation of human rights, as cited in the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2020/360). As such, we remind Libyan political actors of their obligations under international human rights and humanitarian law. Thirdly, South Africa welcomes the cooperation between the United Nations, the AU, the League of Arab States and the European Union in finding a lasting solution to the Libyan crisis. We reiterate the 19 May communique of the AU Contact Group on Libya, which stresses the need for strong cooperation with neighbouring countries. My delegation looks forward to close cooperation among all Council members in ensuring the success of the AU's upcoming inter-Libyan reconciliation conference, to be held in July. We would like to thank UNSMIL, under the leadership of former Special Representative Salame and Acting Special Representative Williams, for its continued efforts to assist Libya in reaching a political settlement and in putting measures in place to fight the COVID-19 pandemic. In conclusion, the Council's endorsement of the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and the lifting of its economic sanctions will lend him political support in his efforts to promote peace during the COVID-19 pandemic. That will also go a long way towards enhancing the Council's credibility in this regard.
