Mr. Pascoe: I appreciate this opportunity to brief
the Security Council on the report of the mission
dispatched by the Secretary-General last November to
2
assess the threat of piracy in Benin and throughout the
Gulf of Guinea.

Members of the Council will recall that, when the
Secretary-General first addressed the issue of piracy in
the Gulf of Guinea in the Council, in October 2011, he
informed the members of his intention to dispatch a
mission to the region following a request from
President Boni Yayi of the Republic of Benin. The
main objective of the mission was to assess the threat
in Benin and in the Gulf of Guinea as a whole, to take
stock of national and regional efforts being made to
address the menace, and to make recommendations on
how to fill the gaps that remain.

As mentioned in its report (see S/2012/45), the
mission visited Benin, Nigeria, Gabon and Angola. In
addition to meetings with Government and other
officials in the four countries visited, the mission also
held discussions with representatives of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), in
Abuja, the Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS), in Libreville, and with the Gulf of
Guinea Commission, in Luanda.

Allow me to convey our deep appreciation to the
Governments of Angola, Benin, Gabon and Nigeria and
to ECOWAS, ECCAS and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission for the valuable support and cooperation
extended to the assessment mission, which facilitated
the smooth conduct of its work.

As highlighted by the Secretary-General last
week in his remarks to the Council at the open debate
on transnational organized crime in West Africa and the
Sahel region (see S/PV.6717), piracy and armed
robbery against ships increasingly undermine efforts by
States in the Gulf of Guinea region to maintain peace,
security and stability and to promote socio-economic
development. The threat has become even more
alarming as the pirates have become more violent. The
Secretary-General recalled, in that connection, the
tragic killing of the captain and the engineer of a ship
that was attacked by pirates off the coast of Nigeria
two weeks ago.

While regional States and organizations have
carried out initiatives designed to counter piracy and
armed robbery against ships at the national and
regional levels, the threat not only persists but appears
to be gaining ground in a region where the high-value
assets the pirates target are abundant. The Secretary-
General's mission found that piracy in the Gulf of
12-24250
Guinea has become more systematic, with the pirates
resorting to sophisticated modes of operation and
utilizing heavy weapons. So far, the attacks have
primarily targeted the lucrative cargo onboard the ships
rather than taking hostages for ransom, which has been
the practice off Somalia.

Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea hampers efforts by
regional States to engage in peaceful international
commerce and to exploit their vast natural resources
for the socio-economic development of their countries.
Recent reports have suggested, for instance, that
Nigeria is losing an estimated 7 per cent of its oil
resources to criminal activities, including piracy.

While piracy was a largely unknown phenomenon
in the Gulf of Guinea 10 years ago, the number of
attacks and the damage they cause has reached
worrisome proportions. In 2010, 45 incidents in seven
countries were reported to the International Maritime
Organization (IMO). Last year, the numbers rose to 64
in nine countries. In only the first two months of 2012,
the IMO has already recorded 10 incidents off the
coasts of Benin, the Congo, cote d'Ivoire, Ghana and
Nigeria. In addition, we know that not all piracy
incidents are systematically reported.

As highlighted in the report of the assessment
mission, Gulf of Guinea countries need a united front
in order to respond effectively to the growing threat of
piracy along their coasts. Isolated national initiatives
are only temporarily, at best, pushing the pirates to
shift their criminal operations from one country to the
next.

Accordingly, we would like to stress the
importance of a comprehensive regional strategy, as
envisaged in Security Council resolution 2018 (2011),
of 31 October 2011. To that end, and as the Secretary-
General reiterated in his remarks to the Council last
week, the assessment mission recommended that Gulf
of Guinea countries should convene a regional summit
as early as possible in 2012 to develop a
comprehensive anti-piracy strategy for the region. We
welcome the commitments expressed recently at the
ECCAS Summit held in N'Djamena in January 2012
and at the ECOWAS Summit held in Abuja two weeks
ago to develop a broad regional maritime strategy.

We also welcome the measures taken collectively
by Central African States, under the auspices of
ECCAS, to set up a Regional Centre for Maritime
Security in Central Africa, based in Pointe-Noire in the
12-24250

Republic of Congo, as well as multinational
coordination centres, which are already operational in
Angola, Cameroon and the Congo. These centres are
designed to monitor maritime activities in the coastal
States of Central Africa. In West Africa, ECOWAS
member States have recently intensified efforts to
establish a joint maritime security plan aimed at
harmonizing West African maritime policies and
operations. For its part, the Gulf of Guinea
Commission, composed of eight members from both
West and Central Africa, sees itself as a bridge to link
ECOWAS and ECCAS initiatives in the field of
maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea region.

We see the various efforts already undertaken by
West and Central African States as important building
blocks that lay the foundation for the convening of the
proposed joint regional anti-piracy summit in the Gulf
of Guinea. While all Gulf of Guinea countries, both
coastal and hinterland, are determined to counter the
growing threat of piracy and armed robbery at sea,
limited national and regional capacities undermine
their ability to do so effectively. The resources at hand
are inadequate and the region lacks a harmonized legal
framework in the field of maritime security. This, in
turn, can undermine effective cooperation to initiate
and implement joint and timely anti-piracy activities.

We welcome the support provided by members of
the international community to the Gulf of Guinea
countries to strengthen their maritime security
capacities. However, in the face of the deepening
threat, we strongly believe that much more needs to be
done. Significant logistical support is required, in
particular to bolster national and regional maritime
capacities. National authorities in Benin and Nigeria
highlighted in their discussions with the assessment
mission the need to set up a logistical facility in Benin
to support the operations of the joint Benin-Nigeria
maritime patrol mission. This facility would help, for
example, with the refuelling and repairs of vessels used
by the joint patrols. Indeed, the joint patrol was cited
as a concrete example of the significant results that can
be achieved when countries work together to address
this transnational threat. Consequently, the assessment
mission in its recommendations highlights the need to
support Nigeria and Benin in maintaining the joint
patrols until a more comprehensive and effective
regional strategy is put in place.

The United Nations system has already begun to
provide some support. IMO is assisting the 25 States
3
members of the Maritime Organization of West and
Central Africa to implement the memorandum of
understanding adopted in 2008 to enhance maritime
safety, security and law enforcement throughout the
region. The Secretary-General discussed this issue at
some length with IMO Secretary-General Koji
Sekimizu in London last week. The United Nations
Office for West Africa and the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa are working with their
respective West and Central African partners to support
the development of subregional maritime arrangements
in preparation for the proposed joint regional summit.

During its discussions with national and regional
leaders, the assessment mission found strong
appreciation for the role and support of the United
Nations in highlighting the need for concerted
international action to counter the threat of piracy in
the Gulf of Guinea. States and institutions of the region
welcomed the adoption of resolution 2018 (2011),
which they saw as the first major international political
and legal tool in mobilizing global cooperation against
the piracy menace. Building on that resolution, the
assessment mission and the increased efforts of States
of the region, we must take further concrete steps
designed to eradicate piracy in the Gulf of Guinea,
which constitutes a clear threat to the security and
economic development of the States of the region.

