Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I would like to thank
Ambassador Gary Quinlan for his quarterly briefing on
the work of the Security Council Committee on Iran.
I would also wish to commend the Committee and its
Panel of Experts for their important work.

Lithuania strongly believes in the need for a
comprehensive, negotiated and long-term solution that
would build international confidence in the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programme, in full
compliance with its international obligations. Lithuania
welcomes the progress achieved in the implementation
of the Joint Plan of Action by the E3+3 and Iran of
24 November 2013. It is encouraging that the talks have
now moved into the drafting phase. We encourage Iran
to engage constructively with the E3+3 in resolving
all outstanding issues, including those related to the
possible undisclosed military dimension of the nuclear
programme.

We also welcome the continuing cooperation of Iran

and the International Atomic Energy Agency under the
Framework for Cooperation. It is encouraging that the
Agency could confirm the implementation by Iran of six
initial and seven subsequent practical measures, as well
as the agreement on a further five practical measures.
The provision of design and other relevant information,
as well as access to various facilities, is an essential
element in helping the Agency to build a clearer picture
of Iran's nuclear programme. Pending a comprehensive
solution, all Security Council sanctions imposed on
Iran remain in effect. Both Iran and Member States,
as well as their nationals and entities, are obliged to
fully implement relevant Security Council measures.
Therefore, the work of both the Committee and the
Panel of Experts in verifying compliance should remain
unaffected.

We welcome the final report of the Panel of Experts
(S/2014/394, annex) and its swift public release. We
are particularly pleased with the Panel's in-depth
analysis of methods used for the evasion of sanctions
and the financing of prohibited activities. The report
also contains sensible recommendations that should
be addressed by the Committee without delay. It
is important to note that the majority of incidents
investigated by the Panel of Experts were related to
items that fall below established control thresholds.
That underscores the need for guidance to Member
States on the implementation of the catch-all clause.
We see merit in adopting the implementation assistance
notice in that regard, as recommended by the Panel of
Experts last year.

We remain concerned, however, about the
disturbing pattern of conventional arms embargo
violations with persistent reports of arms transfers to
Syria and elsewhere. The Panel's final report rightly
points out that Iran's actions on conventional arms stand
in clear contrast to apparent restraint in areas related
to the nuclear programme. The latest case discussed
at the Committee, which involves attempted transfer
from Iran of containers with concealed rockets, mortars
and related material on the vessel Klos C, was another
clear violation of Iran's obligations to comply with the
arms embargo. It merits an appropriate response by the
Committee.

Finally, let me reaffirm Lithuania's support for all
efforts aimed at finding a comprehensive solution to the
Iran's nuclear issue that would be the basis for building
international confidence in the exclusively peaceful
nature of its nuclear programme. We reiterate our hope
that Iran's engagement in the E3+3 talks would also
translate into cooperation with the Committee.

