Mr. Jallow: During the period covered by the
report on the completion strategy of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) (see S/2011/317), my Office has continued to focus its
efforts on the completion of ongoing trials, the referral
of cases to Rwanda, evidence preservation
proceedings, the conduct of appeals, the intensification
of our tracking efforts, and the provision of assistance
to national authorities in respect of cases being
investigated or prosecuted by them.

During that period, we have received judgements
in respect of five accused persons and completed the
evidence phase in respect of four other accused
persons, while trial proceedings are at an advanced
stage in the two remaining cases. Subject to the
decision of the Trial Chambers on our referral
application of the detainee Jean Uwinkindi and the
disposal of the case of Bernard Munyagishari, the new
arrestee, and any arrests effected prior to 30 June 2011,
the trial workload of my Office in respect of current
detainees should thus conclude by the end of 2011.

The evidence preservation proceedings have also
been commenced in the case of Felicien Kabuga. Those
in respect of Protais Mpiranya and Augustin Bizimana
will commence shortly, with all proceedings in respect
of those three cases scheduled also to conclude by
early next year.

The appeals workload has entered an intensive
phase as new judgements are delivered. In addition to
prosecuting the three Rule 11 bis cases - that is, the
referral cases - the Appeals Division, since my last
report (S/2010/574), has been actively prosecuting 12
cases involving a total of 18 separate appeals.

The Division has also been preparing the
groundwork for new appeals expected to be filed in
connection with three multiple accused cases, for
which judgements are likely to be delivered in the
course of the year. Those three cases alone may
generate up to 28 new prosecution and defence appeals
to be argued during the remainder of 2011 and in 2012.

In the months ahead, we plan to file additional
requests for the referral of the cases of the remaining
four fugitives and one new arrestee to national
jurisdictions for trial, to intensify efforts in tracking, to
prepare for the commencement of the remaining
evidence preservation proceedings, to conclude trial
preparations in respect of current detainees, and to
have case files ready for transfer to the Residual
Mechanism for consideration for referral or trial, as the
case may be.
We will devote time and resources to updating the
case files in respect of the six other fugitives to ensure
their readiness for trial or transfer and their handover
to the Mechanism. That would considerably reduce the
workload of the Mechanism when it comes into
operation in the middle of next year.

In a further attempt to implement the referral
strategy of the ICTR and while continuing our focus on
Rwanda, I visited a number of European States in April
this year and held discussions with senior officials to
encourage their Governments to consider accepting
cases for trial from the ICTR. I wish to record my
appreciation for their warm reception, and look
forward to their positive consideration of our requests.

The strategy of referral of cases remains crucial
for a timely completion of the ICTR mandate, the
reduction of the scope and workload of the Residual
Mechanism, and the avoidance of impunity gaps by
encouraging extradition by other countries to Rwanda.
I am also hopeful that the only cases referred so far by
the Tribunal, which went to France, will receive greater
attention in the course of this year in the French courts.

Alongside the attempts at referral, we will
continue to give priority to the tracking and arrest of
the fugitives. I am happy to report in that respect that,
pursuant to the mandate of the Council of Ministers of
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, held in Brazzaville, the Republic of the Congo,
I have recently had very fruitful discussions with its
Executive Secretary Ambassador Mulamula on
cooperation in the tracking and arrest of ICTR
fugitives, most of whom are located in the territory of
States members of that organization. Concerted efforts
by States members of the International Conference, in
collaboration with the ICTR, promise to bring to
account those fugitives who have not only evaded
justice for so long but have also been a source of
insecurity and instability in the Great Lakes region.

I am further pleased to report to the Council that
one of those fugitives, Bernard Munyagishari, a
leading member of the Interahamwe indicted for
genocide and related crimes, was arrested by security
officers of the Democratic Republic of Congo on
25 May, in cooperation with ICTR officers. We look
forward to his early transfer to the ICTR by the
authorities of the Democratic Republic. I would like to
take this opportunity to congratulate and thank the
Government for the cooperation that has made this
arrest possible.

This latest arrest reduces to nine the number of
fugitives that are now outstanding with respect to the
ICTR. I am confident that the continued cooperation of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo will facilitate
the timely arrest of these fugitives, the majority of
whom are in that country.

We welcome the reactivation in November 2010
of the joint ICTR/Kenya police task force, which has
been working on the Kabuga case file. I look forward
to the assistance of the Government of Kenya in the
tracking and arrest of this top-level fugitive and in
finally closing this file. We continue to experience
difficulties in the tracking of top-level fugitive Protais
Mpiranya, former Commander of the Presidential
Guard. I would urge greater cooperation and assistance
on that file from the Government of Zimbabwe.

Staff attrition due to early departures and
administrative regulations continues to pose a difficult
challenge. We are in discussions with the relevant
United Nations departments on this matter and hope for
a quick and satisfactory solution.

Pursuant to the decision of the Security Council
in resolution 1966 (2010), the ICTR branch of the
Residual Mechanism will become operational on 1 July
2012. Accordingly, we have focused on and will
continue to attend to ensuring a smooth transition to
and the effective commencement of our branch of the
Mechanism. A consultative process between the
Prosecutors of the ICTR and the ICTY has been
established for this purpose and an understanding
arrived at between the two Prosecutors regarding the
structure and the staffing and resource requirements of
the common Office of the Prosecutor in line with the
wish of the Council for the Mechanism to be a lean and
effective institution.

Despite the current challenges and those expected
in the process of winding down, we remain committed
to an efficient, effective and timely closure of the
Tribunal and are confident that that can be achieved, as
well as a smooth and timely transfer of residual
functions to the International Residual Mechanism.

I would like to thank the members of the Security
Council, States Members of the United Nations, and
the Secretariat for all their support, which has proved
valuable to the execution of our mandate. I look
forward to the continuation of such support in the
critical transition to the Residual Mechanism.

