Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Griffiths, and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for presenting an overview of the political and humanitarian situations in Yemen. We continue to witness the developments in the situation in the Republic of Yemen, where for the sixth year running we are seeing an acute conflict that is negatively impacting the security and stability of not only the country but also of the region as a whole. We are concerned by the fact that the hostilities are continuing and that civilians are the main ones affected. Because humanitarian issues and challenges are taking centre stage, there must be an immediate reaction on the part of the international community. We are also concerned by the information from the United Nations to the effect that because of insufficient funding, basic assistance programmes are being discontinued; this includes programmes aimed at ensuring food security and access to water and medical services. In these conditions, where the national health system has been undermined by the long-standing conflict, what is needed is collective action to help Yemen in its fight against the coronavirus disease pandemic. We call upon donors, including from other countries in the region, to increase their relevant support. At the same time, we believe that humanitarian assistance should be impartial in nature. One should not classify the Yemenis as the "good ones" and the "bad ones". It will be possible to really improve the humanitarian situation in the country only if a political and diplomatic settlement to the conflict is found. There is no possible military solution to the situation in Yemen. However, so far, the implementation of the Riyadh, Stockholm and Al-Hudaydah agreements has not yielded the results that we want, namely, a country- wide ceasefire, and the relaunching, as soon as possible, of an inclusive inter-Yemeni dialogue. The stalling of those agreements could lead to further escalation. The only entities that could profit from such a situation are extremists and terrorists, who could use Yemen to expand their influence far beyond the boundaries of the country. We support the work done by Mr. Griffiths and understand the difficulties he has to face when providing mediation services. The most important thing here is that the parties in Yemen are showing understanding and general agreement with the fact that they need to launch a nation-wide dialogue aimed at discussing the future of the country. What is of vital importance here is to ensure that the views of all political, social, ethnic and religious groups in Yemen are taken into account. We also understand that the devil is in the details, and that is why it has not been possible to agree on the plan proposed by Martin. One of the issues mentioned is that of the FSO SAFER oil tanker. We believe that solutions to the tanker issue that would be acceptable to all parties could be found provided that all of the parties' interests are duly taken into account. Russia maintains contacts with all the Yemeni and outside stakeholders and will continue to encourage their search for compromise in support of the efforts made by the United Nations and Mr. Griffiths himself. We will continue to back the efforts made by the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement, and we expect that our colleagues in the Security Council and the international community as a whole will do so as well. The situation in Yemen is directly affecting the Middle East, the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea region. Whether or not the crises in the Middle East are interlinked is an issue that could be discussed in academic circles, but for us there should be no doubt in that respect. We are convinced that all efforts to settle the conflict in Yemen and other countries in the region should be interlinked and undertaken in parallel with other steps aimed at generally de-escalating the situation in the Middle East. We stand ready to work together on promoting peace and stability in the Middle East as a whole, including on the basis of Security Council resolution 598 (1987), which called on the Secretary-General, together with the States of the region, to develop a security and confidence architecture in the region. We have proposed our own concept of collective security in the Persian Gulf. There are a number of other peace initiatives, and they have one main element in common: the principle of inclusiveness. We oppose any attempt to place the blame on one party or one country, as was voiced here today, especially since the countries in the region, including the country that was accused again today, could play a positive role in generally de-escalating the situation, including in Yemen. We see that some countries in the region demonstrate readiness to normalize relations, and we expect that they will show the same constructive attitude towards their other neighbours. We once again invite all interested parties to launch a comprehensive dialogue aimed at creating an atmosphere conducive to cooperation in the region.
