Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I wish to thank
you, Madam President, for having convened this
meeting and for maintaining the Security Council's
focus on preventing conflict in Africa. I also thank
Kairat for his comprehensive briefing as Chair of the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and
Eritrea, and for his tireless efforts to advance the work
of the Committee since he took on the role.

As he has reminded us, Al-Shabaab remains a
vicious threat to security in Somalia and indeed to
the region. The sanctions regime remains in place
to reduce that threat from Al-Shabaab and to tackle
threats to peace and security. It does so first through
the arms embargo. The regime makes it harder for
illicit weapons to flow into Somalia, and it supports
the Federal Government of Somalia to establish robust
arms and ammunition management, accountability
and transparency.

These are key elements in wider security-sector
reform, which is both essential and urgent to help make
progress on this vital issue. In May, the United Kingdom
will host the London Somalia conference, co-chaired
by the Secretary-General and the Federal Government
of Somalia. We will accelerate progress of security
and agree the new international partnership needed
to keep Somalia on track towards increased peace and
prosperity by 2020. Central to this is continuing the
battle against Al-Shabaab.

But as several Security Council members said
during the peacekeeping debate convened by the
United States presidency last week (see S/PV.7918), we
cannot defeat armed groups through military means
alone. The political progress made by Somalia in 2017
has laid the essential foundations for peace, stability
and growth, which will be so vital to ensuring that
Al-Shabaab's support is choked off at the political and
economic levels, as well as through the restrictions
of the sanctions regime, which denies Al-Shabaab its
revenue streams.
The sanctions regime cuts offAl-Shabaab's funding.
It preserves Somalia's natural resources for the benefit
of its people and Somalia's economic empowerment, it
tackles spoilers to Somalia's political progress, and it
helps to support the development of Somalia's security
forces. In this way, this regime supports the Federal
Government of Somalia's fight against Al-Shabaab
alongside the bravery and sacrifice of the troops of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).

Now more than ever, Somalia needs our continued
support. The consequences ofthe drought in Somalia are
far-reaching, and we must all take action now to address
the humanitarian crisis and preserve the political and
security gains that have been made since 2012.

Turning to Eritrea, I would like to commend the
Chair for his great efforts and those ofhis team for their
work to engage with the Government of Eritrea since
assuming the role. The United Kingdom continues
to urge the Government of Eritrea to comply with its
international obligations, including compliance with the
Chapter VII resolutions of the Council. We welcome the
increased engagement by Eritrea with United Nations
human rights mechanisms, and we continue to urge
Eritrea to engage with the Committee, its Monitoring
Group and the Council.

We should also recall that some serious outstanding
issues remain. First, the ongoing mediation by Qatar is
vital to ensuring that all Djiboutian combatants missing
as a result of the 2008 conflict, including the bodies of
any who have died, are accounted for and their families
given all the information available.

Secondly, the ongoing refusal by the Government
of Eritrea to cooperate with the Monitoring Group,
including by allowing them to visit Eritrea, means
that we have no way of verifying the Group's lack of
evidence for Eritrean support for Al-Shabaab or of
understanding the concerns about support for other
regional armed groups. We hope that, by the time of the
review of the sanctions on Eritrea, due following the
midterm report of the Monitoring Group, the Council
will have some positive momentum to reflect on. To that
end, we encourage Eritrea to take the opportunity for
engagement, which the Council is once again offering.

