Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I thank you, Sir,
for convening this open meeting at the request of 10
Member States, including Lithuania. I also thank the
Assistant Secretary-Generals Taye-Brook Zerihoun
and Ivan Simonovie for their briefings. Lithuania
welcomes this public briefing on the situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, as do the other
Security Council members that called for this meeting.
We believe that the scale and gravity of human rights
violations in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, as detailed in the report of the United Nations
commission ofinquiry (S/2014/276, annex), threaten to
have a destabilizing impact on the region and on the
maintenance of international peace and security.

The more than 370-page report, based on extensive
research and testimony, is a profoundly disturbing read,
as we have heard from some of the quotes earlier in this
meeting. Hundreds of thousands perished, many many
more have been physically and psychologically maimed
by the regime that, in the words of the commission,
seeks to dominate every aspect of its citizens' lives
and terrorizes them from within. The very idea of a
social contract between the State and its citizens is
reduced to naught, with those responsible to protect
the rights of North Koreans ruthlessly enforcing
almost complete denial of their freedom of thought,
religion, expression, information and association.
Extermination, enslavement, torture, forced abortions,
prolonged starvation - the list seems endless, as no
abuse is judged too harsh or inhuman by the regime.

For decades and even when mass starvation was
claiming thousands of lives, the State gave precedence
to military spending, engaging in a clandestine
nuclear-weapons programme, buying and producing
expensive military hardware. Nuclear weapons tests in
2006, 2009 and 2013, as well as provocative ballistic
missile and rocket launches, have been condemned
by the Security Council and have been recognized as
a continuing clear threat to international peace and
security. As the commission of inquiry notes, the drive
to be a nuclear State has had profound consequences on
resource allocation, affecting particularly the parts of
the population that were already food insecure.

The report clearly indicates that crimes against
humanity are being committed, conceived and supported
by the highest levels of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea Government. Political prisoners and
their families perish in prison labour camps, deprivation
of food is used to control the population, children are
stunted by malnutrition, humanitarian access is blocked
to most affected regions, and torture is an inseparable
part of the interrogation process. Those who manage to
escape are often forcibly returned and invariably face
persecution, torture, forced abortions and arbitrary
detentions.

We take note of the indications by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea that it is ready to consider
human rights dialogues with international interlocutors,
technical cooperation with the Office of the High
Commissioner of Human Rights, and a country visit
by the Special Rapporteur. We were disappointed to
hear, however, that the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea is now backtracking on those signals. We
urge the country to engage with the international
community, to allow unimpeded access to international
human rights and humanitarian organizations, and to
start implementation of the recommendations of the
commission of inquiry.

So long as the human rights situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea continues to
deteriorate, however, it is important to make sure that the
international community is mindful of its responsibility
to protect the population of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, which has been so manifestly and
deliberately failed by its own Government. In this regard,
Lithuania welcomes the recent adoption by the General
Assembly of resolution 69/188 on the situation of human
rights in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
submitting the report of the commission of inquiry to
the Security Council. We also encourage the Council
to follow the General Assembly's recommendation
and take appropriate action to ensure accountability,
including through consideration of referral of the
situation in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
to the International Criminal Court, and consideration
of the scope for effective targeted sanctions against
those who appear to be most responsible for acts that
the commission has said may constitute crimes against
humanity.

To conclude, let me reiterate the conclusion of
the commission of inquiry that the crimes against
humanity in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea will continue until the policies, institutions and
patterns of impunity that lie at their heart remain in
place. The Security Council should therefore remain
engaged in demanding that the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea authorities initiate profound changes
through the implementation of the recommendations
of the commission of inquiry without delay. The
Council should track progress of such implementation
by holding regular briefings of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Special
Rapporteur to the Security Council.

