Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): On behalf of
the Vietnamese delegation, I would like to thank the
head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for presenting the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Iraq
and the work of the United Nations in that country
(S/2009/102). I welcome the participation of
Ambassador Al Bayati of Iraq and thank him for his
statement.
During the reporting period, there have been
many significant positive developments in the political,
security and reconstruction fields in Iraq, including the
overall low levels of violence and criminality, the
improved capability of the Iraqi security forces, and
the continued return of internally displaced persons and
refugees. We are particularly heartened by the
successful holding of provincial elections on
31 January 2009 in 14 out of Iraq's 18 governorates.
We share the hope that Iraqi leaders will grasp this
opportunity to build momentum towards national
dialogue and reconciliation.

We are also encouraged by the steadily increasing
international diplomatic presence in Iraq, particularly
of regional countries, and the Iraqi cabinet's decision
to allocate $25 million towards the construction of the
UNAMI integrated headquarters in Baghdad, which we
consider to be another indication of the country's
enhanced self-confidence and strengthened
international status.

However, we remain concerned about the serious
challenges that Iraq continues to face. The rocket
attack against the United Nations facility in the
International Zone in November 2008, the disturbing
acts of violence in the weeks prior to the provincial
elections and the bloody attacks on Shia pilgrims in
early January and mid-February 2009 are indications of
a fragile situation. At the same time, the growing
unemployment rate, the widening imbalances in social
service delivery and the deteriorated living conditions
of the most vulnerable groups - the vast majority of
whom are women, children, refugees and internally
displaced persons - are causes for concern. This
situation may become even more serious in the context
of the international financial crisis and the fluctuations
in the price of oil.

Now that the governorate council elections have
been successfully organized, the months ahead will be
crucial for Iraq to consolidate the progress made and
lay solid foundations for long-term gains. To this end,
the quest for durable peace and security in Iraq should
be a nationally-led process, which requires a
harmonious combination of various parameters and
united efforts. Throughout this process, the promotion
of dialogue and national reconciliation across political,
ethnic and sectarian lines continues to play a defining
role. For progress in the security and political fields to
take root, economic and social reconstruction must
move ahead. We call on all parties in Iraq to put aside

their partisan interests and jointly take on a national
agenda towards the achievement of national unity,
development and prosperity.

We commend the efforts undertaken by United
Nations staff in assisting the Iraqi Government in
strengthening institutions for local governorates,
advancing political dialogue and confidence building,
resolving the status of Kirkuk and other disputed
internal boundaries, extending electoral assistance,
supporting the constitutional review process and
facilitating regional dialogue in accordance with
Security Council resolutions 1770 (2007) and 1830
(2008). Together with the extension of UNAMI's
provincial outreach and the establishment of permanent
presences in Iraq by other United Nations agencies,
these efforts contribute to the strengthening of the
United Nations role in the development of a stable,
secure and prosperous Iraq as enshrined in the United
Nations Iraq Assistance Strategy 2008-2010.

At the same time, Iraq's constructive engagement
with regional countries and the international
community is critical to the country's long-term
stabilization and reconstruction. We welcome Iraq's
participation in such broad frameworks as the
International Compact with Iraq, the International
Reconstruction Fund Facility for Iraq, the United
Nations Development Group Iraq Trust Fund, the Paris
Declaration principles, the expanded ministerial
meetings, as well as the regional working groups on
energy, refugees and security. We support and look
forward to contributing to the promotion of collective
efforts to assist Iraq in each of its respective phases of
development.

