Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank Mr. Schwarz-Schilling,
High Representative for the Implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the
briefing he has given us setting out the progress made
in the implementation of the goals contained in his
previous report, as well as regarding developments in
the first sixth months of this year. We would like also
to welcome the presence of the Prime Minister, Adnan
Terzie, who has shared his country's expectations vis-
a-vis the international community.

Generally speaking, there have been several
encouraging signs, including the political progress
made by the parties, which took concrete form on

18 March 2006 when six party leaders signed an
agreement requesting the President and the
Parliamentary Assembly to enact a series of
constitutional changes. Indeed, at a time of
international disengagement, constitutional reform is of
critical importance for future developments.

However, our optimism is tempered given the
existence of sources of concern. I would note in
particular the rejection by the parliament on 26 April of
a number of proposed reforms. That rejection led to
tensions that have cast a shadow over the political
debate. Some actors in Republika Srpska went as far as
to use the 21 May referendum on the independence of
Montenegro to demand the right to hold a referendum
on the future of Republika Srpska. A number of
Bosnian politicians understandably became quite upset
at that prospect. We fully endorse the stance taken by
the High Representative aimed at dissuading the Prime
Minister of Republika Srpska, Mr. Dodic, from taking
a path that cannot lead to a positive outcome.

We believe also that the victory achieved by the
moderates in the general elections held on 1 October
2006 represents a stabilizing factor. However, while
advances have been made in many areas, particularly
in the economic field - despite the ongoing
unemployment problem - with the adoption by the
Council of Ministers of a plan of action aimed at
addressing priority issues within the framework of a
European partnership, many questions remain
unresolved. In that respect, I would note that the
preconditions set by the European Commission -
reorganization of the police, public broadcasting
reform and full cooperation with the ICTY - have not
been met.

The arrest of fugitives remains of critical
importance, not only in terms of integration into the
European Union but also in the context of the combat
against impunity and of the administration of justice -
which are the legitimate aspirations of the many
victims of past ethnic conflicts.

My delegation hopes that, with a view to the
achievement of social harmony and thus of greater
political stability, account will be taken of the appeal
made earlier by the High Representative for a
settlement of the issue of the decertification of police
officers.

In conclusion, my delegation welcomes the
efforts made by the international community, the
European Union and NATO in particular in the
transition process, and we believe that, despite the
upcoming reduction in their military presence and the
closing of the Office of the High Representative,
international assistance remains necessary for
stabilization and peacebuilding in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

The region in which that country is located has in
the past few years been a determining factor in the
level of peace and security enjoyed by many peoples. It
is a microcosm of the development of multilateralism,
which can only benefit from the smooth management
of the situation in that country - a situation whose
importance transcends the borders of the countries of
the former Yugoslavia.

