Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank you for
convening this meeting, Madam President. I also
welcome the statement of the High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy.
One of the main objectives of the Lisbon Treaty
is to enhance the European Union's international role.
One year after its entry into force, important steps have

already been taken in order to give the Union a
stronger and more unified voice and capacity to act, as
High Representative Ashton has just underlined.

Given the importance of the cooperation between
the European Union (EU) and the United Nations, as
partners with shared values and objectives, we believe
that strengthening the EU's foreign policy will also
contribute to reinforcing an effective multilateral
system with the United Nations at its centre.

The challenges of the twenty first century
demand the concerted action of global, regional and
subregional actors. With its specific tools in the fields
of security, crisis management, development and the
environment, among other areas, the EU is in a
singular position to support the United Nations in
responding to the multidimensional challenges to peace
and security.

As has already been mentioned, the European
Union and its member States jointly make the largest
financial contribution to the United Nations system.
The EU plays a central role in peace-making,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding and works with the
United Nations to prevent conflicts, manage crises and
build sustainable peace. There are several good
examples where the cooperation between the two
organizations is taking place or can be further
developed, be it in the Balkans, Afghanistan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea-Bissau,
Somalia or the Sudan.

Allow me now to address some of the issues
mentioned by the High Representative in Africa and
Middle East.

In the Sudan, the conclusion of a timely and
peaceful referendum is a historic accomplishment and
a milestone, not only in terms of underlining the
Sudanese people's attachment to democratic processes
but also as evidence of what can be achieved through
cooperation and commitment among all stakeholders.
Its outcome will allow for the stability and sustainable
development of both South and North Sudan and pave
the way for the normalization of relations between
Khartoum and the international community.

The High Representative has underlined the EU's
continued engagement in that process. In the short
term, this means supporting the international efforts to
reach an agreement on all outstanding Comprehensive
Peace Agreement and post-referendum issues,
including Abyei and the difficult security and
humanitarian situation prevailing in Darfur. It also
means, in the period ahead, working closely with the
United Nations towards peace, stability and the
integrated development of the subregion.

The EU and the United Nations have also been
working together to help stabilize the situation in
Somalia, as was mentioned by the High Representative.
The support to the African Union Mission in Somalia,
the cooperation between the European Union, the
United Nations and the African Union in the training of
Somali military personnel and the coordinated efforts
in fighting piracy off the coast of Somalia provide
good examples of this. However, continued strong
coordination between the three organizations, along
with other international stakeholders, is crucial, as
those efforts must be accompanied by an upgraded and
comprehensive political strategy for the country in
order to achieve a long-term sustainable solution.

With regard to C6te d'Ivoire, we concur with the
High Representative's assessment. In the aftermath of
the AU summit last week, Portugal welcomes the
recent creation of the African Union high-level panel
for Cote d'Ivoire. In keeping with the objectives of the
Africa-European Union Strategic Partnership, it is very
important to back this genuinely African effort to find a
political solution to the current stalemate. Such support
represents a strong signal of our willingness to work
closely with African regional and subregional
organizations on issues of peace and security.

More generally, we see that some of the
challenges faced by Cote d'Ivoire are shared by other
countries in the region. That is why we think that it is
important for the European Union and the United
Nations to give serious consideration to their approach
to West Africa as a whole, as I have stressed on
different occasions in the Council.

The European Union and its member States have
been following the recent developments in the
Maghreb and the Middle East very closely. That is a
region with which the European Union has long-
standing relations and where, through a number of
instruments and mechanisms, it has developed genuine
and effective bilateral and regional partnerships, as
Baroness Ashton has just alluded to. She also
mentioned a number of steps that the European Union
is undertaking in the light of recent events with the aim
of jointly furthering, with its partners, the shared goal
of building stability, peace and prosperity in the
Mediterranean and the Middle East region.

The developments that we are witnessing will
undoubtedly have a decisive impact on the future of the
region and beyond. As my Minister recently stated, the
many issues affecting that region cannot be addressed
"in a fragmented, unlinked, inconsistent and incoherent
manner". They require an efficient partnership between
all stakeholders. Over the decades, the European Union
has developed an important acquis of instruments that
can and should complement United Nations efforts to
promote peace and security in the Mediterranean and
the Middle East. Together, the European Union and
United Nations should develop a complementary
partnership capable of adequately responding to the
many challenges in the region.

Portugal stands fully behind Baroness Ashton's
remarks concerning the Middle East and the peace
process. Indeed, the current developments in the region
clearly underscore the urgency of a comprehensive and
lasting peace in the Middle East. Portugal thus
reiterates the Quartet's most recent appeal to the
parties to overcome the current obstacles in the peace
process and to engage in serious negotiations on the
basis of the well-known parameters for peace. I thank
Baroness Ashton for clearly reaffirming those
parameters. We know what the issues are. What is
needed is the effective political will to address them,
with the serious ambition of reaching peace through a
comprehensive agreement on all final status issues, as
underlined by our French colleague.

Ending the 63-year conflict between Israelis and
Palestinians is the shared aspiration of all those in the
Chamber. That is surely another area where the
European Union and the United Nations can actively
work together towards a positive outcome, through
both the Quartet and the relevant United Nations
bodies.

I conclude by saying that the very fact that this
meeting is taking place reflects the important role that
regional organizations play in the overall contribution
to peace and security. That clearly results from the
United Nations Charter, and the European Union has
been part of that effort.
The Treaty of Lisbon represents yet another step
forward in the Union's vision and capacity in that area,
which we strongly believe can be instrumental to the
United Nations in pursuing its universal goals.

