Mr. Maas (Germany): Conflicts are part and parcel
of the Security Council's day-to-day business, but we
do not often have the opportunity to take a step back
and consider the causes of those conflicts. I would
therefore like to thank you, Mr. President, for inviting
us to do that today.

I would like to tell members of the Council about
someone who did not just take one step back, but around
570,000 steps. It was from up high at the International
Space Station that the German astronaut Alexander
Gerst gazed down on our planet for six months last year.
The images that he beamed back to Earth shocked many
people in Europe. The driest summer since records
began had clearly left its mark. It was even Visible from
space. What is usually a green continent at that time of
year resembled a yellow-brown steppe. I have brought
some of those pictures with me. The consequences of
that drought are crop losses running into the billions;
catastrophic forest fires, even in northern Europe; and
in some regions of Germany, fuel started to become
scarce as the water level in rivers was too low for
tanker ships.

I know that all that sounds harmless compared with
the disasters caused by climate-related extreme weather
in other parts of the world. In the Sahel, there is an
increasing number of conflicts because of the lack of
water and land for farming. As Lake Chad shrinks, the
livelihoods of entire populations are disappearing - the
perfect breeding ground for extremism and terrorism.
In Iraq, water scarcity is undermining the prospects for
lasting peace. In Afghanistan and Yemen, water tables
have fallen dramatically. We still remember the forest
fires that raged in California, and rising sea levels and
hurricanes threaten the very existence of a number of
island States, including in your region, Mr. President.

Climate change is real. It is having a global impact,
and it is increasingly becoming a threat to international
peace and security. That is why the debate about the
policy consequences of climate change belongs here
in the Security Council. It must become routine for
us to take the link between climate and security into
account in all conflict situations. We should focus on
three aspects.

First, all United Nations Member States need
access to reliable and comprehensive information. That
is why systematic reporting by the Secretary-General
on the security-related impacts of climate change is
so important.

Secondly, the Security Council needs sound risk
analyses and forecasts with clear recommendations
for action. Our Swedish friends have strengthened the
capacities of the United Nations system to that end, and
we want to continue along that path.

Thirdly, we must work even harder to translate our
knowledge about climate change into tangible policy
within the mandates of United Nations missions and,
above all, in the work ofthe United Nations in the field.
The United Nations ability to analyse the situation
on the ground must be strengthened. Our partners,
especially regional organizations, need early warning
capacities, and we must support those regions that
are most affected by climate change through quick-
impact projects.
Those are key priorities for Germany as a member
ofthe Security Council. I am glad that we are not alone
here. Last year, we established the Group of Friends on
Climate and Security, together with Nauru and partners
from around the world. The Group is supported by a
broad international network of experts. Together, we
will submit proposals to the Security Council on how
we can improve our response. We want to deepen our
discussion about the issue at a high-level conference on
climate and security to be held in Berlin on 4 June. Allow
me to invite all present to join us at that conference.

One hundred and twenty-five years after Fridtjof
Nansen's polar expedition, a new mission to the Arctic is
to be launched in September. For one year, the German
research vessel RV Polarstern will travel through the
frozen polar sea ice - some 150 days in the polar night.
Approximately 600 scientists from 17 countries will be
on board, including women and men from Belgium,
China, France, Poland, Russia, the United States and
the United Kingdom. They will all be united by a
common goal, namely, to warn humankind about the
worst consequences of climate change. Climate change
is real. It is having a global impact, and that is why it
should bring together not only scientists on board a ship,
but also us here in the Security Council. The Arctic is an
early-warning system for climate change. The Security
Council must become an early-warning system for
international policy. That is our shared responsibility.

