Mr. Barkin (United States ofAmerica): Let mejoin
others in congratulating South Africa on its extremely
successful presidency of the Security Council this
month. We also thank each of the briefers, although that
may not be the appropriate word today.

The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) was established in 1999
to resolve what was then a grave humanitarian situation
in Kosovo. I was personally privileged to be there on
the ground that year as part of the team that set up
the United States Mission, which is now the United
States Embassy. At the time and over subsequent
years, we worked closely with other missions and
with the United Nations on the ground to carry out the
requirements of the mandate, including guaranteeing
public safety and providing an interim administration
for Kosovo, which is now the Government of Kosovo.
Twenty years later, every one of the goals enumerated
as a mandate obligation and a Security Council
resolution has either been substantially completed,
or become obsolete, as the sovereign, independent
Government of Kosovo has assumed responsibility for
them. It is high time for the United Nations and the
Security Council to acknowledge that fact. The simple
truth is that while the international community and the
United Nations can provide a useful supporting role in
Kosovo's democratic development, it no longer needs
a peacekeeping mission to do that. Today, we reiterate
our call for a clear plan to reform or phase out UNMIK.

To further such efforts and move the parties towards
a stable peace, President Trump appointed Ambassador
Richard Grenell as the Special Presidential Envoy for
Serbia and Kosovo Peace Negotiations. Ambassador
Grenell has already visited the region to urge progress
towards an agreement. That is a clear demonstration of
the United States commitment. That appointment is not
about choosing sides but rather seeking a resolution.
For example, the tariffs imposed by Kosovo on Serbian
goods worsen the situation, while Serbia's campaign
against the recognition of Kosovo's independence fuels
unnecessary tensions. In addition, with respect to the
two countries, we encourage the leaders of Kosovo,
following its democratic October elections, to quickly
form a Government that is in favour of dialogue and
prepared to suspend tariffs on Serbian goods.

Likewise, we urge Serbia to refrain from
provocations and cease its campaign against the
recognition of Kosovo. Serbia and Kosovo must both
accelerate reforms to strengthen the rule of law and
address corruption and organized crime. We also
encourage both countries to involve wide segments of
society in their political processes, including women,
the importance of whose meaningful participation we
have reiterated so many times this week. I would note
that we have heard a great deal today about the incident
on 28 May. I thank Special Representative Tanin for
sharing the results of the investigation, and we hope
to see them in written form. Like every country
represented here, the United States strongly supports
Kosovo's efforts to combat smuggling, corruption and
organized crime throughout the territory of Kosovo.

The United States expresses serious concerns about
excessive police force against any United Nations staff
member and supports the safety and security of all
United Nations personnel. However, we continue to find
the presence of UNMIK staff at that police operation
troubling, as it risked, and ultimately resulted in, a
confrontation that could have been avoided. Incidents
such as that raise many questions from different
perspectives and underscore the need for a thorough
review of UNMIK's mandate and standard operating
procedures in order to ensure that the Mission does not
inhibit Kosovo's democratic development or obstruct
legitimate law enforcement efforts.

Today, we have heard a great deal of rhetoric, which
does not promote a peaceful resolution of this situation.
We all know exactly what is needed: Kosovo and Serbia
must together reach an agreement to comprehensively
normalize relations.

We,theinternationalcommunity,mustworktogether
and separately to encourage both countries to recognize
that actions that work against the normalization of
relations are fruitless and counterproductive, hindering
their economic development, social progress and
integration with Europe and the West. They will never
lead to a resolution. If we take our mandate seriously,
it is progress towards the goal of a stable peace for
all citizens of Kosovo that needs our attention and
resources, not an outmoded mission whose goals have
already been achieved.

