Mr. Rama: I am very honoured to address the Council in my capacity as Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). This opportunity for an exchange of views on contemporary security challenges has become a valuable tradition and is an expression of the excellent cooperation between our organizations. The United Nations and the OSCE are natural partners. As the world's largest regional security organization under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, the OSCE is an important pillar of the international rules-based order. Our work directly supports the implementation of the global United Nations mandate and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Since 1993, a structured framework has guided our cooperation, reinforced by a joint statement issued in December last year. During 2020, it is my resolve as OSCE Chairperson to maximize our practical cooperation. Together, we can address key challenges to international peace and security and promote respectfor human rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule of law. For Albania, assuming the chairmanship of the OSCE is a momentous event, marking a step up in our international leadership. While at the helm of the OSCE, Albania's strategic goal will be to defend multilateralism at a time where we feel that it is under attack. This is the key reason that prompted us to chair the OSCE and that inspires our bid to sit, in the future, in the Security Council. Let me now describe what we intend to do. The action of the Albanian chairmanship will revolve around three main priorities. The first is making a difference on the ground. The OSCE has proven time and again that it can deploy in challenging conflict and post-conflict settings. We will promote the work of our Organization where it is closest to our people. Thus, conflict resolution efforts are at the top of our agenda. The crisis in and around Ukraine remains the most pressing security challenge in Europe, so the unique contribution made by the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine (SMM) to reducing tensions and fostering peace, is essential. Two weeks ago I made my first visit in this new capacity to Ukraine. I met with President Zelenskyy and the entire Ukrainian leadership. I assured my counterparts of our determination and dedication to do our part to advance peace efforts, urging respect for OSCE principles and commitments and the full implementation of the Minsk agreements. We will also support efforts in the Trilateral Contact Group and the Normandy format. The resumption of dialogue in that format and outcomes of the Normandy summit are steps in the right direction. Still, there continue to be civilian casualties and loss of life, and we need primarily to ensure a full and sustainable ceasefire. What I heard in my meetings in Ukraine was a request for further OSCE monitoring in eastern Ukraine, in the framework of the mandate of the SMM. We will support the SMM in fully implementing its mandate. While travelling to the line of contact, I had an opportunity to observe the practical impact of our flagship operation on the ground. Operating in a challenging and volatile environment, the OSCE SMM offers an essential contribution towards peace. For that to continue happening, however, there is a need to ensure safe and secure access for its staff on the ground. That requires political will by the sides. I will not stop calling for it. Political will is indeed key to peace, and I could see with my own eyes how the repaired and reopened bridge at Stanytsia Luhanska is relieving the hardship of those living across the line of contact, and how the security and humanitarian aspects of the conflict go hand in hand. Such positive steps need to be replicated and multiplied. Yet the OSCE's conflict-resolution efforts are broader. During our chairmanship we are also supporting the efforts of the co-Chairs of the OSCE Minsk Group, where talks last week in Geneva saw the exploration of possible next steps to prepare populations for peace, as well as discussion of the principles and elements that could form the basis of a future settlement in the Nagorno Karabakh conflict. Looking to Georgia, together with the United Nations and the European Union, the OSCE is also a co-Chair of the Geneva international discussions, where we keep de-escalation and dialogue at the top of the agenda. While almost 12 years have passed since the conflict, people on the ground are still affected by security and humanitarian challenges, including restrictions on the freedom of movement. The chairmanship also supports the Transnistrian settlement process and stands by the results-oriented approach to the 5+2 talks to promote progress. Confidence-building measures in the economic, social, education and health fields bring populations on both banks closer together and ease their daily lives. Eventually, they will contribute to a comprehensive settlement based on the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Moldova within its internationally recognized borders, with a special status for Transnistria. Across the OSCE region, our organization also plays a key role in early warning and along all phases of the conflict cycle, in particular thanks to the network of field operations. Their action is crucial to preventing a re-emergence of conflicts and to strengthening institutions. Women continue to be disproportionally affected by conflicts in the OSCE area and, of course, across the world. They are also unjustly excluded from peace efforts. Inspired by the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), Albania will inject new momentum into promoting the role of women in peace processes. I know at first-hand, in my ownGovernment, how effective the contribution of women leaders is. I hope that this dossier will be one of enhanced cooperation between the United Nations and the OSCE. Other opportunities for reinforced mutual efforts willinclude countering violent extremism and terrorism, building on the excellent cooperation with the United Nations Office of Counter Terrorism, and addressing transnational organized crime, in cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. Albania's second priority is implementing our commitments. The instruments and institutions of the OSCE are essential safeguards for human rights and fundamental freedoms. Their impact reaches beyond our region and benefits the broader international community. Promoting the freedom of expression and the freedom of the media, safeguarding the rights of national minorities and combating violence against women are our immediate, urgent priorities. Advancing good governance is another challenge of our time. Corruption erodes the very foundations of our society and is a major threat to stability and prosperity. Therefore, Albania will promote the OSCE's efforts in combating this phenomenon and host a high-level conference on anti-corruption in Tirana. Combating trafficking in human beings is another area where the OSCE is becoming a global player. As co-Chairs of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons, we will maximize our action in partnership with the United Nations, marking 20 years since the adoption of the Palermo Protocols. Since its creation, the OSCE has developed remarkable expertise on arms control. In 2020 we intend to prioritize countering the spread of small arms and light weapons and destroying surplus stockpiles of ammunition. Our organization also excels in_ responding to emerging challenges, such as cybersecurity. In that connection, we have developed an important new set of confidence-building measures to reduce the risks of conflicts resulting from the use of information technology. Our third priority is dialogue, which some might say is the OSCE's ultimate purpose. The divisions in our region show how badly we need it. This year is the thirtieth anniversary of the Charter of Paris for a New Europe. To promote its legacy, I will make it my personal commitment to advance dialogue among OSCE States and among and within our societies - about 57 countries and more than 1 billion people, from Vancouver to Vladivostok. Key issues such as risk reduction, incident prevention and environmental protection will feature in debates among OSCE States, international organizations and civil society. We will promote the full implementation of OSCE confidence- and security- building measures to ensure military transparency and rebuild trust. Yet we see a major obstacle to dialogue in the rise of intolerance, hate crimes and hate speech. To reverse that negative trend and work towards full respect for human dignity and human rights, we will redouble efforts to promote tolerance and non-discrimination. Just before departing for New York, I opened the Tirana Conference on Combating Anti-Semitism. Together we remembered the seventy-fifth anniversary of the liberation of the Nazi concentration camps. We also proudly shared Albania's experience of providing sanctuary to Jewish people, as we were a rare example of a European country that had more Jewish people after the war than before it. Albania is really proud of its history of interreligious and cultural tolerance, which we see as essential to world peace and security. In our work as honest brokers and as Chairperson-in-Office of the OSCE, we will be inspired by our tradition of tolerance, openness and respect. To face today's broad range of complex challenges, global action must draw on, and coordinate the work of, regional organizations. The OSCE is an effective partner of the United Nations and a venue for promoting the idea that great Power competition must give way to great Power cooperation. I believe that the basic principles of the Helsinki Final Act - respect for sovereignty, territorial integrity and defence of human rights - are still today, as they were back then, a simple and effective recipe for security, prosperity and a future of peace. Our task for the year ahead will be to safeguard those principles. Together, now more than ever, the United Nations and the OSCE can be decisive for peace.
