Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We would like
to take this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of June, and would equally like to express our
sincere gratitude to the delegation of Azerbaijan for the
manner in which it steered the work of the Council in
May.

Let me offer our sincere gratitude to Mr. Luis
Moreno-Ocampo for his progress reports. As this is
his final report to the Council, I would also like to join
others in expressing my delegation's appreciation for his
tireless efforts over the past nine years. I wish him well
in his future endeavours. Allow me also to congratulate
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, who will soon take over the hot
seat of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC). I am confident that she will lead the fight
against impunity with fearlessness and integrity.

As a State party to the ICC, South Africa is fully
committed to all the objectives of the Rome Statute
system, particularly the dual purpose of fighting impunity
while promoting the preservation of peace, security and
the well-being of the world. We are convinced that,
when all is said and done, those who have committed
international crimes must be held accountable. We are
also very much aware that the victims on whose behalf
all our actions are taken will find little comfort if we do
not do all that is politically feasible to facilitate an end
to the conflict. It is only by ending that conflict that the
people of Darfur will find security and be able to live in
dignity. With that in mind, we believe that the Council
should utilize the Court as a tool to promote political
dialogue in the search for peace and justice in Darfur,
and indeed in the whole of the Sudan. The efforts of the
African Union (AU) in particular should be supported.

We have taken note of the decision of the Pre-Trial
Chamber to issue an arrest warrant against Abdelrahim
Mohamed Hussein, Minister of Defence of the
Government of the Sudan, on 51 counts of crimes against
humanity and war crimes. We note that this has resulted
in an increase in the number of outstanding warrants. We
have also noted the decision of the Pre-Trial Chamber
on 13 December 2011 concerning the non-cooperation
of two African States in relation to the President of the
Sudan. In that connection, we have had the opportunity
to study an AU communique of 14 December 2011 on
the Pre-Trial Chamber's decision that raises a number
of legal questions.

South Africa remains very concerned about
the report's allegations about continuing genocide,
aerial bombardments, attacks on civilians, sexual
and gender-based crimes and the recruitment of child
soldiers. Such allegations serve to strengthen our
resolve that a political solution to ending the violence
must be found as a matter of urgency. South Africa has
always advocated a two-track approach to the Darfur
situation, one that recognizes not only a judicial track,
aimed at ensuring accountability and justice for crimes
committed, but also a political track, designed to find
lasting peace.

Our search for that peace is inspired by the desire
to ensure that the crimes that have been committed
and are allegedly still being committed cease, and that
the people of Darfur can find security and be able to
live in a dignified way. In our search for justice and
accountability, that political track should be kept
constantly in mind. It is, after all, for the victims that
we are expending all these efforts. Relieving their plight
should therefore be at the forefront of our concerns.

The Council, as the organ with primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
should utilize all the tools at its disposal for promoting
political dialogue in the search for a comprehensive
solution to the conflict in Darfur. It is only through a
comprehensive political solution that peace will be
found. In that regard, the Council should support the
framework for facilitation by the AU and United Nations
of the Darfur peace process. The framework represents a
key initiative aimed at addressing the pertinent issues of
supporting the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur and
bringing non-signatory participants to the negotiating
table in order to promote a cessation of hostilities.
Furthermore, it addresses the importance of supporting
internal dialogue and consultation among Darfuris.

By the same token, efforts towards peace cannot
ignore the requirements for justice. We therefore call
for implementation of the recommendations of the
AU High-level Implementation Panel on Darfur, and
particularly of the methods for ensuring accountability
that they contain. It is important that the Council take a
strategic approach in dealing with the challenges faced
by the Sudan, as we believe that will advance the cause
oflong-term peace and justice there.

We understand the Prosecutor's frustration at the
number of arrest warrants issued against indictees that
have gone unenforced. Nonetheless, we wish to warn
against the possibility referred to in the Prosecutor's
report of using the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) as an enforcement tool
for effecting ICC arrest warrants. Not only would that
be inconsistent with UNAMID's mandate, it would
also have a negative effect on UNAMID's credibility
and threaten its important peace-related objectives,
including the promotion of a peace agreement. While
the report purports not to suggest that as an option, the
mere mention of the possibility is cause for concern
to us. The report does not mention the possibility of
asking Member States or regional organizations to
execute arrest warrants. In the current state of affairs,
the ICC States parties have an obligation under the
Statute to cooperate, while the Government of the Sudan
has an obligation to comply under resolution 1593
(2005). Owing to the limited scope of that resolution,
no other State is obliged to cooperate with the ICC
in relation to the situation in Darfur. We note that the
limited scope of the duty to cooperate, as laid out in
resolution 1593 (2005), was specifically designed in
order to accommodate the interests of some permanent
members of the Council that have misgivings about
the ICC. The Council is therefore unlikely to adopt a
resolution requiring all Member States to cooperate in
the enforcement of arrest warrants.

Moreover, given that regional organizations are
not party to either the United Nations Charter or the
ICC Statute, it is difficult for us to conceive the legal
possibility of obliging regional organizations to enforce
arrest warrants issued by the ICC. If by regional
organization the Office of the Prosecutor is suggesting
that regional security arrangements be activated to effect
the arrest of persons under arrest warrants, my delegation
would view such a process as a dangerous proposal that
could add fuel to an already volatile situation.

Let me conclude by recalling that our overall
objective should be to alleviate the hardship of the men,
women and children engulfed by violence in the Sudan.
It would be a travesty if our actions resulted in the
worsening of conditions for the people in Darfur.

