I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his briefing. I would like to emphasize four points. First, allow me to highlight the dynamic created by the Pau summit, which reaffirmed the determination of France and the countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to fight terrorism and re-establish peace, security and development in the region. We recognize that it is necessary to improve security, but there must also be better governance and development if we are to enable national authorities' sustainable ownership of these processes and improve people's living conditions. We have therefore established a coalition for the Sahel with a view to better integrating the fight against terrorism, the strengthening of national capacities, support for the return of State authority, and humanitarian and development programmes. Secondly, against this backdrop, France welcomes the recent and positive steps taken to implement the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, including the start of the deployment of the reconstituted army in Kidal and other towns, the visit of the Prime Minister to the north of the country, and progress in women's participation in the peace process. I commend the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) for its work, which was instrumental in bringing about these achievements. Much work remains to be done, however, and France encourages the Malian parties to accelerate the implementation of the peace agreement, in particular through necessary progress in institutional reforms and the completion of the deployment of the reconstituted army on the basis of agreed criteria. The first round of the legislative elections, held on 29 March, was an important outcome of the national inclusive dialogue. Unfortunately, it was marked by an atmosphere of insecurity and by concerns about the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We wish to express concern at the kidnapping of opposition leader Soumaila Cisse and call for his swift release. Thirdly, the security situation in Mali remains worrying. Terrorist groups, particularly those affiliated with Da'esh or Al-Qaida, have proven their capacity to adjust. We condemn the 6 April attack against the Malian army in Bamba. Nevertheless, we see reasons for hope. Following the Pau summit, France and its G-5 Sahel partners have inaugurated joint structures and stepped up their operations. The results are evident. Dozens of terrorists have been neutralized since January, and in March the G-5 Sahel Joint Force conducted an operation unprecedented in scale in the three-border zone. We reiterate our call for greater support for the Joint Force. Another positive development is the launch of the Takuba task force to support the Malian army, together with the task force's endorsement by 11 European countries. France thanks Security Council members Belgium and Estonia, which are among those countries that have pledged troops. Finally, I would like to address the humanitarian and human rights situation in the context of the COVID-19 crisis. France is concerned about the spread of COVID-19 in Mali. We welcome the efforts of United Nations agencies and their partners; these efforts need to be supported. Ensuring safe and unimpeded humanitarian access to all people in need is also key. In Central Mali, the human rights situation remains worrying. Yet again, in February, an atrocious massacre occurred in Ogossagou. We acknowledge the efforts of the Government of Mali, but more needs to be done. Those responsible must be arrested and prosecuted. To effectively protect the people, militias must be disarmed and the Malian security forces deployed. We reiterate our support for MINUSMA's adaptation plan, which has the potential to improve the effectiveness of the Mission, including for the protection of civilians. Its success will depend on the allocation of appropriate resources and on the capacity to generate new forces. We call on troop-contributing countries to respond to the Secretariat's requests in this regard.
