Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): Acts of
terrorism kill, injure or intimidate many hundreds of
innocent men, women and children each year. But they do
more than that. Terrorist acts, by their indiscriminate
nature, their defiant rejection of the norms of civilized
behaviour and their challenge to the rule of law constitute
a challenge to the authority of those States on whose
territory they are committed and a threat to the wider
peace and security of the international system. The
Council has addressed a number of terrorist outrages in
the past, not least the tragedy of Lockerbie, the bombing
of the United States Embassies in Dar es Salaam and
Nairobi and, most recently, the presence of Usama bin
Laden in Afghanistan. But we welcome this initiative to
address the problem of international terrorism in a
comprehensive fashion.

 

Terrorism is condemned by all States, each in its own
way. But the draft resolution before us today is right to
note that such condemnation, to be effective and credible,
cannot in any way be equivocal or selective. All acts of
terrorism, wherever they take place and whoever commits
them, must be unequivocally condemned, regardless of the
motive behind them. Sadly, not all members of the
international community appear ready to accept this
principle; and it is right that the Council should reiterate it
firmly in this draft resolution. Unanimous adoption of the
draft resolution will send a firm message that the
international community distances itself from those who
attempt to argue that terrorist methods may be justified in
certain circumstances because of the nature of the cause.

As Governments we are bound by the rule of law and
our international obligations. Those who practise terrorism,
a brutally indiscriminate and cowardly crime, claim a
special status outside the reach of the rule of law. Over the
past 36 years, the Member States of the United Nations
have decided to oppose that claim in a variety of ways, not
least by carefully negotiating 11 international anti-terrorism
conventions, which cover such acts as hijacking of aircraft
and shipping, hostage-taking and the illegal use of
explosives. The United Kingdom has ratified 10 of those
conventions, and signed the eleventh, the terrorist bombing
Convention, on the day it was opened for signature here in
New York.

Taken together, these Conventions represent a body of
international law which lays the foundation of the
international community's response to terrorism. As well as
providing a framework for cooperation between States, they
are a key tool by which terrorists may be brought to justice.
The Conventions establish an international legal regime,
based on the principle of universal jurisdiction, which
imposes on States parties the requirement to prosecute or
extradite suspected terrorists. It is essential, as the five
permanent members of the Security Council reiterated in
their statement of 23 September, to deny terrorists safe
havens. There can be no hiding place for terrorists, no place
where they can feel secure or beyond the reach of the law.
As the draft resolution before us makes clear, it is
important for all Member States to become parties to these
conventions, in order to turn the regime which we have
created into a universal one.

The draft resolution before us rightly draws attention
to the key role of the United Nations in strengthening
international cooperation against terrorism and promoting
enhanced coordination among States and within
international and regional organizations. In this regard, the
United Kingdom is pleased that the Sixth Committee of
the General Assembly will soon consider the text of a
new draft convention on the suppression of terrorist
financing, agreed in its working group on terrorism. We
are indebted in particular to the Government of France for
its skill in bringing this work to fruition. Terrorists are
increasingly well-funded and adept at transferring funds
across borders. Speedy adoption of this new convention
will be an important step forward. Similarly, the pending
convention against acts of nuclear terrorism must be
finalized as quickly as possible.

I am grateful to the Russian Federation for taking
the lead on this subject at this time. By rejecting peaceful
methods and choosing violence, or the threat of violence,
to further their aims, terrorists fly in the face of the
purposes and principles of the United Nations set out in
the Charter. We must move beyond the mere
condemnation of terrorism, important as that is, and take
up the urgent task of finding practical ways to combat the
continuing threat. Adoption of this draft resolution will
demonstrate that we mean business.

