Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): This afternoon, the
Secretary-General is arriving in Baghdad on a crucial
mission to try to defuse a crisis that has been the focus of
worldwide attention for weeks. Not only are the good
offices of the Secretary-General being utilized in their
most direct form, but he has also embarked on his trip
with the full and unanimous backing of the Security
Council and United Nations Member States. I would like
to take this opportunity, on behalf of my Government, to
restate our firm wishes for his success in seeking a
peaceful, diplomatic solution to the current crisis.

A couple of weeks ago, we received the
supplementary report of the Secretary-General on the
humanitarian situation in Iraq. It is worrying reading. In
almost all sectors - food/nutrition, health, electricity and
others - the situation is described as grave and
deteriorating. It has been clear to us all that something
had to be done urgently to address the alarming
humanitarian situation and to alleviate the plight of the
Iraqi population. A significant expansion of the so-called
oil-for-food programme could meet that end.

 

That is why, together with the United Kingdom and
Portugal, Sweden engaged in an effort to try to put the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General into a Security Council resolution. Our
aim was to find common ground that would enable this
Council to give unanimous support to an expansion of the
humanitarian programme in Iraq.

A comprehensive approach is the proper response to
the needs of the people of Iraq. Through the adoption of
this draft resolution, crucial resources will be made
available for medicine and food, as well as for other sectors
such as water, sanitation, agriculture and electricity. The
expanded programme will support vulnerable groups, in
particular children, and the effectiveness and flexibility of
the programme will be further enhanced when the
distribution plan envisaged for the implementation of the
draft resolution is approved.

By adopting the draft resolution before us, the Security
Council will demonstrate its determination to help alleviate
the humanitarian crisis in Iraq. But the oil-for-food
programme alone cannot satisfy all the humanitarian needs
of the Iraqi people and was never intended to do so. We
should keep in mind that the oil-for-food programme is a
temporary arrangement. It will no longer be necessary once
Iraq fulfils the requirements of all relevant Security Council
resolutions and the sanctions are subsequently lifted.
Meanwhile, the Government of Iraq continues to have a
responsibility for the needs of its population, of course, and
must also cooperate fully with the United Nations in the
implementation of this complex and unprecedented
humanitarian programme. At the same time, the United
Nations, on its part, must continuously make sure that the
process is running as smoothly as possible.

We believe that a unanimous vote in favour of this
draft resolution would send a clear and important signal to
the Iraqi Government at this point. We are also convinced
that such a demonstration of unity would be conducive to
the talks in which the Secretary-General will soon be
engaged in Baghdad.

