Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): Let me begin by wishing
you, Mr. President, and all the other members of the
Security Council a most prosperous and healthy new year
and by congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January. I should also like to thank your predecessor,
Ambassador Bakuramutsa of Rwanda, for presiding over
the Council's work in December 1994.

We join you, Mr. President, and the Security Council
in expressing sincere condolences to the families of the
victims of the deadly earthquake that struck the region of
Kobe in Japan two days ago. May I ask the Permanent
Representative of Japan to convey this message of
sympathy to his Government and to all those who are
mourning their loved ones.

Poland welcomes the "Supplement to an Agenda for
Peace", submitted by the Secretary-General on the occasion
of the fiftieth anniversary of the Organization. Aimed at
improving United Nations performance in the main area of
the Organization's responsibility - namely, the
protection of international peace and security - the
document contains both an evaluation of United Nations
achievements and a number of inspiring ideas regarding
the future of the United Nations.

We believe that the Secretary-General rightly
emphasizes that the United Nations offers the best and
most promising avenues to address current and possible
future threats to international peace and security. This was
true in the not-too-distant past, and it is so now, when we
are witnessing a significant rise in intra-State, often
violent, conflicts, as opposed to the inter-State wars more
frequent in the cold-war world. We share the Secretary-
General's view that sustainable and harmonious social and
economic development constitutes the best remedy for
those conflicts. It is with this in mind that Poland will
continue to support the work of the social and economic
sectors of the Organization, as they are both an important
element of the early-warning system and an indispensable
instrument of post-conflict reconstruction. The Polish
delegation shares the Secretary-General's view that the
way we deal with today's qualitatively new threats to
international security has to correspond better to the root
causes and nature of these threats.

Further discussion is needed on the development of
the concepts of preventive diplomacy, conflict
management and post-conflict recovery. The regional
organizations are in a position to contribute significantly
to this discussion. Development of the cooperation
between them and the United Nations would greatly
facilitate our work. I am thinking in particular about the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
which has garnered significant and unique experience
while dealing with the peace and security problems in the
area perhaps most affected by the post-cold-war changes.

It is also our view that peace-keeping operations will
continue to be a main instrument in managing crisis
situations for the foreseeable future. The Secretary-
General is right when he calls for an urgent, in-depth and
up-to date examination of United Nations performance in
this respect. No doubt the overall picture which emerges
from such an examination will be positive. But there is
still room for further improvement. United Nations peace-
keeping should be fully mandated and better planned,
organized and financed.

There is potential for improvement in the United
Nations peace-keeping operations through certain
readjustments to coordination mechanisms within the

 

Organization itself, as well as between the Secretariat and
the contributors concerned. We recognize the complexity of
this issue. The best thing that we can and should do now is
to address them fully and sincerely with a clear will to
come to satisfactory conclusions. A part of that work has
already been done. We thank the delegations of Canada,
Norway and the Netherlands for their efforts to facilitate
the discussion on the refinement of the peace-keeping
mechanisms.

At this point I would like to mention the Polish
participation in United Nations peace-keeping operations.
About 2,000 Polish troops are now serving under the
United Nations banner. The peace-keeping training center
in the Polish city of Kielce became operational more than
a year ago. Poland has committed itself to designating a
logistic unit to be included in the United Nations stand-by
forces in 1996. May I assure the Council that in the future
Poland will also do its best to respond positively to United
Nations requests.

Poland attaches particular importance to the issue of
collective sanctions, which is extensively dealt with in the
Secretary-General's position paper. Appropriately and
carefully designed and applied sanctions are now, and will
remain, an indispensable instrument at the disposal of the
international community. Poland stands ready to take part
in a detailed discussion on this subject.

Our approach to the sanctions has been best defined
by the Polish Minister for Foreign Affairs, who, in a
statement to the General Assembly, said that there should
be arrangements alleviating the burdens incurred by
countries which participate in economic measures against
the offender State and that it was clear that Article 50 of
the Charter did not constitute a sufficient remedy.

Finally, the adverse implications of the United Nations
current financial situation for the improvement of the
United Nations peace-keeping capabilities cannot be
overlooked. There are not many countries in a position to
claim a flawless performance in this regard. Having said
that, I should like to point out that in many cases those
countries' conscientiousness in discharging their financial
obligations depends heavily on the punctuality of
reimbursement to them for outlays they made earlier in
regard to their country's participation in peace-keeping
operations.

These are the initial remarks offered by the Polish
delegation at this juncture of our deliberations.

I should like to thank you once again, Mr. President,
for convening this important meeting and to declare our
readiness to contribute further to the discussion.

