Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for inviting
my country to take part in this very important debate. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
very instructive briefing this morning. The subject of
today's debate has become a source of growing concern
for the international community, given the impasse
in the Middle East peace process and the outbreak of
new conflicts, which are proving very difficult for the
international community to resolve. Overcoming these
multidimensional challenges demands coordinated
and resolute action by the international community,
particularly the Security Council, at regional and
global levels.

The quest for a solution to the Palestinian issue,
which remains a core issue for the Middle East, must be
a priority for the international community, which has to
uphold its full responsibilities in the area. Nevertheless,
it must be acknowledged that the halt in negotiations
since 2014, along with the ongoing colonizing
settlement policy, the confiscation of land, the closing
of border crossing points, blockades and the judaization
of the Holy City, in disregard for international law and
Security Council resolutions, as well as the increasing
relapses into violence, as testified to in the recent
escalation ofviolence at the cost ofthe lives of innocent
civilians, are not helping to bring about a two-State
solution, with Israelis and Palestinians living side by
side in peace and security within the 1967 borders.

In his capacity as Chair of the Al-Quds Committee
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, His
Majesty King Mohammed V1 is making every effort
to defend the Palestinian issue in general and that
of Al-Quds Al-Sharif in particular. He continues to
underscore that settling the Palestinian issue requires
preserving the legal, historic and geographic nature of
that Holy City, which is part of the Palestinian territory
occupied in 1967, in accordance with international law
and the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolutions 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016). The Kingdom
of Morocco supports a two-State solution with East
Jerusalem as the capital of the Palestinian State, within
the borders of 4 June 1967 and in accordance with
international agreements, the Arab Peace Initiative,
the Quartet road map and the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

The Kingdom of Morocco attaches great importance
to the situation in Libya, a brother country with which
it shares historic links and a common destiny as part
of the Arab Maghreb Union, which was established
under the Marrakesh Treaty in 1989. The Treaty calls
for effective solidarity among the members of the
Maghreb Union and encourages them to contribute to
international peace and security. In accordance with
its policies of good offices and the peaceful settlement
of disputes, the Kingdom of Morocco organized peace
talks in Skhirat between the Libyan factions and parties,
under the auspices of the United Nations. That led to
the Libyan Political Agreement on 17 December 2015,
which is considered the basis for a peaceful settlement
of the Libyan crisis and has received major support
from the Security Council. Morocco has repeatedly
supported the efforts of the United Nations and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya Ghassan
Salame to find a negotiated consensus political solution
among the Libyan parties, a position that was reaffirmed
during Mr. Salame's most recent visit to Morocco.
Morocco continues to play an active role
internationally and regionally in contributing to
resolving the situation in Libya, including through the
participation of our Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation ofthe Kingdom ofMorocco in
the Paris conference on 29 May. Furthermore, Morocco
also stresses the importance of ensuring Libya's
territorial integrity and non-interference in its internal
affairs, in order to enable the Libyans themselves to
arrive at a settlement. Morocco stands ready to offer the
necessary assistance to ensure reconciliation among
the Libyan parties, support the democratic process
and provide Libyans with the necessary training and
expertise to establish and run their own institutions.

Between 2014 and 2016, the scourge of terrorism
in general and foreign terrorist fighters in particular
expanded to an unprecedented degree into the Middle
East, the Sahel-Sahara and the Maghreb, where several
groups are active, particularly Al-Qaida, Da'esh and
Boko Haram. In that regard, we welcome the Security
Council's timely response aimed at suppressing such
developmentsthroughits adoptionofvariousresolutions,
in particular resolution 2178 (2014), adopted at the high-
level summit held in September 2014 (see S/PV.7272),
resolution 2253 (2015), aimed at cutting off terrorism's
financial support, and resolution 2396 (2017).

Morocco has been determined to be involved
in all the regional and international efforts to fight
this scourge. In that regard, we have hosted several
meetings on border security, including the inaugural
conference of the Border Security Initiative in El J adida,
in cooperation with the United Nations Counter-
Terrorism Centre. We are also currently co-Chair,
with the Netherlands, of the Global Counterterrorism
Forum, which has adopted several memoranda on
good practices, including The Hague-Marrakech
Memorandum on Good Practices for a More Effective
Response to the Foreign Terrorist Fighters Phenomenon.
We have also developed a national strategy for fighting
terrorism based on optimizing security governance
by updating our counter-terrorism legal framework,
combating social insecurity and promoting sustainable
human development and introducing religious reforms,
in particular by training the young imams who teach
the principles of Islam. King Mohammed has launched
initiatives to train male and female imams, including
from our brother countries in Africa and Europe, by
providing them with religious teaching based on the
values of dialogue, tolerance, moderation and respect
for others.

In conclusion, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, once again for organizing today's
debate. I can assure you, Sir, of Morocco's commitment
to peace, security and development in our region
and beyond.

