Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Before I begin my briefing, allow me
to warmly welcome His Excellency Prime Minister
Aristides Gomes and His Excellency Mr. Joao Ribeiro
Butiam Co, Minister for Foreign Affairs, International
Cooperation and Communities. Their presence at this
meeting is clear proof of the considerable interest in the
new dynamic promoted by the authorities in Guinea-
Buissau to bring the country back to a state of peace,
stability and respect for constitutional order.

I have the honour to inform the members of
the Security Council, in my capacity as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2048 (2012), concerning Guinea-Bissau, of
my visit to Bissau and Conakry from 25 to 29 June. It
was the second visit to Guinea-Bissau by the Sanctions
Committee Chair, the most recent visit having been
undertaken by my predecessor, Ambassador Rosselli
of Uruguay, in mid-June 2017. The purpose of my visit
was to gain first-hand information on the effective
implementation of the sanctions measures imposed
under resolution 2048 (2012) and to discuss progress in
the restoration of constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau.
I was accompanied on my visit by a representative of
the Secretariat. Representatives of the local Embassies
of China, cote d'Ivoire, the Russian Federation and
the United Kingdom joined me and participated in the
meetings I held in Bissau and Conakry.

During our discussions, I emphasized the
importance of continuing the dialogue and engagement
with the many national and international stakeholders
with the aim of seeking a way out of the political
impasse in Guinea-Bissau and finding a lasting solution.
I also stressed that the international community should
continue to support Guinea-Bissau, especially in
the light of the upcoming legislative and presidential
elections and related technical and financial issues, and
that it should take concrete measures to create a stable
political environment.

I emphasized that the Security Council continues
to attach importance to the situation in Guinea-Bissau
and that the overall objective of the sanctions regime
was not to punish, pressure or change the leadership,
but rather to contribute to the establishment of stability
in the country and support positive change in the
subregion. There is still some confusion about the scope
of the travel-ban restrictions, and I made sure to explain
the procedures to the authorities during my visit.

While the situation in Guinea-Bissau remains
generally stable and shows encouraging progress,
the political uncertainty in the light of the upcoming
elections threatens to undermine the calm in the
country. To date, the constitutional order does not seem
to be directly threatened, but the uncertainty over the
division of power between the President and the Prime
Minister continues to be the basis of political disputes.
In addition, the political leaders still have to draft
and implement important reforms, particularly in the
security and justice sectors.

International and regional efforts and initiatives
to find a lasting solution to the political crisis seem to
have been effective so far. However, the international
community should continue to monitor the situation in
the country closely, also taking into account that some
key elements of the road map for peace envisaged in
the Conakry Agreement on the Implementation of the
Economic Community of West African States Roadmap
for the Resolution of the Political Crisis in Guinea-
Bissau still need to be implemented.

The security situation is stable given that no
incident of significant Violence has been recorded,
the army does not interfere in politics and, in general,
human rights are respected. However, there is still
great concern over the activities related to transnational
crime and illicit trafficking. The feeling and the View
of most of the interlocutors was that the sanctions had
been effective in deterring possible disruptive elements.
However, many interlocutors continue to demand that
sanctions be imposed against politicians responsible for
the political crisis, which is still perceived as an issue
that has not yet been fully resolved.

I took note of the initiatives undertaken by the
Security Council, the African Union, the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
ECOWAS Mediator for Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Alpha
Conde, President of the Republic of Guinea, the
European Union, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) and the international
community with a view to supporting and encouraging
Guinea-Bissau in overcoming the political stalemate.
The visit reflects the positive momentum for
cooperation between the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012) and the Government
of Guinea-Bissau, which should be maintained and
improved. I also noted that the political actors and civil
society were keen to discuss and to put forward their
views to the Committee, which leads me to believe that
an ongoing dialogue between the Committee and the
Council and the Bissau-Guineans is necessary.

On 16 July, I reported to the Committee and
provided recommendations. In particular, I focused
my attention on the need for a timely revision of
the sanctions list, taking into account the current
circumstances, the developments in Guinea-Bissau
and the Views expressed by the relevant interlocutors
interviewed during my visit.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the authorities
of Guinea-Bissau and Guinea-Conakry for their warm
welcome and for the fruitful meetings held, as well as
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Jose Viegas Filho, the United Nations Resident
Coordinator and Resident Representative of the United
Nations Development Programme, Ms. Seraphine
Wakana, and her team for the excellent support provided
during my visit.

