Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset, Mr. President, to express my sincere thanks to
you and to your delegation for your initiative to include the
question of terrorism on our agenda for this month, as well
as for the preparation of the draft resolution that aims at
drawing the attention of world public opinion to the gravity
of the phenomenon of terrorism, which has spread to many
countries and has become a threat to international peace and
security.

The first things that come to mind when dealing with
the question of terrorism are who stands behind and
supports acts of terrorism and who provides terrorists
with money, weapons and safe havens.

What we are dealing with at this time are acts of
violence carried out indiscriminately by certain groups
against a country, from outside or from within, against
civilians or civilian targets, with the aim of causing fear
and intimidation among innocent civilians and creating an
atmosphere of chaos in order to destabilize that country and
threaten its security. Acts of terrorism could not continue to
be perpetrated without outside support, whether by
individuals, groups or States. The worst form of that
support is States' provision of safe havens for terrorists, as
well as the means of communication necessary to spread
their destructive thoughts and to instigate the commission
of acts of terrorism.

The international community must tighten the noose
around terrorists, wherever they may be, by depriving them
of safe havens and of the necessary financing, especially
since they exploit the principles of human rights and
international humanitarian law by hiding behind it in order
to acquire refugee status.

There is another form of terrorism that is no less grave
than terrorism perpetrated by individuals: State terrorism.
This is what we witnessed during the Balkan war, as well
as in Kosovo. The occupied Arab territories in Palestine,
Syria and southern Lebanon witness many forms of such
State terrorism, as exemplified by Israel's demolition of
the homes of Palestinian citizens, the usurpation of their
land resources and the denial of their freedoms and basic
rights. Therefore, we urge for the sake of justice that the
peace process should move at a much faster pace than is
currently the case, on the basis of land for peace and the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, in order to
achieve a just and fair peace.

The international community should establish the
necessary legal instruments to cover all aspects relating to
combating terrorism, and this should include the provision
of a clear, precise definition of the concept of terrorism.
This could constitute an important and new starting point
to combat terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.

In this regard, my country supports the convening of
an international conference on the definition of terrorism
and the establishment of machinery through which States
can cooperate in exchanging information relevant to
combating terrorism. Bahrain is convinced that there is a
need to arrive at an understanding among States on the
strengthening of the principle of the extradition of those
suspected of acts of terrorism.

My delegation believes that there is a need for
comprehensive, integrated cooperation between States in
the field of legal and juridical assistance. There is also a
need for international cooperation to arrive at a unified
understanding of political asylum and not to allow
terrorists to take advantage of the opportunities that this
principle provides to find safe haven.

My country believes in the positive role that can be
played by various media in exposing terrorists. The State
of Bahrain supports that role and believes it should have
the continuous support and encouragement of
Governments.

Bahrain believes that there is a need for wider
international understanding of the concept of the
protection of human rights, which is used by terrorists as
a pretext to achieve their objectives.

The promotion of the concept of national sovereignty
and the maintenance of security and stability for peoples
are basic concerns that should compel members of the
international community to intensify their cooperation in
combating terrorism. Furthermore, the concept of peoples'
right to self-determination and to resist foreign
occupation - which has been endorsed by the relevant

 

resolutions of the General Assembly - must not be
equated with the concept of overthrowing legitimate
Governments in order to assume power.

Finally, the various working groups mandated by
relevant General Assembly resolutions to draft conventions
to combat terrorism constitute a powerful instrument for
countries to use in codifying their efforts in this regard.

It is for all these considerations that my delegation
supports and will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before the Council.

