Mr. Rastam (Malaysia): Mr. President,
congratulations to you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I also
congratulate the Permanent Representative of Spain for
his outstanding work as President last month.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the delegation of Tunisia on behalf
of the Group of Arab States. My delegation considers
that the question that is now before the Council bears
great importance for the maintenance of peace and
security in the Middle East region and the world at
large.

Malaysia is gravely concerned over the escalation
of violence in Gaza over the past few days. The acts of
violence and terror against civilians, including women,
children and non-combatants, are unacceptable and
deserve to be condemned by the Council. Similarly,
Malaysia believes that the Council should condemn the
excessive and indiscriminate use of force and physical
destruction arising from broad military incursion and
attacks by the Israeli occupying forces in the area of
northern Gaza Strip, including in and around the
Jabaliya refugee camp. We are saddened over the
extensive human casualties and destruction, which has
exacerbated the dire humanitarian situation in the area.
These must be stopped immediately. The Security
Council must exercise its role and responsibility in this
regard.

Malaysia urges members of the Quartet to play a
more vigorous role and undertake all necessary
measures to reverse such a situation. The road map
must be resuscitated, and both parties should
immediately implement their obligations under the
road map. The international community must prevail
upon Israel to desist from continuing with its policy of
collective punishment and acts of aggression against
the Palestinians. In addition, the international
community must render all necessary assistance to the
Palestinian Authority to strengthen its security
apparatus. Malaysia commends ongoing assistance by
several countries towards this end.

Malaysia, as Chairman of both the Non-Aligned
Movement and the tenth Islamic Summit Conference,
will continue to do its part by working with all relevant
parties, including the Quartet and the Security Council,
to bring about a just and durable peace in the Middle
East. Malaysia remains convinced that an independent
and sovereign State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, would be the best hope for lasting peace
in the region, with both Israel and Palestine living
peacefully, side by side, within secure and recognized
borders.

Malaysia reiterates its long-standing position that
the Security Council must seriously consider approving
the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping force
or the placement of an international monitoring
mechanism in the occupied Palestinian territory to
oversee the implementation of the road map. That
would help create an environment of confidence for the
speedy resuscitation of the road map. Israel must
realize that a military solution is not the answer to the
conflict. Both sides must return to the negotiating table
and seek a political solution.

The continued plight and suffering of the
Palestinian people remain a tragic embodiment of the
consequences of the non-implementation of resolutions
and the non-enforcement of the decisions of the
Security Council. There are ways in which the Council
can ensure compliance with its resolutions and
decisions by Israel. Malaysia calls upon the Council to
do so now to ensure that justice and the rule of law will
prevail in the occupied Palestinian territory.

