Mr. Fowler (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
will vote in favour of the draft resolution before us on the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL).
The draft resolution gives expression to the international
community's commitment to peace in Sierra Leone. We
are deeply grateful for the sacrifices made by the
Economic Community of West African States Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG), which has been working towards
stability and security in Sierra Leone for the past three
years. The decision to prolong ECOMOG'S stay in order
to ensure a smooth transition to a more robust United
Nations presence is much appreciated. We also commend
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,

 

Mr. Adeniji, for his tireless work in support of the
restoration of a durable peace in Sierra Leone.

(spoke in English)

In adopting this draft resolution today, the Security
Council is reaffirming its commitment to supporting the
Lome Peace Agreement and to bringing peace to Sierra
Leone. The next phase of UNAMSIL will take on some of
the heavy responsibilities that have to this point been
ECOMOG'S, notably support for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme,
maintenance of law and order in the main centres and
protection of key facilities. In discharging these critical
tasks, the Mission will have the benefit of a strong mandate
that provides for the protection of civilians, within, of
course - as the draft resolution notes - its capabilities
and areas of deployment. Canada believes that this is a
sign that we are learning from past mistakes and that
current and future peacekeeping missions in Africa will be
able to count on the full support of the international
community.

For Sierra Leone, this commitment is both timely and
necessary. More than 30,000 former combatants are yet to
be disarmed. Some 4,000 children abducted during the war
are still missing. Large areas of the country remain
inaccessible to aid agencies; the humanitarian and human-
rights situation in those areas can only be imagined.
Banditry is a constant menace. The next phase of
UNAMSIL ought to provide much-needed stability and
security, ensuring improved humanitarian access and vital
support to the DDR process. Canada will help to sustain
these objectives by contributing $9 million towards peace-
building projects, including DDR, and the reintegration of
war-affected children. We are also pleased to contribute
military observers to UNAMSIL.

Canada welcomes the profound concern for human
security manifest in this draft resolution. The inclusion of
provisions for landmine action and for the conscientious
management of Sierra Leone's natural resources represents
an innovation in the crafting of peacekeeping mandates. It
also shows great awareness of the fact that human security
remains a constant challenge, even after the guns fall silent.

It is our hope that this commitment will be
acknowledged and replicated by the parties to the conflict.
We are heartened by the recent joint effort by the
Government of Sierra Leone, the Revolutionary United
Front Party (RUFP) and ECOMOG to raise awareness of
and confidence in the disarmament programme. We
continue to view the situation in Sierra Leone with eyes
wide open, however, and trust that RUFP leader Foday
Sankoh's recent negative comments regarding the United
Nations do not foretell a drift from the path towards
peace. We are glad to hear from Mr. Annabi that,
indeed, Mr. Sankoh believes that he was misunderstood
in this regard.

The task ahead is, indeed, daunting. The United
Nations, with this draft resolution, is poised to make a
significant contribution to the effort. We encourage all
the leaders of Sierra Leone to work with us and bring the
suffering of their people to an end.

With regard to Ambassador Van Walsum's
suggestion and generous remarks about our efforts with
regard to the examination of how the illegal trade in
diamonds impacts on civil war in Africa, I will be
presenting the report of the expert panel to the Council in
mid-March. I expect that, at that time, we will be hearing
a fair amount about the vicious nexus between the illegal
marketing of diamonds and the purchase of war materiel
and, more generally, about the truly corrosive nature of
the impact of these high-value materials on such volatile
situations as those which pertain in Sierra Leone and
Angola and on the individuals and Governments involved.
I therefore wholeheartedly agree with Ambassadors Van
Walsum and Chowdhury that further study, perhaps
following the presentation of the report of the expert
panel next month, on these issues within the Council is
indeed timely and warranted.

