Ms. Shalev (Israel): I thank the Secretary-
General for honouring this meeting with his presence.

Eight years: For eight years the citizens of
southern Israel have suffered the trauma of almost
daily missile attacks from Gaza. For eight years more
than 8,000 rockets and mortar shells have targeted
Israeli towns and villages. For eight years the residents
of these towns have had a bare 15 seconds to hurry,
with their children and their elderly, to find cover
before rockets and missiles land on their houses and
schools. Fifteen seconds would not give the members
of this Council time to leave this room. No State would
permit such attacks on its citizens; nor should it. But
Israel sought every way to avoid the current conflict.

In 2005 Israel removed from Gaza every one of
its soldiers and every one of its 8,000 civilians, along
with their homes and schools, their synagogues and
cemeteries. We did this to try to create an opening for
peace, and for Palestinians to build a prosperous
society.

But the Hamas regime that brutally seized control
of Gaza, murdering scores of fellow Palestinians, has
no interest in peace and prosperity. It is vehemently
opposed to negotiations between Israelis and
Palestinians. It rejects the Annapolis process which
was commended by this Council last month in
resolution 1850 (2008). Hamas has no interest in
making peace with the enemy. For Hamas, peace is the
enemy. Its only interest is in establishing a regime of
tyranny for Gazans and of terror for Israelis.

Hamas likes to tell the Palestinians that it was
terrorism that brought Israel to withdraw from Gaza in
2005. But the truth is plain to see: it was the hope for
peace that led us to withdraw from Gaza, and the
terrorism of Hamas that compelled us to re-enter. In
our efforts to avoid confrontation, we also agreed six
months ago to an Egyptian-brokered tahadiya - a
situation of calm. Hamas violated this arrangement on
a daily basis. Over 365 rockets and mortar shells were
fired during this period. And all the while it used the
so-called calm to build up its supplies of weapons and
rockets, smuggled through tunnels into the Gaza Strip.
Yet still we restrained ourselves.

But then, Hamas unilaterally announced the end
of the tahadiya and began to wage a new campaign of
rocket attacks against Israel's citizens with the
weapons it had smuggled into Gaza during the calm.
Then, we could not restrain ourselves any longer. With
its new Iranian-made missiles, Hamas is now able to
reach as far as the cities of Ashdod and Beer Sheva,
placing over one million Israelis in the shadow of its
terror.

Many in this Chamber have condemned Hamas's
terrorist attacks, and we welcome this statement of
basic principle. But the families at home in the city of
Sderot and the children at school in Kibbutz Netiv
Ha'asara will not be protected by these condemnations.

In the face of such terrorism we have no choice.
We have to defend ourselves, not from the Palestinian
people, but from the terrorists who have taken them
hostage; not to gain territory or power, but to
demonstrate that our restraint was not weakness and to
give our citizens the basic right of a normal life.

In this campaign, Israel has dealt the Hamas
infrastructure a major blow. Dozens of its terrorist
factories and training bases have been destroyed, its
stockpiles of rockets have been significantly depleted
and many of the tunnels used to smuggle weapons have
been put out of action. But we have not only sought to
change reality for our citizens; we have also sought to
uphold the values that set us apart from the terrorists.

Hamas rejects every core humanitarian principle.
Instead of waging its battle openly between
combatants, it directs its attacks against civilians.
Some have called these attacks "indiscriminate", but
that is not the case. Hamas attacks are very
discriminate, directed deliberately at innocent men,
women and children. In the past week alone, Hamas
rockets have landed on a school and on a kindergarten.

Hamas shows a similar disdain for the lives of
Palestinians. It has adopted the terrorist tactic - the
coward's tactic - of using civilians as shields while its
leaders themselves flee from combat with Israel's
soldiers and make pathetic demonstrations of bravado
from their bunkers. It hides its missiles and terrorist
bases in homes, hospitals and mosques, and, as we saw
earlier today, deliberately launches attacks from in and
around schools and United Nations facilities, with
tragic results.

For Israel, every civilian death - Israeli or
Palestinian - is a tragedy. In responding to terrorist
attacks that show no respect for human life, either
Israeli or Palestinian, Israel takes steps to protect both.
It takes every possible measure to limit civilian
casualties, even where those measures endanger the
lives of our soldiers or the effectiveness of their
operations. The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) have
dropped tens of thousands of leaflets and made
thousands of phone calls to Palestinian civilians,
beseeching them to leave the areas of terrorist
operation to avoid harm. But let this be clear: failing to
respond to terrorists simply because they are using
civilians as cover is not and cannot be an option. To do
so would simply broadcast an invitation to every
terrorist group in the world to set up shop inside a
hospital or a kindergarten.

Unlike the Hamas regime, which has targeted
crossing points to prevent the entry of aid and has
prevented Palestinians from boarding ambulances,
Israel respects its humanitarian responsibilities. It has
permitted Palestinians in need of medical aid to enter
Israel for treatment and has set up a special
humanitarian situation room to coordinate with the aid
organizations working in Gaza. Since the start of the
fighting, Israel has facilitated the entry into Gaza of
more than 540 trucks, delivering more than 10,000 tons
of humanitarian assistance. In fact, just a few days ago,
Israel was asked by the World Food Programme to halt
supplies of food shipments since the warehouses were
full.

It is time for the international community to place
responsibility for the humanitarian situation in Gaza
where it lies: on the shoulders of the terrorists who
have chosen violence over peace. It lies on the
shoulders of those Hamas leaders who, from their
bunkers and luxury hotels in Damascus, have
abandoned the people of Gaza and have chosen to
endanger and exploit them rather than protect them.

This conflict is a fundamental clash between two
world views, between moderates and extremists,
between those who seek to preserve life and humanity
and those who glorify death and destruction. As Hamas
spokesman Fathi Hamad was proud to announce on
Al-Aqsa Television,

"Palestinians have created a human shield of
women, children the elderly and the jihad
fighters, as if to say to the Zionist enemy, 'We

77,

desire death as you desire life .

For that reason, there is - and can be - no
equivalence between Israel and the Hamas terrorists we
are confronting. There is no equivalence between a
State that equips civilian homes with bomb shelters and
a terrorist regime that fills them with missiles. There is
no equivalence between military commanders who
struggle daily to ensure that their operations are
conducted in accordance with the requirements of
international humanitarian law and the terrorists who
flout that law by keeping Corporal Gilad Shalit captive,
without even allowing the International Committee of
the Red Cross access to see him - for 930 days. There
is no equivalence between a State using force in
exercise of its right to self-defence and a terrorist
organization for which the very resort to violence is
unlawful.

No doubt, there will be much discussion today
about the credibility of the Council and the need for a
resolution. But the credibility of this Council is
measured not by the pieces of paper it issues, but by
the values it upholds. Is the Council's credibility
strengthened when it calls for a ceasefire that
effectively equates a terrorist group with a State
defending itself against it? Does anyone here truly
believe that Hamas will heed the words of this
Council?

This is not about a "ceasefire" with terrorism or a
mutual cessation of hostilities. It is about ensuring the
end of terrorism from Gaza and the end of smuggling
weapons into Gaza, so that there is no longer a need for
Israeli defensive operations.

This conflict will end not when terrorism is
appeased or accommodated, but when the international
community stands determined and united against it.
Anything less than that will only embolden Hamas,
lengthening this round of the conflict and accelerating
the next. Anything less will reward Iran, the coward's
coward, which hides behind terrorists as they hide
behind civilians, and encourage its worldwide efforts
to use Hamas and other terrorist groups to fight its
wars on the cheap. And anything less will be a major
setback for hopes for peace and prosperity for the
Palestinians. As long as Hamas rules Gaza, rejecting
the Quartet principles and seeking Israel's destruction,
Gaza can never be part of a Palestinian State.

There are many in this Council who speak in
favour of peace. But it is not enough to support peace;
we have to confront those who work to destroy it. For
that reason, the current military operation is not an
obstacle to peace; it is a prerequisite for peace.

We, the people of Israel, listened to the
international community when you told us to withdraw
from Gaza and promised that that would give us the
credibility to respond forcefully should Gaza turn into
a launching pad for terrorism. We listened when you
promised us that acting with restraint during the period
of calm would give us the credibility to fight back
should the rocket attacks resume. Now is the time for
you to make good on those promises. In the clash
between life and death, between building societies and
destroying them, Hamas has taken its side. Now there
is no choice but for the international community to take
a side itself.

