Mr. Lopes da Rosa (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): My delegation welcomes the recent positive
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina. These may, in
our view, herald an era of peace in this region, which has
been ravaged by war for four years. The significant and
encouraging events that have taken place a year after the
signing of the Peace Agreement, namely the disengagement
of armies; the end of military operations; the elections of
14 September 1996, which prompted massive participation
on the part of the population; and, above all, the
establishment of the joint institutions provided for in the
Constitution, all strengthen our delegation's conviction that
Bosnia and Herzegovina will enjoy peace in the future.

However, we should note much remains to be done if
this country is to be a united society in which its people
can live in harmony and enjoy the freedom they so keenly
desire.

We call once again on all parties to show political
will and make further sacrifices to ensure the full
implementation of the Peace Agreement, and thus help
reconcile the country's communities. Guinea-Bissau has
always maintained that the conflicts in the former
Yugoslavia could be settled only on the basis of a
negotiated political solution that takes full account of
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all
States within their internationally recognized borders.

We are convinced that the prospects for peace
cannot become reality unless justice is done in the case of
the numerous victims of the fratricidal war that has
devastated Bosnia and Herzegovina. Let us not forget that
true peace can be achieved only if all citizens, and
particularly the victims of the atrocities committed in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, feel that justice has been well
served. To that end, the international community must not
fail in effectively preventing any recurrence of such
situations. Justice must ultimately prevail. Those who
have committed crimes against humanity must be brought
before the courts and held accountable for their acts.

That is why it is essential for us fully to support the
work of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. We hope that cooperation with the
Tribunal, which was pledged at Dayton, will be cordial
and genuine and that all States will be prepared to arrest
persons indicted for war crimes and hand them over to
the Tribunal.

The fate of thousands of refugees and displaced
persons, who are far from their homes and homeland, is
of concern to my delegation. Suitable conditions need to
be created so that these people can return home with
dignity and in safety.

We believe that the United Nations must continue to
help implement the Peace Agreement. Consequently, we
endorse the recommendation made by the Secretary-
General regarding the extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH), which must be accompanied by the necessary
financial and human resources for it to carry out its
activities. In this spirit, we join in the appeal made by the
Secretary-General in his most recent report inviting the
international community to contribute generously to the
financing of programmes to help Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We welcome the content of the draft resolution
before us, which we are about to adopt, because we look
forward to the time when all the peoples of Bosnia and
 

Herzegovina and elsewhere in the former Yugoslavia will
be able to forget the years during which the country was
torn apart and finally work together to build a better future.

