Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): Mr. President, I wish to begin
by expressing our appreciation to you for enabling the
Security Council to consider the recent developments in
East Timor in the present format. We believe that an open
briefing is most suitable, since the issue of East Timor has
been receiving serious attention, not just from Security
Council members, but also from many other United Nations
Member States present today.

I wish to make a few brief remarks concerning the
major issues referred to in the briefing by the Assistant
Secretary-General, Mr. Hedi Annabi, who briefed us with
his usual sense of comprehensiveness and lucidity, and I
thank him for the briefing. The donor conference in Tokyo
was an extremely important event. It was aimed at raising
funds to help rebuild East Timor and ended with over $500
million in pledges. We wish to express our appreciation for
the generous attitude of many donors, which testifies to
their true commitment to address the urgent and long-term
needs of East Timor. We would particularly like to stress
the fact that this was achieved in close and coordinated
partnership among the world financial institutions, the
United Nations and the East Timorese.

From among the political and factual problems on the
ground, we consider the problem of the safe and timely
return of refugees to be of paramount importance. We note
with satisfaction the agreement on establishing a joint
border commission, brokered by Ambassador Holbrooke
during his visit last month to the region, which addresses
the problem of the return of refugees.

But the picture presented by Mr. Annabi today
remains bleak. Clearly, further efforts are needed. In that
context, we wish to lend our full support to the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
others present on the ground in the effort to assure the
return of refugees in safety and dignity.

We would like to express our appreciation to
Australia, as the leading nation, for the periodic reports
on the operations of the International Force, East Timor
(INTERFET), and we emphasize the importance of the
lead taken by the regional States in that operation. We
commend INTERFET for the effective implementation of
its responsibilities under the Security Council resolution.
We are hopeful for INTERFET's early transition to a
fully-fledged peacekeeping operation. We are confident
that a period of transition from INTERFET to the United
Nations peacekeeping force will be carefully managed so
as to ensure continuity during that period. We believe that
the remarks and explanations provided to us by
Mr. Annabi today were extremely reassuring in that
regard.

Given the scope and nature of the violations of
human rights and humanitarian law that have taken place
in East Timor, Slovenia has all along supported the need
for investigations into crimes and into the efficient
delivery of justice. We believe that full reconciliation and
a new, prosperous future for East Timor will be possible
only if built on a platform of justice, equality and the rule
of law. In this context, we welcome the recent report on
the joint mission to East Timor undertaken by the three
Special Rapporteurs, in accordance with the Commission
on Human Rights resolution of 27 September 1999. We
note the recommendations made in that recently published
report. We look forward to the report by the commission
of inquiry, which is due at the end of this month.

Another important element in rebuilding East Timor
is the reconciliation process, which is essential for
achieving stable conditions for sustainable development.
We strongly hope that the next round of reconciliation
talks will make further progress in this area.

We would like to emphasize the strong commitment
and interest of the East Timorese themselves in
constructively contributing to all aspects of shaping their
common future. In that context, we welcome the
establishment of the National Consultative Commission as
the essential instrument for the meaningful participation
of East Timorese in decision-making and for
strengthening the independence process of East Timor.

 

Finally, we would like to express our appreciation to
the Secretary-General, his Special Representative,
Mr. Vieira de Mello and all others participating in the effort
to bring peace and post-conflict reconstruction in East
Timor.

