I wish to thank the German presidency of the Security Council for inviting me to speak on the great challenge of our times: the very real impact the climate crisis has on security and the global response that is needed. Accordingly, I submit the following statement on behalf of Mr. Josaia Voreqe Bainimarama, Prime Minister and Minister for iTaukei Affairs and Sugar Industry of Fiji. Fiji follows the work of the Security Council most closely. We directly participate in or support peace operations across the world. Our brave peacekeepers have learned from our engagements in many peace operations that the United Nations is devoting more and more effort and funds to peace operations in regions that face severe climate-induced pressures. This is not a coincidence. Ask any Fijian peacekeeper on the ground across the world, and he or she will say that water scarcity, droughts, cyclones, desertification and other natural phenomena that are directly related to climate change compound conflicts. They make competition for resources more intense. They help to radicalize disillusioned young people and increase the appeal and spread of radical ideologies. They make conflicts more protracted and political solutions more difficult to achieve. Fiji's views are consistent. The climate crisis threatens peace and stability within States and is increasingly fuelling insecurity between and among States. For Pacific small island developing States, climate change is an existential crisis. Its impacts are deep and far-reaching for all our economies. It undermines our societal cohesion, affects food security and creates deep anxiety in our populations. It also threatens the sense of peace and security that we traditionally feel in our part of the world. Fiji and all Pacific island leaders have said to the global community that rising sea levels must not have consequences for the maritime boundaries of our ocean States. We did not cause the sea-level rise, and sea-level rise must not threaten, erode or limit our national sovereignty. As large ocean States, we depend on our oceans for our livelihoods. Yet warming oceans have triggered a large-scale displacement of migratory fish stocks from our exclusive economic zones into the cooler waters of the eastern Pacific. The loss to Pacific islands from this one situation alone is in excess of $1 billion per year - almost twice as much as the total annual official development assistance to the Pacific States. It is a devastating blow to the small economies of these island States and to their stability, and the threat is growing. While the Security Council expends much of its energy on long-standing geopolitical frustrations, we have a climate crisis that is persistently wreaking havoc across the Pacific. Try telling my colleague the Honourable Bob Loughman, Prime Minister of Vanuatu, that the Security Council will respond to the climate crisis at a slow pace. His nation is midway through a long recovery from super-cyclone Pam, which wiped out 70 per cent of Vanuatu's economy in 2015. Earlier this year, Vanuatu was hit by super-cyclone Harold, and saw 30 per cent of its economy swept away. Vanuatu now faces a near-total collapse of the mainstay of its economy, namely, tourism, because of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Vanuatu and Fiji are both contributing members of the global community, and we want to see solutions brought to trouble spots in the world. We appreciate the work of the Security Council. But we say: do not put climate on the back burner. We have the tools and the frameworks we need to win the fight against climate change. The world community must now ask if we have the institutional architecture and the will. Fiji and the Pacific islands speak out in the debate on climate and security because it affects us deeply and immediately. It is an existential threat that has a concentrated and unequal impact on all aspects of our lives, including our security. First is the human dimension of the crisis. Fiji, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and several other countries are already relocating communities away from their homelands, away from their fishing grounds, away from the graves of their ancestors and away from their traditional lands. Secondly, more and more of our arable lands and groundwater are being lost through salination and sea-level rise. Thirdly, as most of the world grapples with the COVID-19 crisis, the Pacific islands are tackling multiple health threats and managing more frequent and prolonged outbreaks of dengue, leptospirosis and other diseases, in addition to COVID-19. We are on a permanent war footing while we relocate health facilities and reinforce or rebuild other health facilities to make them more resilient. Fourthly, the Pacific islands' energy, water, airports, wharves, roads and bridges - and all physical infrastructure needed to maintain and extend essential services - are all being threatened by the climate crisis. It is my hope that the Governments of the United States of America, China, Russia, France and the United Kingdom - the permanent members of the Security Council - will hear our call. This is the war of our times. We do not have the luxury of choosing to ignore some crises while trying to confront others. We do not have the luxury of engaging in endless debates over the same regional conflicts that have frustrated this organ for decades while rising seas slowly swallow up national territories today. The Council's core responsibility - the maintenance of international peace and security - is fundamental and will be fulfilled through sustained and accelerated progress in implementing the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. The Paris Agreement is the single most important weapon that we have if we are to win this war of our generation. You, Mr. President, have requested guidance in shaping the work of the Security Council. To that end, let me make five proposals. First, I wholeheartedly support the call by Pacific island leaders for the appointment of a United Nations special envoy for climate and security. Secondly, I fully support the call by several Member States this morning that climate and security should be featured as a core and recurring agenda item for the United Nations. Thirdly, I urge the Security Council to work with all United Nations organs and the United Nations system as a whole to ensure that the peace and security dimensions of climate change are systematically mainstreamed in the work across United Nations agencies, programmes and funds as well as peace operations. Fourthly, as a long-standing troop-contributing country, Fiji urges the Security Council to work with States Members of the United Nations to prepare and better position our peace operations to operate in increasingly complex and climate- stressed peacekeeping contexts. Finally, I call on the United Nations to convene, at the earliest possible date, a summit of world leaders on the international peace and security consequences of climate crisis and on the United Nations response. The summit should seek the views of leaders on whether the existing international architecture is capable of responding to this challenge of our times.
