The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Austria, Belgium, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Congo,
Denmark, Finland, Gabon, Ireland, Israel, Luxembourg, the
Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Rwanda, Spain, Sweden
and Zaire, in which they request to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nsanze
(Burundi), Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda), Mr. Lukabu
Khabouji N'Zaji (Zaire) took seats at the Council
table; Mr. Sucharipa (Austria), Mr. Baekelandt
(Belgium), Ms. Boum (Cameroon), Mr. Fowler
(Canada), Mr. Abibi (Congo) Mr. Kimberg
(Denmark), Mr. Breitenstein (Finland), Mr. Dangue
Rewaka (Gabon), Mr. Campbell (Ireland), Mr. Ayalon
(Israel), Mr. Wolzfela' (Luxembourg), Mr. Biegman
(Netherlands), Mr. Biorn Lian (Norway), Mr. Catarino
(Portugal), Mr. Zulueta (Spain) and Mr. Osvald
(Sweden) took the seats reserved for them at the side
of the Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/ 1996/941, which contains the text of a letter dated 14
November 1996 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council.

 

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/ 1996/943, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Belgium, Botswana, Canada,
Chile, Denmark, Egypt, France, Gabon, Germany,
Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, the
Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, Spain, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Zaire.
Austria, Cameroon, Congo, Finland, Israel, Luxembourg
and Sweden have joined as sponsors of the draft
resolution contained in document S/ 1996/943.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents:
S/l996/922, letter dated 11 November 1996 from the
Permanent Observer of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-
General, transmitting the text of the communique of the
Fourth Extraordinary Session of the Central Organ of the
OAU Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management
and Resolution, held at Addis Ababa on 11 November
1996; S/ 1996/942, letter dated 15 November 1996 from
the Charge d'affaires, a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Zaire to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council; and S/l996/944, letter dated 15
November 1996 from the Permanent Representative of
Eritrea to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council.

Members of the Council have received photocopies
of the letter dated 15 November 1996 from the Permanent
Representative of Rwanda to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council, which
will be issued as document S/1996/945.

The first speaker on my list is the representative of
Zaire, on whom I now call.

Mr. Lukabu Khabouji N'Zaji (Zaire)
(interpretation from French): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir. We have even had personal
relations for many years and are most pleased to see you
presiding over the Council for the month of November,
which will be a difficult month for the Council.

At the same time, I would like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Honduras for his work as
President in the month of October.

On behalf of my country, I wish to express sincere

thanks to the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-
Ghali, for his initiative in submitting the matter of the

 

prevailing situation in eastern Zaire to the Security Council.
We also wish to pay a well-deserved tribute to Canada and
its two distinguished sons, Ambassador Chretien and
General Baril, who have both accepted very difficult
missions on behalf of the United Nations, which we all
cherish.

On 30 June 1960, my country achieved independence
and international sovereignty. A few months later, turmoil
broke out in the country that led the United Nations
Security Council to take up the question of my country and
to come to its rescue to save its unity and integrity. Today,
that same Council is meeting to study the situation of
manifest aggression, witnessed by the entire world and
recognized even by the aggressors themselves.

Neighbours with whom we have maintained fraternal
relations for 34 years now think that they belonged to the
Hima empire. Rwanda, whose authorities came to power
through arms, has forced a portion of its population out of
the country. Eighty-five per cent of that population lives in
camps called "refugee camps"; however, I doubt that many
of you have had the opportunity to Visit those camps known
as "refugee camps". Those who have, I am certain, will
long remember the conditions in which these populations
live. People are reduced to living like animals under tents
in indescribable conditions, entire families live together,
relieve themselves together. That is what the camps are
like.

I do not want to sicken the Council any further on the
subject of the camps. This situation leaves the Kigali
authorities indifferent. Day after day, they exult in saying
that security reigns in Rwanda. If security reigns in
Rwanda, why should the camp population living in
undescribable conditions not be able to benefit from that
security? They are alive, but they are refugees who have
lost everything, even their dignity.

There is no way to convince us that 80 per cent of a
population is composed of criminals but since we are on
the subject of crime, according to the law of our countries,
as far as I know, crime is perpetrated by individuals. One
cannot accuse an entire population on a collective basis of
having committed a crime. Genocide did in fact take place,
but who conceived of it? Who carried it out? The
Rwandese themselves! There were Tutsi victims, I agree,
but we must not forget that there have been Hutu victims
as well. The people sought by the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda include Tutsis who were in power at
the time, just as there are now Hutus in power. Who knows

 

if, tomorrow, these Hutus might not also find themselves
accused of genocide against their own brothers?

My country has a tradition of welcoming refugees,
particularly those from Rwanda. In 1959, we took in a
wave of refugees who established themselves in our
country and some of whose sons are now in power in
Kigali. In 1972, we took in refugees again but they were
not armed. In 1994, tragedy erupted in Rwanda and Zaire
took in more than 2.5 million refugees. By way of
example, Germany, a developed country wealthier than
Zaire, with better means and more structures to cope with
refugees, took in 400,000 refugees from the former
Yugoslavia. Germany had no qualms about complaining
of the burden of these refugees on its territory. But,
imagine Zaire - no means, in a financial crisis, in a
social crisis, in an economic crisis - receiving five times
the number of refugees that Germany took in. Germany
knows how these refugees rewarded its generosity; Zaire
is in the same boat today.

The people we took into Zaire, whom we fed and
dressed, have returned through the back door with
weapons to kill our Zairian population. That is why,
before this Council, I wish to reiterate Zaire's position, as
set out in the letter I addressed to the President of the
Security Council this morning. Zaire considers that the
key to the crisis in eastern Zaire is the problem of
refugees, be they from Rwanda or Burundi. We therefore
call on the international community to intervene and to
exert pressure, on Kigali in particular, to ensure that the
leaders in Kigali bring their compatriots home. I believe
that, once the refugee problem has been solved, calm will
return to the region. I can guarantee this because Zaire
lived on good terms with Rwanda and Burundi for 34
years.

Zaire, my country, agreed to the Secretary-General's
proposal to convene a regional conference to consider the
problem in the region. Zaire, my country, even made an
offer to the Secretary-General, through the President of
the Republic of Zaire to accept the deployment of
observers along our borders with our neighbours. Zaire
was the sole country to welcome the Secretary-General's
initiatives, in the belief that it could help solve the crisis
in Rwanda and Burundi. But what did Rwanda do?
Rwanda rejected that initiative; Rwanda called for the
departure of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Rwanda; Rwanda reduced the proposed number of United
Nations staff members allowed to stay in Kigali to a level
at which they could not work effectively. The non-

 

governmental organizations that were permitted to function
in Rwanda were minimized.

But what was Rwanda trying to do? Perhaps the
Council does not know. Rwanda had a very clear-cut
objective: to get rid of all witnesses. Rwanda knew that,
some time ago, along the border of Zaire, an inflammatory
speech was given by a local leader in which he advocated
the establishment of an army. What we are experiencing
today is the result of that speech. Rwanda remembered that
it belongs to the Hima empire and wants to restore it. That
it is its right, but we remind Rwanda that the charter of the
Organization of African Unity enshrines a principle that no
African country would wish to abuse: the inviolability of
borders acquired after independence.

With regard to the refugee situation, how can the
international community remain impassive and indifferent
to what is occurring in Kigali? How can we accept that a
monoethnic Government should drive away the majority of
its population and then govern on behalf of that very
population. The principle against which the international
community fought in Bosnia and Herzegovina when it tried
to stop ethnic cleansing has become a rule of thumb for the
Government in Kigali. A tribe representing 85 per cent of
the population is expelled from the State of Rwanda and the
international community is content to follow the situation,
exerting no pressure whatsoever on Kigali to take that
population back.

My country made proposals when the wave of
Rwandese refugees invaded my country. We were aware of
the fact that there were armed elements among the refugees
crossing the border. We disarrned some, but how could we
disarm everybody? We could not contain such a mass. The
luggage that they carried on their heads sometimes
contained weapons that we were unable to inspect.
However, we made a proposal to the Security Council and
to the Secretary-General. Zaire identified sites where the
armed elements could be separated from civilian refugees.

Former members of the Council can testify to the
Council's reaction at that time: "It is going to be very
expensive." Zaire is curious to know today how much the
operation that we are about to undertake is going to cost. It
was the reluctance of the Security Council that has brought
us to the situation in which we find ourselves in today.

With regard to a regional conference, Ambassador
Jesus of Cape Verde was entrusted with the happy mission
of considering with leaders of the region the possibility of
bringing them together. Rwanda rejected the convening of

 

such a conference. Today, in the mandate entrusted to
Ambassador Chretien - who is in the region - such a
conference is envisaged. We put it to the international
community that if the initiative for the conference
entrusted to Ambassador Jesus had taken place, we would
not be sitting here regretting the deaths of all those who
have already died.

We call upon the international community to exert
greater pressure on Kigali so that the refugee problem can
be solved through their return to their country.

My country is the victim of obvious aggression. I
was in this Chamber as the representative of Zaire to the
Security Council on 2 August 1990. We were in a similar
situation then: aggression perpetrated by one State against
another had sprung up in a different part of the world.
We raised an army to combat that aggression, so we
cannot understand the timidity with which the Security
Council is dealing with the aggression against my
country.

Today it is Zaire. Yesterday it was Kuwait. But who
knows whose turn it will be tomorrow?

I began by thanking Canada and its two worthy sons
for having agreed to this mission. I would like to say a
few words about the composition of the force that is
currently being authorized. I will be brief because the
details appear in the letter that I sent to the President of
the Security Council this morning. However, let me recall
that Zaire wishes to be consulted at all times on this
operation and may challenge offers from some States that
it considers to be working side-by-side with the aggressor.

In closing, I should like to return to the images that
our beloved CNN has been broadcasting throughout the
day. It showed us a column of women and children
wandering around - I do not know in which direction.
It told us of the return of the refugees to their beloved
country, Rwanda.

We are not dupes. That is a diversionary tactic
undertaken by Rwanda. The troops of the Rwandese
Patriotic Front in Goma have gone to the Mugunga camp
to chase out the few refugees remaining in the camps and
showed them the road to Gisenyi. The entire Rwandese
cabinet went to Gisenyi to say: "We will now welcome
our returning brothers." For shame! For shame! For two
years, those people have been living like animals and only
today does the Rwandese cabinet go to Gisenyi to
welcome them.

 

The Council should not let itself be duped by such
manoeuvres. Rwanda is a past-master of these ploys. Let us
remember that Rwanda had asked the United Nations to
leave it the materiel used by the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Rwanda. Its request made a mockery of the
United Nations.
I wish to express my country's sincere gratitude for
the draft resolution that the Security Council is going to
adopt. It will enable the deployment of this multinational
force to eastern Zaire, first for humanitarian purposes and
allow for the possibility of an extended mandate for the
force under United Nations auspices.

I wish to thank the Council again and I do wish to
reserve my right to speak again later.


The President: I thank the representative of Zaire for
the kind words he addressed to me.

The next speaker is the representative of Rwanda, on
whom I now call.


