Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): Let me first express my
gratitude to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his tireless efforts
in Kabul and for his comprehensive briefing today. I
noted in particular the point he made that 2016 would
be the year of survival. I would also like to extend my
sincere appreciation to Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi
of Spain and to his colleagues for effectively guiding
consultations on resolution 2274 (2016), which was
adopted unanimously moments ago. I am also grateful
for the statement by Ambassador Saikal of Afghanistan.

I notice that we have 28 speakers today. I am only
the ninth, and it is already 11.30. I will keep to the
five-minute rule that the Security Council set.

Since Japanjoined the Security Council in January,
I have been underlining the importance of implementing
resolutions. Security Council resolutions are effective
only when implemented. 1 would like to discuss how
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) is implementing its mandate.

Resolution 2274 (2016) describes UNAMA's mandate
in detail, therefore I will not spell it out now. But I
will say that UNAMA is implementing its mandate
under extremely difficult circumstances. UNAMA
plays a significant role in the progress of electoral
reforms and in supporting the Special Electoral Reform
Commission. As described in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2016/218), we have observed progress in
this area. Confusion in the 2014 Afghan presidential
election, which we still remember, occurred due to the
lack of a robust electoral architecture. We are confident
that UNAMA's efforts will fully ensure an inclusive,
transparent and credible election in the future.

One of Japan's priorities has been, and is, the
enhancement of Afghanistan's capability to maintain
security. Japan has fully implemented its commitments
by providing assistance for capacity-building and the
salaries of the Afghan National Police. Despite strong
support from Japan and other international donors, the
situation in Afghanistan is far from stable. The number
of civilian casualties in 2015 was at a record high, with
more than 11,000 people either killed or injured. Many
previous speakers focused on that point.

Under the deteriorating security situation, Japan
welcomes the establishment of the Quadrilateral
Coordination Group, which includes Afghanistan,
China, Pakistan and the United States. The Group
focuses on the Afghan peace and reconciliation
process and on the resumption of direct talks between
the Afghan Government and the Taliban, which will
hopefully provide a significant improvement in security
conditions in Afghanistan.

My personal experience as Japan's first Special
Representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan tells me
that there is no one-size-fits-all solution for Afghanistan.
The efforsts of the Quadrilateral Coordination Group's
are highly appreciated, but the peace and reconciliation
process is not the only answer to the many challenges
the National Unity Government faces. The delay in
starting direct talks should not be an excuse for the lack
of progress in other key areas, such as anti-corruption,
governance, the rule of law and human rights. Again,
the key word is "implementation".

The Security Council meets every three months to
discuss the situation in Afghanistan and from time to
time adopts resolutions. But given the seriousness of
the challenges that Afghanistan is facing, this approach
seems like business as usual. What more can the
Security Council do to support the efforts of UNAMA
and the Government of Afghanistan? This has long
been my question.

In my view, the Security Council could explore
the possibility of conducting a Council mission to
Afghanistan. It is certain that we would have to examine
various elements of such a proposal, for example, the
timing of a mission, the security situation, and what
messages we would like to send to the country. But I
believe that a Security Council mission can serve as a
good opportunity to send a strong message of support
for the stability and the development of Afghanistan,
which continues to face the difficult challenges that
have been reported to us today.

As the Afghan Government implements its
commitment to reforms on the basis of mutual
accountability and makes a crucial transition towards
self-reliance, Japan, and other members of the Security
Council and the international community, I am sure,
stand ready to offer their support.

