Ms. Skare (Norway): I take the floor on behalf
of the Nordic countries: Iceland, Finland, Denmark,
Sweden and my own country, Norway.

Twenty years after the first Security Council debate
on protection of civilians (S/PV.3980), civilians are still
in the line offire in armed conflicts across the world, not
least due to the rise in urban conflicts, the proliferation
of non-State armed groups and asymmetric warfare. I
thank you the Indonesian presidency for convening this
open debate on an issue that regrettably must remain of
great concern to the Council.

Let me state the obvious. The civilian population
is not a legitimate target. Attacks directed against
civilian objects such as schools and hospitals must
end, and schools and hospitals must not be used
for military purposes. We are exasperated at the
inadequate respect for international humanitarian law
and principles and the lack of respect for international
human rights law shown by many parties to conflicts
around the world. And yet we can and must take heed
of the multiple ways in which we have progressed
over the past 20 years. Resolution 2286 (2016) and the
subsequent recommendations of the Secretary-General
are examples of concrete progress on how to enhance
protection of civilians. We welcome the report by
the Secretary-General (S/2019/373), which identifies
further practical measures.

Sexual and gender-based Violence in conflict has
received due attention as the heinous crime that it is - in
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, in
landmark convictions by the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, and in multiple Security Council
resolutions, most recently through the newly adopted
resolution 2467 (2019). The Special Representative
of the Secretary-General monitors, reports and raises
awareness of sexual violence in conflict. Protection of
civilians has become firmly embedded in mandates and
activities of United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Nevertheless, sexual and gender-based violence in
conflict is often an unreported crime. There is a lack
of support for victims, and perpetrators go unpunished.
Norway, Iraq, Somalia, the United Arab Emirates,
the International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
are hosting a conference today and tomorrow precisely
to improve coordination and mobilize greater resources
in the humanitarian response to sexual and gender-
based violence. In these efforts, we must listen to those
affected. Persons with disabilities are particularly at
risk of violence, exploitation and abuse, and women's
participation and rights must be a priority.

The developments mentioned are no small feat.
Still, they are not sufficient. We can and must do better.

First and most obviously, we must increase the United
Nations capacity to prevent and solve conflicts. We
must continue to strengthen United Nations mediation
efforts, support the Organization's broader political
and peacebuilding efforts and enhance the situational
awareness of peacekeeping operations. In this regard,
we welcome the revised peacekeeping-intelligence
policy of the Department of Peace Operations.

Secondly, we need to enhance respect for
international humanitarian law and principles and for
international human rights law. For example, those
responsible for violations and abuses of international
law against the Rohingya in Myanmar must be held to
account. We must support national efforts and capacity
to pursue justice and reparations in the wake of armed
conflicts. Innovative initiatives such as the Safe Schools
Declaration play an important role in strengthening
the protection of civilians and civilian objects. The
Safe Schools Declaration has now been signed by
89 countries, and we appreciate Spain hosting the third
Safe Schools conference next week.

Thirdly, the Security Council needs to maintain the
issue of medical care on its agenda and strongly underline
the seriousness of attacks on medical-care facilities and
denial of access, as suggested by the recommendations
of the Arria Formula meeting on protecting medical
care in armed conflict held in December last year. The
Council should, to a greater degree, consider issues
relating to the protection of medical care in country
resolutions and mission mandates.

In conclusion, we must constantly stand up and
say that medical-care facilities and civilians are not
legitimate targets.

