Ms. Wilson (Australia): Australia welcomes the
opportunity to participate in today's high-level open
debate on stopping the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction by non-State actors. From the outset,
we would like to thank Spain for its leadership and the
inclusive approach it has taken to the comprehensive
review of resolution 1540 (2004). We congratulate
Spain on compiling a thorough report and were pleased
to co-sponsor resolution 2325 (2016) adopted today.

Our initial assessment ofthe report is that it makes a
number of important conclusions and recommendations.
We support the Committee's continued efforts to ensure
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), including
by working with international, regional and subregional
organizations. We agree that the Committee should also
work closely with civil society, industry and academia.
The report and the resolution adopted today rightly
underline the potential proliferation risks posed by
rapid advances in science, technology and international
commerce and the threat posed by non-State actors in
accessing weapons of mass destruction.

It was therefore disappointing, indeed difficult
to comprehend, that the recent Review Conference
of the Biological Weapons Convention (BWC) failed
to agree an intersessional programme, which would
have included the review of new developments in
science and technology and their potential dual-use
applications. Progress in such fields will not wait
for the decision-making processes of Member States
parties and the threat of use of biological weapons
is a reality that we all face. Recalling the advice of
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs to
us during the June consultations on resolution 1540
(2004), BWC States parties did however step up their
thinking on preparedness and response. Australia's
skills training course held in October under the
auspices of the Secretary-General's mechanism was
timely, strengthening regional capacity to respond to
potential use of a biological weapon. Such mechanisms
are useful in meeting the objectives of resolution 1540
(2004), particularly given their strong deterrence value.

We believe that the BWC Review Conference
outcome does not in fact reflect the desire of States
parties to strengthen the Convention, but we need to
carefully consider its implications and ensure that the
BWC continues to be the key multilateral reference
point for combating the real and growing risk of the
use of biological weapons. We equally need to note the
findings of the comprehensive review report on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and measures
relating to biological weapons.

We have been similarly hard pressed in addressing
the threat posed by the use of chemical weapons,
including by non- State actors. Prevarication and lack of
consensus on issues can only send the wrong message to
potential proliferators. We were pleased, therefore, that
the Council unanimously agreed to extend the mandate
of the United Nations-Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons Joint Investigative Mechanism.

Once again, Australia commends Spain for its
exemplary leadership as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and
in carrying out the comprehensive review. We look
forward to welcoming Spain, as outgoing Chair of
the Committee, to the next Australia Group meeting
to address participants on the capacity-building and
assistance measures available under resolution 1540
(2004).

