Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Herve
Ladsous, for presenting the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2016/1109). Uruguay wishes to stress that
the report notes that no significant conflicts were
reported in Darfur over the past three months and
that compared with previous years, there were fewer
intercommunal clashes. We wish also to acknowledge
the steps taken by the Government of the Sudan to limit
intercommunal tensions and fight crime.

Nevertheless, these encouraging elements have
not been accompanied by any tangible progress in the
Darfur peace process or in addressing the underlying
causes of the conflict. In this regard, we encourage
all the parties involved to renew as soon as possible
direct talks in order to reach a formal agreement on
a cessation of hostilities and humanitarian access, and
move towards a political solution to the conflict.

I should like to highlight once again the important
role being played by the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) in
an operational context that is not without problems.
In terms of protecting civilians, UNAMID is focusing
its activities mainly on protecting internally displaced
persons (IDPs) and the prevention of intercommunal
conflict. We take note of the efforts being made by
UNAMID in this context, and we highlight the fact
that, as stated in the report, the mission, in coordination
with the United Nations country team, mapped the
protection situation in 174 locations hosting IDPs,
including camps, gathering sites and communities.
This exercise measured approximate number of IDPs,
the main protection issues, response capacities and risk
levels. We encourage the mission to continue its efforts
to improve the effective protection of civilians through
a comprehensive approach, as it has been doing, for
instance, in terms of mediation in local conflicts and
supporting reconciliation efforts and peace processes
between various communities.

With regard to the operational situation, while
there has been an improvement in the issuance of visas
to UNAMID personnel and food ration shipments
for its troops, I would reiterate that, in keeping with
the obligations emanating from the status-of-forces
agreement, the Government of the Sudan must take
the steps necessary to eliminate all bureaucratic
impediments and ensure that UNAMID enjoys
conditions conducive to fully carrying out its mandate.

We would also highlight that the note dated
23 December 2016 from the Permanent Representative
of the Sudan addressed to the Security Council
referred to obstacles in connection with UNAMID's
exit strategy.

In closing, allow me to express Uruguay's
appreciation to all UNAMID personnel, the United
Nations country team in the Sudan, and the humanitarian
actors who continue to work tirelessly, often under
difficult conditions, to achieve lasting peace in Darfur.

