Mr. Jinga (Romania): I should like first to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and to wish
you and your team every success. Allow me also to
commend the United States for holding this debate; I
am confident that under your presidency, the Security
Council will continue to build on this important topic.

Romania associates itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

Peacekeeping is one of the most effective tools
available to the United Nations and a symbol of
international solidarity in the promotion of international
peace and security. Considering the many challenges
that our world is facing today, we believe that, in order
to adapt and deliver a quick and effective response in the
process of advancing peace and security, peacekeeping
reform should go beyond the level of debate. We
therefore need to focus our efforts on mobilizing
greater support for the development of high standards,
imposing real accountability and ensuring that we
have well-equipped and trained forces in the field.
Despite Member States' efforts to provide personnel,
equipment and financial support, peacekeeping still
faces a number of difficulties that undermine its ability
to deliver on its mandates.

Romania strongly supports the Secretary-General's
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, launched in order to
respond to these challenges, to renew mutual political
commitment and mobilize partners.

The Secretary-General acknowledges that action by
the Secretariat alone is not enough to meet the challenges
we face. We therefore underline the importance of a

collective approach in relation to all mission components
and all peacekeeping stakeholders, from personnel on
the ground and at Headquarters to the Security Council
and troop- and police-contributing countries.

Romania firmly supports the policy of zero
tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse and is
fully committed to the Secretary-General's strategy
to prevent and end this type of misconduct on the part
of United Nations personnel. We need coordinated
implementation of policies to prevent the occurrence
of sexual exploitation and abuse across the United
Nations system, as we need to ensure accountability
for perpetrators.

The President ofRomania, His Excellency Mr. Klaus
Iohannis, is a member ofthe Secretary-General's Circle
ofLeadership on the prevention ofand response to sexual
exploitation and abuse in United Nations operations. In
addition, last year Romania signed the United Nations
voluntary compact on preventing and addressing sexual
exploitation and abuse, and all Romanian personnel
participating in United Nations operations are trained
before deployment on topics regarding United Nations
principles on stopping sexual exploitation and abuse.

My country has been a consistent contributor to
peacekeeping operations since 1991. We endorse the
efforts of the Strategic Force Generation and Capability
Planning Cell to strengthen information-sharing, and
we welcome the establishment of the Strategic Planning
and Monitoring Unit in the Executive Office of the
Secretary-General.

Romania also welcomes the innovative approach to
force generation and appreciates the new initiatives for
"smart pledges", co-deployment and contributions to
multinational rotations.

We commend the enhancement of efficiency and
transparency in the field of the selection, recruitment
and deployment of police officers, matching this
process to the Strategic Guidance Framework.
Following the external review of the Police Division,
Romania supports the proposal mentioned in the latest
report of the Secretary-General on United Nations
police (S/2016/952) that deploying trained, well-
equipped and fit police officers with the necessary skill
sets to United Nations operations at the right time is
essential. We therefore encourage the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support to continue exploring potential new models of
cooperation in training development and delivery, in
close consultation with the troop-contributing countries
and in cooperation with other relevant partners.

Peacekeeping reform can start with a comprehensive
vision and an inclusive policy that set new standards
to ensure staff evaluation, performance improvement
and real accountability. This set of principles is the
foundation of Romania's vision for peacekeeping
reform, based on our experience as an active contributor
for nearly three decades.

