Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): As we embark
upon another review cycle for the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), it is
important that we, as the Security Council, charged
with the maintenance of international peace and
security, take a step back and consider the contribution
made by the NPT to international stability. Over the
past 50 years, the NPT has minimized the proliferation
of nuclear weapons and provided the framework for
significant nuclear disarmament. For example, the
United Kingdom has more than halved the number of
warheads it had at the height of the Cold War.

Of course, the NPT has not just been about
prohibition. It has also provided the framework to
develop secure and safe peaceful uses for nuclear
energy globally, which ensures that the international
community can have confidence in the safety of civilian
nuclear energy and, where proliferation does occur, the
NPT provides the framework for the Council's action
to contain it. Under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action, Iran is subjected to a rigorous programme
of inspections made possible by the architecture
underpinning the NPT; and while the Council continues
to demand that North Korea dismantle its nuclear
programme, its verification will ultimately need to be
conducted consistent with the NPT.

As we approach another Review Conference of
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, we should keep in mind that there is
more that unites us than our differences and that we all
agree that we should strengthen the NPT going forward.
The United Kingdom is committed to working with all
partners to secure a positive outcome to the Review
Conference process, which means resolving the issue
of the presidency and agreeing an agenda for the 2020
Review Conference and its Preparatory Committee at
its third session.

Despite those challenges, it is important that we
continue to demonstrate progress on disarmament
in a way that strengthens all of our security. That is
why the United Kingdom is working on developing
disarmament verification solutions, in particular with
the United States, Sweden and Norway in the Quad
Nuclear Verification Partnership. Establishing an
effective verification regime will be vital if we are
to realize our long-term goal of multilateral nuclear
disarmament. States will need to have confidence that
a nuclear-armed State has dismantled its warheads
and - crucially - that they have been dismantled
in a way that makes us safer rather than spreading
nuclear knowledge.

Such work has demonstrated that non-nuclear-
weapon States can play an important role in the
development of nuclear disarmament verification, while
preventing proliferation. We encourage all States to
fully participate in that process in order to continue to
grow capacity for verification worldwide; and we very
much welcome France and Germany's joint verification
exercise scheduled for later this year.

We must all continue to promote the step-by-
step approach, work for the universalization of the
Non-Proliferation Treaty and the early entry into force
of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and
promote the early commencement and conclusion of
negotiations on a fissile material cut-off treaty at the
Conference on Disarmament.

Allow me to outline some of the steps that the United
Kingdom is taking to support a successful outcome of
the Review Conference. We will be submitting a draft
implementation report to the Preparatory Committee,
setting out how we have implemented the NPT in this
review cycle. We encourage all States to do the same.
We intend to use our coordinator role of the process
involving the Council's five permanent members (P- 5) to continue the excellent work that has taken place
under Chinese leadership, including continuing the
P-5's dialogue with all signatories. We will remain a
strong supporter of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) and all the work that it does, including
efforts related to technical cooperation.

The United Kingdom has made significant
extrabudgetary contributions to support the
refurbishment of the nuclear application laboratories
at Seibersdorf, Austria, including in the amount of
more than €l million for the period from 2016 to 2018.
We are pleased to have signed a new Voluntary Offer
Agreement and Additional Protocol with the IAEA in
June 2018 and a Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement
in 2018, which enables the United Kingdom to establish
a domestic nuclear safeguards regime. We continue to
regard the additional protocol as the gold standard of
safeguards and urge those States that have yet to do so
to agree and ratify such agreements with the IAEA. We
strongly support the State-level concept.
I also want to note the echoing silence on compliance
issues from some of the States that are most eager
to promote the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons, a treaty lacks any concrete provisions for
verifying compliance. The United Kingdom will not
support, sign or ratify it.

We should not underestimate the challenges
facing the NPT, which are themselves an indication
of the challenges facing international security. Any
meaningful discussion on disarmament must take the
wider security environment into account. We all have a
responsibility to work for a safer, more stable world in
which States with nuclear weapons feel able to relinquish
them. That is where the Security Council must make
its own contribution to the NPT. That must involve
remaining resolute in our determination to fully disarm
North Korea and prevent the escalation of conflicts. We
must give our full political support to the continuation
of the NPT process and an agreed, consensus-based
outcome of the upcoming Review Conference.

