Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to express our appreciation for
holding this meeting, which comes within the
framework of international efforts to combat the spread
of the AIDS epidemic, particularly concerning
peacekeeping operations that exist in different parts of
the world. What we aim for is to create awareness and
to train the members of peacekeeping operations on the
question of prevention of and dealing with this
epidemic in order to contain it and to prevent its spread
in the field. Allow us, Mr. President, to share your
welcome of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, and his presence in our midst, while we
discuss this very important item.

We would like to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno, for the information he provided on the
implementation by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) of the relevant paragraphs on the
matter contained in resolution 1308 (2000). We would
like to indicate that awareness, training and
commitment to the measures followed by the
administration are in the final analysis part of the
comprehensive international campaign to combat this
epidemic and to put an end to it.

My delegation would like to express its
admiration and satisfaction with the content of the
report of Mr. Guehenno concerning the measures to
combat AIDS within the framework of peacekeeping
operations, particularly since my country, beginning in
1974, hosts some 1,000 peacekeepers in the framework
of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force.
We would like to thank Mr. Peter Piot, Executive
Director of UNAIDS, for his statement, which
contained basic points and facts that the international
community has to take seriously into account in order
to contain this epidemic. We would like to confirm that
the efforts of UNAIDS are basic and vital within the
framework of international efforts.

The General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and relevant United Nations agencies,
particularly the World Health Organization, are basic to
the ability of the international community to deal with
this epidemic, taking into consideration the effect of
this disease on stability and security in some countries.
We would like to indicate here that international efforts
and international cooperation are basic and necessary
for pushing forward the positive steps that have been
taken to date. We would like to express our
appreciation for the efforts made personally by the
Secretary-General Kofi Annan in this respect.

There is an urgent need to earmark more money
at both international and national levels. There is a
need to support the Global Fund to Combat AIDS,
Tuberculosis and Malaria and to provide medicines that
are affordable to those infected, in particular in
developing countries. We cannot forget the vital role
played by non-governmental organizations, and
national and international organizations that are active
in this field. This contributes to reinforcing
international efforts to combat HIV/AIDS. The
document issued from the twenty-sixth special session
of General Assembly on HIV/AIDS represents an
important basis for the international community's
combat against this disease. I would like to confirm
that the elimination of this disease depends on
cooperation among the countries of the world and on
providing assistance to poor and developing countries
in order to support their national efforts. This is by
necessity linked to international, technological and
scientific advances, which should lead to the provision
of preventive vaccines, to better treatment and to the
development of better medicines.

The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic was
cognizant of the danger of this disease at an early
stage, particularly for the armed forces, and it
considered HIV/AIDS a main source of concern. In
1987, it established a national programme to combat
HIV/AIDS. It set up a multisectoral, strategic national
plan, which led to the establishment of a national
committee on AIDS, that has made efforts in all fields,
as mentioned in the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS.

Thanks to the efforts of health authorities in Syria
and the role played by private organizations and the
social and religious institutions, the rate of the spread
of this disease is very modest. In 2003, the National
Committee to Combat AIDS and Sexually Transmitted
Diseases sought to achieve the following: enforcement
of the commitment of all national authorities in efforts,
national plans and educational and media activities to
combat AIDS; reinforcement and development of
capacities and national resources to combat AIDS and
sexually transmitted diseases and to provide care to the
infected; the integration of AIDS prevention
programmes into reproductive health programmes,
primary health care and school curricula; reinforcement
of the role of health research and epidemiology studies;
and the establishment of an AIDS database. We pay
special attention to the question of increasing health
awareness among individuals, particularly the armed
forces.

Despite all that, the basic obstacles impeding
national efforts to achieve the objectives of the
Declaration of Commitment lie in the lack of financial
and human resources to support the efforts made so far.

Finally, I wish to reaffirm once again that Syria is
fully prepared to do everything possible to reinforce
our collective effort to face this epidemic in order to
guarantee a brighter and healthier future for humanity.

