The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Denmark.

Denmark fully associates itself with the statement
to be made shortly by the representative of Austria on
behalf of the European Union. I will only add a few
points.

Denmark would like to pay tribute to the four
States that so rapidly heeded Timor-Leste's call for
assistance in restoring security to the country. We are
grateful for their efforts, which have already
contributed to calming the situation. Nevertheless, the
security situation remains tense, and additional United
Nations assistance will be required to help reorganize
and rebuild Timor-Leste's security sector.

We welcome the efforts made by the Government
of Timor-Leste to clarify responsibilities within the
Government and to reach out to the dismissed soldiers
in order to find a solution to the crisis. Political
reconciliation is key to resolving the conflict, and we
support the United Nations continued engagement in
that effort. Denmark also fully supports the request for
an independent investigation of recent events and calls
for those responsible for the killings to be brought to
justice.

We thank the representative of Timor-Leste and
the Secretary-General's Special Envoy for their
remarks here today on the future United Nations
presence in Timor-Leste. We look forward to receiving
more detailed proposals from Timor-Leste and the
Secretary-General as soon as they become available. In
the meantime, Denmark supports a relatively short
extension of the present mandate of the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste.

Among other elements, a future United Nations
mission would need to contain a robust policing and
police-training element, assistance to the upcoming
elections, and support for justice and reconciliation. On
the latter issue, Denmark understands that the
Secretary-General will soon issue a separate report. It
will also be important that the humanitarian needs
arising from the conflict, as well as the serious socio-
economic problems that have been a contributing
factor to the recent conflict, be rapidly addressed.

Recent events are a strong indication that the
international community needs to continue to provide
strong support to Timor-Leste. With the combination of
international support and the efforts of Timor-Leste's
Government and people, Timor-Leste will, hopefully,
soon be back on track towards a more peaceful and
prosperous future.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Brazil.

