Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we wish to convey our most
11-56143
sincere condolences to the people and the Government
of Turkey in connection with the tragedy that they have
suffered as a result of yesterday's earthquake.

Nicaragua, as a member of the Non-Aligned
Movement, associates itself fully with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Egypt in his
capacity as Chair of the Movement.

Nicaragua once again reiterates its most fervent
condemnation of the illegal occupation by Israel of all
of the occupied Arab territories in Palestine, Syria and
Lebanon, and demands Israel's immediate withdrawal.
We condemn the expansionist Israeli policies and
practices of building and not dismantling settlements,
as well as the inhumane blockade of Gaza and the
policy of breaking up the West bank and other
Palestinian territories.

The Security Council is meeting on the eve of a
historic moment that will give undeniable reality to the
existence of a Palestinian State that is recognized and
fully welcomed into our Organization, and represent
the implementation, at long last, of the many
resolutions and agreements calling for the creation of
two States - one Arab and the other Jewish - on
Palestinian territory.

We can no longer tolerate the logic of denying the
very existence of the Palestinian State. That logic is
part and parcel of a policy of corralling the Palestinian
people, and it is based on an unacknowledged
determination to deny all Palestinian citizens their very
humanity. It is extremely urgent that Israel free, as
soon as possible, all Palestinian political prisoners,
who suffer, in violation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, inhumane conditions, torture, captivity
and indefinite isolation. Israel must put an end to those
violations and comply with its obligations under
international law, including international humanitarian
and human rights law.

Since the victory of the Sandinista popular
revolution, in 1979, Nicaragua has witnessed the heroic
fight of the Palestinian people and the substantial
concessions they have made, which, shamefully, were
responded to by Israel with more illegal settlements,
more humiliation, more deaths, more systematic
murders of Palestinian leaders, more destruction of
homes and more expulsions, including in East
Jerusalem.
11-56143
For all of those reasons, Nicaragua reiterates the
need to put an immediate end to the intolerable
impunity that Israel enjoys, which has been
irresponsibly guaranteed it by the Security Council, in
particular through the indiscriminate use of the veto,
which has become Israel's greatest accomplice.

It is high time that the Security Council lived up
to its responsibilities and demand that Israel make a
commitment to peace. It is time to abandon threats of
veto. It is time for the international community to
substitute concrete action for rhetoric. Nicaragua thus
calls for the immediate recognition of the Palestinian
State along its 1967 borders by the Security Council
and the General Assembly. Only in this way will there
be a firm and lasting peace that allows both peoples to
effectively enjoy all their rights, putting an end to an
inexplicable injustice. May those who oppose it do so
publicly, and thereby publicly acknowledge their own
shamefulness.

