Mr. Nkosi (South Africa): Allow me tojoin previous
speakers in expressing our deepest gratitude to the
fraternal Republic of Equatorial Guinea for convening
this important debate on transnational organized crime
at sea, which poses a great threat to international peace
and security. We also take this opportunity to welcome
you, Sir, to New York and to thank you for the brilliant
and wise manner in which you are presiding over our
proceedings this morning.

I wish to express our gratitude to the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov, and to our dear sister, the
Executive Secretary of the Gulf of Guinea Commission,
Mrs. Florentina Adenike Ukonga, for their extremely
useful, comprehensive and informative briefings on the
subject under discussion.

South Africa, as the Council is aware, is a maritime
country with more than 2,800 kilometres of coastline
and an exclusive economic zone of 1.54 million square
kilometres straddling both the Indian and Atlantic
oceans that is larger than our land area of 1.2 million
square kilometres. It is estimated that there are 580
ships in South African waters every day, and more
than 11,000 ships dock in our ports every year. South
Africa therefore continues to be concerned about the
prevalence of transnational organized crime at sea.
Africa is very conscious ofthe impact ofthese insidious
activities on the stability, security and development of
both coastal and inland countries. In many instances,
the effects of such transnational organized crime fuel
conflicts on the continent. The proceeds from those
crimes contribute to the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons, protracted conflicts, trafficking
in drugs and humans, terrorism, money-laundering
and increased mercenary activity. In the past few
years South African security and coastal patrols have
confiscated numerous vessels and arrested countless
people involved in illegal fishing and abalone poaching
in our waters, which deprive South Africans of millions
of dollars of revenue and have a negative effect on the
livelihoods of our coastal communities.
The link between transnational organized crime at
sea and the threat that it poses to the stability, security
and economies of both coastal and landlocked States is
visible and a matter of grave concern. In order to meet
the challenges posed by this large-scale phenomenon, it
is crucial that we develop a robust regulatory framework
and a coordinated and comprehensive approach at the
national, regional and international levels to address
it. South Africa welcomed the Council's adoption of
resolutions 2383 (2017) and 2442 (2018), which we
believe will make a major contribution to dealing with
the challenge of transnational organized crime at sea,
specifically off the coast of Somalia and the affected
coastal areas in the Gulf of Guinea. They embody some
of the important steps that the international community
should take to prevent and counteract maritime crimes
and maintain international peace and security.

In 2014, the African Union (AU) adopted 2050
Africa's Integrated Maritime Strategy (2050 AIM Strategy), which identifies threats and vulnerabilities
that could fuel violence and insecurity on the African
continent. Those threats include transnational
organized crime in the maritime domain, which
covers illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing,
money-laundering, trafficking in illegal arms and
drugs, piracy and armed robbery at sea, illegal oil
bunkering and human trafficking. Through the 2050
AIM. Strategy, the AU seeks to rally its member
States in a coordinated and collaborative partnership
that will foster wealth creation in a safe and secure
African maritime domain, thereby contributing to the
continent's socioeconomic development.

Furthermore, in 2016 the AU adopted the African
Charter on Maritime Security, Safety and Development,
known as the Lome Charter, developed to operationalize
the security and developmental aspects articulated in
the 2050 AIM. Strategy and the AU's Agenda 2063. It
provides general rules and principles for regulating
navigational security and combating piracy and illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing activities, as
well as for preserving marine life and biodiversity. It
includes provisions for enhancing areas of economic
development through ocean-economy activities and
cooperation in the use of oceanic riches at the level of
exclusive economic zones and international waters. It
should also be noted that the AU declared the period
from 2015 to 2025 to be the Decade of African Seas and
Oceans, with the strategic goal of improving maritime
conditions to ensure the protection and sustainable use
of the seas and oceans of Africa.
South Africa has worked together with fellow
African countries in developing those key continental
instruments, which seek to create an ocean environment
that is safe, secure and environmentally sustainable for
the benefit of the peoples of Africa. In cooperation
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
the Governments of Mozambique, Tanzania and South
Africa have entered into a trilateral agreement to counter
drug trafficking on maritime routes in the Indian Ocean
that seeks to intensify maritime-surveillance capability
and the detection of illicit trafficking in the Indian
Ocean, as well as to enhance security at ports and other
points of entry in the region.

In addition to those initiatives on the African
continent, South Africa is currently Chair of the
Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA), which was
established in 1995 and consists of 21 Indian Ocean-
rim countries straddling the continents of Africa,
Asia and Australasia. IORA recognizes that the ocean
economy is emerging globally as a common and
critical source of growth, innovation and employment
creation owing to its enormous economic potential,
and it has therefore identified maritime security and
safety as two of its priorities. At the domestic level,
South Africa has identified marine protection and
governance as a top priority of our ocean economy
strategy, known as Operation Phakisa, which means
"make haste", underlining the importance that our
Government attaches to this important area of human
endeavour. South Africa believes that the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea outlines a
comprehensive legal framework applicable to piracy
and armed robbery at sea. Our current efforts to combat
transnational organized crime at sea must be fully
consistent with that international legal framework.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my
Government's support for the call to strengthen the
capacity of Member States' maritime security to
enforce international maritime law. In that regard, the
importance of exchanging evidence and information
for anti-piracy law-enforcement purposes, as well
as sharing lessons learned and best practices among
States and international and regional organizations,
is imperative, and should ensure that the necessary
structures remain dynamic and that the relevant
structures, strategies and programmes are adapted to
align with prevailing shifts in global trends.

We wish to reiterate that transnational organized
crime at sea is linked to insecurity on land. It is only
through concerted, holistic and comprehensive action,
both on land and at sea, that we will be able to fight
that scourge.

