Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I would like to
welcome Mr. Vuk Jeremie, Foreign Minister of Serbia,
and thank him for his statement. I would equally like to
welcome Mr. Skender Hyseni, Foreign Minister of
Kosovo, and thank him for his statement. Moreover,
allow me to express our deep appreciation for the work
of Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and for the important contribution
he is making on a daily basis to facilitating dialogue
between all sides.

We note with satisfaction that the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
has successfully finalized its reconfiguration and
downsizing, as foreseen in the report of the Secretary-
General before us today (S/2009/300). We are
convinced that the new structure and strength of the
Mission will enable UNMIK to perform the functions
identified in the Secretary-General's reports of June
and November 2008 (S/2008/354 and S/2008/692). We
particularly welcome the Mission's focus on mediation
between the communities and on support to minority
communities.

Allow me to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to the outstanding performance of the personnel who
have served in UNMIK over the past 10 years.

We are particularly satisfied that the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX)
assumed its full operational capability on 6 April,
allowing the Mission to effectively perform its tasks of
monitoring, advising and mentoring the police,
customs and judiciary of Kosovo, as well as ensuring
effective responses to instances of inter-ethnic violence
or major public disturbances.

The European Union will, as it does for the rest
of Kosovo, implement its mandate in northern Kosovo
in the interests of all communities and will, in that
context, ensure an adequate presence. Austria is
currently providing 26 experts, above all in the fields
of police and the judiciary, to EULEX. Furthermore,
we will also continue to contribute to the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) with approximately 600 troops. We support
the decision by NATO, taken after consultation with
non-NATO troop-contributors to KFOR, including
Austria, to commence preparations for the transition of
KFOR to a determined presence, which also foresees a
reduction in troop numbers in several phases.

For our part, we will maintain, as I have said, our
level more or less at the present level of contribution,
which will continue to make us the biggest non-NATO
contributor to KFOR. We see the step taken by NATO
as recognition of the progress achieved in the
stabilization of Kosovo and as closely linked to the
increasing capabilities of EULEX.

In the light of the downsizing of UNMIK, we
appreciate the valuable role that the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) continues
to play in Kosovo in areas where UNMIK has
concluded its work or has greatly reduced its activities.
The extensive civilian field presence of the OSCE
throughout all parts of Kosovo is unparalleled and
brings unique continuity and balance to its grassroots
monitoring and capacity-building efforts. The early
warning mechanism that this monitoring provides is
highly valued, in particular at the municipal level. The
local elections foreseen for 15 November will also
highlight the indispensable support the OSCE has
maintained for nearly a decade to the developing
democratic institutions of Kosovo.
As we have just heard, there have been several
positive developments over the reporting period. We
particularly welcome progress in the ongoing
decentralizing process in Kosovo, which will be key to
addressing minority protection and to strengthening
local governance throughout the country. Successful
implementation clearly benefiting the minority
population, above all the Kosovo Serb community,
will, however, depend on their participation in this
process and, in particular, in the upcoming local
elections.

We are confident that with the necessary
pragmatism, solutions to contentious matters can be
found, thus taking Kosovo closer to the objective of a
multi-ethnic and peaceful society. Despite relative
stability in the past months, tensions and incidents of
violence, as in northern Mitrovica over the
reconstruction of houses by Kosovo Albanian
returnees, continue to have a destabilizing potential.
While we appreciate the well-coordinated reaction of
UNMIK, EULEX and KFOR, we want to reiterate that
lasting and peaceful solutions can only be found if all
communities engage directly both with each other and
with the international presences.

We share the Secretary-General's observation that
the efforts of all sides, with the support of the
international community, need to continue to further
implement the practical arrangements laid out in his
report, issued in November last year (S/2008/692). We
welcome the increased contribution of EULEX in
discussions in the area of the rule of law. Impasses in
the fields of police, justice, property rights and
customs continue to hinder the normalization of daily
life, with negative impacts for both Kosovo and Serbia.
We therefore encourage both Pristina and Belgrade to
bridge their differences and reach a productive working
relationship. Recent reports warn that, owing to
political, social and economic discrimination against
smaller minorities who have inhabited Kosovo for
centuries, many of their members may be forced to
leave the country, which give us cause for concern.

We hope that the Kosovo authorities, with the
help of the international presence, will increase efforts
to translate their commitments regarding a tolerant and
multi-ethnic society into effective action so as to
facilitate the active participation of all minorities,
including the smaller ones, as I said, in all aspects of
public life. Particular attention should be paid to the
practical application of international human rights law
with regard to the entire territory and population.
Equally, we expect the Belgrade authorities to use their
influence in order to ensure a more positive approach
in that regard by the Kosovo Serbs.

While deploring the fact that the overall number
of voluntary minority returns remains disappointingly
low, we are encouraged by news of the recent gradual
increase in numbers. We express our hope that
Kosovo's project for returns will prove to be effective
in creating conditions conducive to the reintegration of
minority communities.

Austria, as is well known, has consistently
supported a future for all peoples of the Western
Balkans within the European Union. In particular, we
hope that Serbia can rapidly advance on its path
towards European integration, and Belgrade knows that
it can count on the support of the Austrian Government
in that matter.

At the same time, we very much appreciate the
clear commitment by the Government of Kosovo to the
European future and the European perspective of its
country. We are convinced that that shared vision will
clearly benefit all citizens of Serbia and Kosovo and
will help them to look ahead to overcome existing
differences and allow for the necessary progress.

