Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
should like to welcome to the Council today the President
of the Special Court for Sierra Leone, Shireen Fisher,
and the Prosecutor, Brenda Hollis, as well as the Court's
Registrar, Binta Mansaray, and the head of the Defence
Office, Clare Carlton-Hanciles. I thank them for their
briefings, and I congratulate them and their staff for the
significant achievements of the Special Court to date.
We are grateful for their dedication and commitment to
the pursuit of justice.

I should like also to thank Guatemala for having
scheduled this briefing today and to welcome the
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Sierra Leone to the Council.

Today's briefings come at a pivotal juncture, as
the Special Court moves towards the end of the final
phase of its mandate, the extensive appeals process in
the Charles Taylor case. The Special Court has been
instrumental in contributing to peace and stability in
Sierra Leone.

By creating a transparent and independent judicial
process, the Court has brought justice and provided
accountability for the people of Sierra Leone and has
helped them to move on from a painful chapter in their
history and that of the region.

The Special Court, moreover, has broken new
ground in the field of international criminal law,
including through its jurisprudence on the use of child
soldiers and its recognition that sexual slavery can be
a war crime and a crime against humanity. It has also
shown a powerful commitment to gender issues and
to combating gender-based violence. We particularly
appreciate that as we mark the twelfth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security
this month.

Although the trial proceedings in the Charles Taylor
case have finished, the work of the Court is not yet done.
We therefore welcome the finalization of the agreement
between the United Nations and the Government of
Sierra Leone on the establishment of a Residual Court
that will come into existence after the conclusion of
the appeals process. Its important responsibilities will
include witness protection, investigations and trials for
contempt, oversight of prisoners and the handling of
archives.

The United States was instrumental in the
establishment of the Special Court for Sierra Leone.
We have appreciated the opportunity to serve on the
Special Court's management committee and commend
the work of the Commitee's Canadian Chair and United
Kingdom co-Chair. We are proud to have been the
Court's largest financial supporter, contributing more
than $83 million since its inception, including a recent
$2 million disbursement for fiscal year 2012. Given
those contributions, we especially appreciate the efforts
of President Fisher and Registrar Mansaray to reduce
costs, to improve efficiency in the Special Court's
operations and to lay the groundwork for an efficient
and successful Residual Special Court.

The United States welcomes the broad financial
support that the Court has enjoyed so far. That must
continue for the Court to complete its critical mandate.
President Fisher has reported a projected budget shortfall
of $15 million to conclude the Court's work. The United
States will endeavour to contribute towards closing that
gap and urges the continued support of the international
community to both the Court and the Residual Special
Court so that justice is served and impunity not tolerated
and so that Sierra Leone and the region can move
forward in peace and security.

The Government of Sierra Leone has been a strong
and committed partner of the Court. We fully support the
Court's efforts to transfer its institutional knowledge to the
Sierra Leone authorities. It is important to the country's
ongoing democratic development that all lessons of the
past be fully absorbed. The Special Court has much to
offer in that regard. Once the Court completes its mandate,
the international community will, of course, continue its
support for peacebuilding and long-term socioeconomic
development in Sierra Leone.

The Special Court has built a powerful legacy of
fighting impunity and of working to bring justice to the
people of Sierra Leone. The United States looks forward
to the successful completion of the Court's work and the
smooth transition to the Residual Special Court.

