Mr. Allam-mi (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
first of all like to greet all the eminent speakers who
made statements before me. I would also like to
congratulate my brother from Central Africa,
Ambassador Emanuel Issoze-Ngondet of the Gabonese
Republic. He has not only shown competence and
efficiency in presiding over the Council and thus
brought honour to the States of the subregion, but also
demonstrated his concern for the fate of our entire
subregion by including on the Council's programme of
work the serious issue of the impact of arms trafficking
on peace and security in Central Africa. I would also
like to thank, of course, Council members for having
agreed to this proposal.

Illicit arms trafficking in our Central African
subregion poses a permanent threat to the consolidation
of the rule of law, democracy and economic and social
development. Our capacity to ensure good governance,
which is imperative, and a secure environment
conducive to lasting economic and social development
has been sorely tried by the illicit circulation in the
subregion of arms of all calibre. This enriches
traffickers who are frequently invisible and users of all
sorts, from petty criminals to adventurers posing as
revolutionaries and defenders of human rights to seize
power, as well as road blockers and other highway
bandits.

Obviously, peaceful citizens - men, women and
children - are their primary victims. Our States,
fragile and with limited human and other resources,
find it difficult to combat these outlaws and to maintain
order and security in order to meet our peoples'
legitimate aspirations to more peace and security. The
first thing that the international community must do is
to help us by bolstering our material and human
resources to combat illicit arms trafficking and its
impact on peace and security in our subregion. We
need help in revising and harmonizing our national
legislation to international provisions, in establishing
an arms database and checklist, and in national
capacity-building to manage stockpiles and combat
cross-border crime.

Chad welcomes the quality of the work that has
been done in promoting peace and implementing our
security policies under the auspices of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa, the twenty-ninth
ministerial meeting of which was held in N'djamena. I
wish to emphasize that we have placed on the agenda

of our forthcoming meeting in Kinshasa consideration
of preliminary drafts of a legal instrument for the
monitoring in Central Africa of small arms and light
weapons, ammunition and any material used in their
manufacture, and of an implementation plan for that
instrument.

I would also emphasize that, in the context of
subregional cooperation, in particular within the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), we have established instruments for crisis
prevention and management to that have proved to be
very effective in helping us to implement our peace
and security policies. The statement of the Secretary
General on that issue was very edifying.

The security situation in the region is well
known. Successive civil wars, having undermined our
young States and our security services responsible for
enforcing regulations on the monitoring and movement
of arms, have fuelled crime and the activities of arms
traffickers in our subregion. Porous borders are
difficult to monitor and allow illicit arms traffickers
and users to move easily from one country to another.
The lack of security arising from that situation is a
major challenge that each of our States must meet, but
one that we can also fight together with joint patrols
involving two or several countries that share the same
border. Such an effort must be complemented by
relevant intelligence allowing us to identify and punish
traffickers.

When States are responsible for illicit trafficking,
firm and effective international sanctions are
imperative. Moreover, if we are to obtain their
cooperation, which is also necessary to that effort, our
people must be made aware of the gravity of the
situation so that we can collect illegally held arms.

With respect to Chad, the circulation of light
weapons can be explained with reference to the
repeated wars and disturbances that have shaken our
country since its independence. Armed groups,
supported from outside the country, have introduced
weapons into the various regions and provided them to
road blockers, poachers and other traffickers in the
Sahel and the Sudanese border. In addressing this
situation, and despite the vast area involved, the
Government has carried out regular operations to
recover those weapons, which are a source of
insecurity and violence. In December 2008, we set up a
national disarmament commission that has recovered
more than 10,000 weapons of various calibres.

We look to the future with optimism as political
life of our country has considerably improved. We have
normalized our relations with the Sudan, opening the
way to improved bilateral cooperation to enhance
security on our common borders. We also rely on the
support of the international community in carrying out
our disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme so that ex-combatants from armed groups,
particularly child soldiers, may legally enter public and
private life. In that regard, we wish especially to thank
the international community for having decided, at a
time when we particularly needed it, to deploy the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad to make the eastern region of our
country more secure, as far as possible, in particular by
strengthening our capacities through the deployment of
the Detachement inte'gre de securite. We trust that we
shall be able to go it alone in the future, but we rely on
other sources of support from the international
community to complement our human and other
resources.

