Mr. Sorreta (Philippines): I join the other
delegations in congratulating Japan on its presidency
this month. Your outstanding and inspiring leadership,
Sir, have proven valuable to the work of the Security
Council.

We appreciate Japan's proactive and enthusiastic
role in advancing today's issue. We commend Japan for
circulating a concept paper (S/2010/l65) for the
Security Council's debate on the implementation of the
measures set out in the note by the President of the
Security Council contained in document 8/2006/507.
The concept paper provides us with a concise and
comprehensive view of the present work of the Council
and has been very useful in guiding our debate today.

The Philippines associates itself with the
statement made by the representative of the Arab
Republic of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. The enthusiastic participation of many
Member States in this debate reflects the utmost
importance they attach to this issue. Our delegation
strongly shares that sentiment. The Philippines is
among those countries that consider the improvement
of the working methods of the Council to be crucial,
not just to the Council's effectiveness but also to the
overall success of the United Nations system. Its
working methods are key to the Council's role as a
guardian of international peace and security, for they
greatly influence and enhance its effectiveness in
performing its mandate.

Various attempts have been made to increase the
Council's transparency and openness. We saw in recent
months the efforts made by the Council to provide
more and timely information regarding its work
programme and schedule and the issues to be tackled
by the incoming president of the Council. We are
indeed pleased by these positive developments and
urge the Council members to continue this practice.

Recently, we have also observed a higher degree
of interaction and dialogue between Council members
2

and non-members, especially on such relevant issues as
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Indeed, the greater
participation of non-members to express their views on
issues germane to them creates the impression that the
Council also cares about the views of non-members.
Not only does this reflect a growing sense of
inclusiveness, but it also keeps unilateralism at bay.

However, as new developments and threats
emerge, the work of the Council continues to grow and
expand. These, of course, absorb the Council's
resources, energy and attention. There is a need to
refocus the Council's attention on the basic and core
issues - peace and security - in order to achieve
greater efficiency. The Council should therefore
refrain, if possible, from tackling cross-cutting issues
such as those more appropriately dealt with by the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council or
other United Nations organs. Having said this,
however, the Philippines wishes to reiterate some of its
previous proposals for specific amendments contained
in the paper that the Philippine Mission transmitted to
the General Assembly and which it gave to the
permanent missions in February last year.

Mr. President, your laudable effort to convene
this debate has truly rekindled the enthusiasm of
non-members of the Security Council to share their
views and has renewed their hope that the Council is
capable of improving its working methods, which in
turn will redound to the benefit of the membership of
the United Nations and the international community as
a whole.

The reform of the Council's working methods is
itself a work in progress and much remains to be done.
To this end, let me assure you that the Philippines is
ready and willing to support the work of Japan and
other like-minded States in achieving this lofty goal.

