Mr. Briz Abularach (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): Mr. President, allow me at the outset to
welcome you in particular. It is a privilege to see a
close friend of Guatemala's, Mr. Jorge Enrique Taiana,
Minister for Foreign Affairs, International Trade and
Worship, presiding over this meeting. It is very
auspicious for us, and we are very pleased to know that
we can count on the invaluable experience of a
distinguished Argentine diplomat to guide us during
this debate.

Allow me also to congratulate the President-elect
of Haiti, Mr. Rene Preval, on his recent election and to
convey our resolute support for his Government, since
it is the focus of hopes that Haiti will achieve stability,
leading to comprehensive development.

We welcome the initiative to convene an open
debate on the situation in Haiti. We believe that it is of
the utmost importance, at this critical period of
challenges and transition, that we all engage in a
dialogue on the need to promote national
reconciliation, economic development and institutional
strengthening in that brotherly country.

In that regard, my delegation wishes to associate
itself with the statement made by the Minister of
Foreign Affairs of Guyana, Mr. Samuel Insanally, on
behalf of the Rio Group.

Ever since the crisis in Haiti began, my country
has expressed its solidarity with the people of that
noble country. Furthermore, the Government of
Guatemala has expressed its sincere wish that all
political sectors in Haiti reach a basic consensus that
would enable them to build and consolidate a true
democracy and to foster a positive environment that
would secure the sustainable development of the
country, for the benefit of all Haitians. Although the
primary responsibility to achieve those crucial
objectives lies with the Haitians themselves, we
recognize that this will be possible only if the
international community undertakes a coordinated,
generous and long-term cooperation effort.

It is for those reasons that we reiterate our strong
support for the work being carried out by the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
whose main military and civilian components come
from Latin America. Guatemala expresses its particular
support for the work of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Haiti and Head of
MINUSTAH, Ambassador Juan Gabriel Valdes.

In line with our policy of opting for peaceful and
negotiated solutions to conflicts, the Government of
Guatemala has reaffirmed its commitment and
willingness to participate in MINUSTAH by sending a
contingent of 87 Guatemalan military police who are
now stationed in Haiti, which for the time being,
constitutes our contribution to MINUSTAH.

Guatemala believes that the role of the United
Nations in Haiti is of particular importance, especially
given the previous setbacks suffered by the
international community in that country. Thus, this
time we must view the Mission as a comprehensive,
long-term operation that will continue until the goals
set have been reached, that is, to give the Haitian
people the possibility of self-rule in conditions of
freedom and democracy, with improved economic and
social conditions.

We must take careful note of the mistakes made
in the past, and, for those reasons, we are convinced
that the international community's engagement in Haiti
is a long-term commitment.

The Heads of State and Government of the
member States of the Central American Integration
System, meeting in Panama on 9 March 2005,
underscored the importance of the democratic process
in Haiti for the entire region. They therefore called for
continuing MINUSTAH'S presence until that process
had been consolidated.

With regard to the challenges now confronting
Haiti, we share the concern about the current fragile
security situation in the country, as well as about the
former army's ongoing negative influence. We are
especially concerned about the challenge posed by
armed gangs linked to criminal groups. We are aware
that the challenges on the streets are enormous and that
such armed gangs control entire neighbourhoods in
which impunity and violence conspire against the
population.

The weakness of the judicial system is another
major obstacle confronting the Haitian people today.
There can be no delay in providing technical assistance
to law and order institutions. We must help the Haitian
State to strengthen democratic institutions, which
ensure peaceful, productive and orderly coexistence.

Guatemala therefore deems it important that the
international community, regional organizations,
international financial institutions, agencies,
programmes and non-governmental organizations
continue to support the people of Haiti to enable them
to achieve the full enjoyment of their fundamental
rights and freedoms, while at the same time supporting
the new authorities in investigating abuses so as to put
an end to impunity through the reform, restructuring
and strengthening of the national police and the
judicial system. Effective and speedy justice is not
possible without those institutions. In that regard, we
appeal to the new authorities urgently to adopt concrete
measures to prevent and punish criminal acts through
the effective investigation of accusations and the
prosecution of those responsible.

At the moment, it is not enough to solve the
country's current security crisis by putting in place
short-term measures. It is necessary to demand that a
comprehensive approach be taken that addresses the
political situation, security, the administration of
justice, human rights and economic development.
Without a comprehensive approach, it will be difficult
to break the vicious circle that fuels frustration,
violence and lack of confidence in the mechanisms
provided for by the rule of law.

Guatemala would like to underscore the
importance of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes. We share the concern of
other countries with regard not only to the delay in the
implementation of the programmes proposed by
MINUSTAH but also to the problems linked to the
financing of such programmes, especially as regards
reintegration.

Although the process of free elections is in itself
a significant achievement, it is also crucial to begin a
process of inclusive national dialogue that will make it
possible for all political and social groups to exercise
true self-determination.

My delegation cannot fail to mention such
fundamental problems as extreme poverty and high
rates of illiteracy and malnutrition, which continue to
deprive Haitians of their fundamental economic, social
and cultural rights, thereby exacerbating the
consequences of disregard for fundamental civil and
political rights.

We acknowledge the fact that the new authorities

will not be able to substantially resolve those problems
in the short term. Nevertheless, they can begin to put in
place coherent and comprehensive initiatives. We
therefore call upon them to draft and implement, in
cooperation with all sectors of society and with the
unwavering support of the international community, a
long-term development strategy that will make it
possible to address the social and economic needs of
every Haitian citizen.

With regard to the challenges and tasks facing
Haiti and its people, my delegation calls upon the
international community, and upon donor countries in
particular, to provide Haiti, in the context of the
Interim Cooperation Framework, with the support and
assistance necessary for Haiti to overcome the
problems of the past and to move the country towards a
future where there is rule of law, democracy and full
enjoyment of human rights.

It is therefore essential that we face Haiti's
challenges as common challenges and that we fulfil our
duty to demonstrate solidarity with that country, which
has been so unjustly punished throughout history. We
will continue to be committed to the reconstruction and
stabilization effort that will enable the Haitian people
to be the masters of their own destiny and the agents of
their own development.

