Mr. Laotegguelnodji (Chad) (spoke in French):
Mr. Nagoum Yamassoum, Minister of State and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and African Integration of
Chad, had wished to participate personally in this
public meeting on Central Africa, but because of time
and scheduling restraints, he was unfortunately not able
to come to New York today. He has therefore requested
me to present his sincere apologies to the Council. He
also asked me to convey his warmest congratulations to
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for November 2003. My delegation
joins in the Minister's message and asks you to convey
our sincere congratulations to the delegation of the
United States of America for the excellence and quality
of its work in presiding over the Council during the
past month.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the member States of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) made
by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Congo, the current Chair of ECCAS.

We would also like to add that almost one year
ago, Chad, after being accused on several occasions,
appeared before the Security Council on 9 December
2002, as the victim of a complaint lodged against it by
the former regime of the Central African Republic. On
that occasion, my delegation detailed the timeline of
the crisis in the Central African Republic to
demonstrate that it was a question of an internal crisis.
The events that subsequently took place on 15 March
2003 at Bangui confirmed that.

Today, my delegation takes the floor calmly and
with hope to welcome the environment of peace and
harmony that once again prevails between our two
brotherly countries united by geography and history.
Under the auspices of the Central African Economic
and Monetary Community, Chad is proud to make its
contribution to strengthening security and social peace
in the Central African Republic.

However, we must learn lessons from the painful
events suffered by our States if we want to build a
happy future for our peoples. The tragic events that
have occurred all over Africa are in part a result of the
lack of social dialogue at the national level.

My delegation welcomes the fact that the new
Central African Republic authorities have quickly
understood that and have rapidly committed themselves
to the route of national dialogue. The results of their
national forum are encouraging for the future of the
country.

We observe that wherever national dialogue
prevails over the logic of war, there is a real chance to
achieve peace - the peace of the hearts and minds of
the citizens who desire to live together in national
harmony. That is why when national dialogue is weak,
we must help to maintain and strengthen it. At stake
are the lives of thousands of citizens of Central Africa
who die and of those who fall deeper into poverty each
day.

The dispatch by the Secretary-General of a
multidisciplinary assessment mission to the Central
African subregion last June is an initiative that
contributes to strengthening national dialogue in
member States. My delegation welcomes and supports
the interim report of the mission, which contains a
comprehensive and pertinent analysis of the situation.
My delegation also supports the Secretary-General's
proposal to appoint a special envoy to work with our
Governments on political questions.

However, my delegation hopes that the
appointment of a special envoy is only one step among
others. The mission's results could lead to the
establishment of a comprehensive, integrated and
lasting strategy in which the subregional organizations
and the United Nations agencies and programmes
operating in Central Africa would work in coordination
on all the political, economic and humanitarian issues
of all the States of the subregion. That would be in
keeping with the Council's presidential statement,
contained in document S/PRST/2002/31 of 31 October
2002.

