Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): Most
of the members of the mission that was recently in East
Timor are here with us today, and, on behalf of us all, I
would like to reiterate our strong appreciation to the
Special Representative, as well as to his team, for what
I think we all believe was a useful visit. I was not on
the first mission, but those who were came back
impressed and gratified by the work that you,
Mr. Vieira de Mello, had done over the past year. I
think we all want to extend extreme gratitude for your
efforts there, as well as for the impressive gains of the
people of East Timor. It is a rare partnership to witness,
and it is a privilege to watch a nation being created. It
makes all of us proud to be part of the United Nations
system that is at work there. We saw the cabinet
meetings and the rebuilding that is going on. Seeing the
conditions on the ground, I think, also makes us
appreciate the personal sacrifices that you and your
colleagues are making on the ground month after
month. On behalf of us all, I want to express our
deepest appreciation for your hard work and sacrifices
every day on the ground.

Mr. Vieira de Mello, the fact that we were there a
couple of weeks ago and that you are here today shows
the importance of continued dialogue between the
Security Council and your Mission. You are off,
literally, at the other end of the world, about as far as
one can get from New York. Your success is also your
burden, because it is not on the front page of the
newspaper every day. I think it is important for us to
see things on the ground, but it is also important for
you to know that you have a ready ear here. This is not
an easy situation; there are still dangers. We like to
think, "Well, Sergio is there, so we don't have to worry
about it". But that is not fair to you or to the people of
East Timor. So I am glad that you are here, and I hope
you feel that you have a ready ear here at any time you
want.

The issues that you have discussed, as well as
those in our report, raise some key issues. I will not go
into them in great detail, since most of them are
covered in our report. But one that I think perhaps
deserves to be highlighted is the need to begin now to
plan for the role of the international community after
independence. Not only do we have a lot of work to do
to make sure that, whatever timetable is established for
the independence of East Timor, you have the
resources during that transition; but also, I think one of
the messages from our mission to the region is that
clearly the international community is going to have to
remain engaged. I think your visit here is well timed to
begin to define the parameters of that presence.

We will be renewing the mandate of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) at the beginning of next year, and your visit
here today, Mr. Vieira de Mello, begins to lay out the
milestones we will need to address in order to begin to
ensure that the international community is there for the
post-independence period as well. I think all of us
would like to emphasize as strongly as possible the
importance of beginning that planning now. For this
reason, I think your visit is particularly well-timed.

The term "UNTAET light" was used during our
mission there, and that means we have to look at the
various components of UNTAET in terms of not only
its political aspects, but its security aspects as well. I
think you have done yeoman work, Mr. Vieira de
Mello, in trying to lay the groundwork for that. The
security presence there has already had a fair amount
of work done on it. There was the international
conference in which the international community,
including the United States, participated; and defining
financial, technical and security assistance is going to
be crucial.

The other point I wish to make from the United
States standpoint, and which is most important to us, is
the process of justice and reconciliation. All of the
post-independence questions will be greatly affected by
how well the process of justice and reconciliation is
addressed today. I think I speak for my colleagues who
were with me on the mission in saying that the key to
ensuring UNTAET's success, as well as the success of
the independence of the people of East Timor, is to put
the dual track of reconciliation and justice on a
progressive path that achieves both in a symbiotic
fashion.

In West Timor, we certainly heard repeated
concerns from the refugees about the conditions on the
ground in East Timor. They had sent their families back
and had not heard from them. Rumours and
misinformation created legitimate fears within the
community. Having just been to East Timor, we were
able to reassure them that we were convinced that the
people of East Timor would welcome the refugees
back, that they would be treated well and with respect,
as long as there was a process of justice to ensure the
people of East Timor that their need for justice was
taken care of.

Without this process of justice, we will not get
the appropriate reconciliation to solve the problems.
One of the most important aspects we came away with
was the need to make sure that UNTAET and the East
Timorese system have the capability to investigate
crimes and to conduct prosecutions. The plan that you
brought with you here, Mr. Vieira de Mello, and
presented to us on the process of justice is, I think,
very important and timely. We are already reviewing it,
and I certainly hope that we will be able to look
favourably on your request for the SWAT teams of
assistance, as well as staff and equipment. Unless you
can have a functioning judicial system, all of the other
wheels of progress will be much squeakier.

As we look at this issue, I think we have to make
sure that we do not have bureaucratic inertia that could
cause some of these resources to be underutilized. I
think we need to continue to work within the United
Nations system to make sure that these requests can be
dealt with urgently and efficiently.

In addition to ensuring that the UNTAET process
and the East Timorese process work, it is equally
fundamental to make sure that the Government of
Indonesia fulfils its responsibilities on these issues, as
outlined in Security Council resolution 1319 (2000).
The principal points relating to justice are still
germane. Further decisive action is necessary to deal
with the remaining militias. Those responsible for the
murders of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees staff, as well as for the
killing of two United Nations peacekeepers, must be
brought to justice; and there must be a process of
accountability to address the human rights violations of
1999.
While we were in Jakarta, we had very productive
meetings with a number of Government officials, and
they briefed us on the progress. We all urged strong
action in Jakarta to establish the ad hoc tribunals,
which are critical to ensuring that the process ofjustice
moves forward.

It has been over a year since the violence of 1999,
and the international community has a responsibility to
help ensure that justice is done. We all hope that the
Government of Indonesia will fulfil these
responsibilities with appropriate urgency.

The second issue I wish to highlight is that of
disbandment of the militias. This is a crucial process of
justice, and the Government must fulfil its
responsibilities in that respect. We were in several of
the camps, and I think that the militias' continued
presence in those camps, their hold on the camps and
some of the decisions of the people are impeding the
process of return. As we wrote in our report, I think it
is useful to recall here that we all stress the need for
decisive action to deal with the remaining militias, and,
in particular, the leaders, to put an end to their
activities once and for all, inter alia, through ongoing
disarmament operations, the separation of militia
leaders and of those engaging in intimidation from
refugee communities and the expeditious prosecution
of militia leaders for the serious crimes they have
committed. Progress on these issues is crucial for the
success of all that the United Nations is trying to do in
East Timor.

Lastly, the issue of return is one that has been a
large focus of the international community and the
Government of Indonesia as well. There must be a
credible, apolitical, internationally observed refugee
registration and return programme. There have been
some encouraging developments on this front in recent
weeks with the ad hoc return of 400 former TNI and
civil servants (MILSAS), in addition to the discussions
going on with the militias that had written to the
President of the Security Council. Those discussions
and returns could potentially trigger other significant
returns, which I think we would all welcome and View
as a Significant way to address the problem. They do
not, however, in any way mitigate the need for the
international community to be present in West Timor
under appropriate security conditions.

During our visit we had good discussions on
trying to enable a classic United Nations security staff
to go and review the situation, and we are hopeful that
that will occur so that the international community can
return to West Timor in full force.

I will leave one or two questions on the table for
the Special Representative.

One of our key discussions in Jakarta was to try
to urge that the Joint Border Commission meet as
quickly as possible. We are pleased that the
Commission will be meeting on Thursday and urge that
the meetings be regular and at the senior level. One of
the clear impressions that we came away with was the
need for very regular and constant discussions and the
need for better sources of information. Clearly, the
Border Commission is key, so we should do anything
we can to help on that front.

The other issue concerns the joint commissions
that are dealing with some other key bilateral matters,
in particular the pensions, which are of key importance
for the return of the refugees. Perhaps Mr. Vieira de
Mello has some additional information on what is
happening on that front.

I think all of us came away with the sense that the
back-and-forth discussions on development of working
relationships so that there is mutual understanding on
both sides would be key to moving forward, and
certainly these various committees are essential in
order to accomplish that.

Let me thank you again for a very useful visit,
Mr. Vieira de Mello, but, most importantly, for the
work that you are doing on behalf of all of us to let the
people of East Timor achieve their independence.

