Mr. Fedotov: I would like to thank the Security
Council for its continued attention to the threats posed
by drug trafficking and other forms of transnational
organized crime to peace and stability in Guinea-
Bissau.

As the Council recognized in resolution 2404
(2018), the Government oquinea-Bissau, the Economic
Community of West African States, the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
and other partners are working together to address
those urgent challenges. That includes support to the
transnational crime unit established under the West
Africa Coast Initiative, the joint airport interdiction
task force under the Airport Communication Project
(AIRCOP) and the trafficking in persons brigade
of the judicial police. Since its establishment, the
transnational crimes unit has investigated 70 cases
of drug trafficking, with 113 persons prosecuted and
71 kilogrammes of cocaine and 1,353 kilogrammes of
cannabis seized. Thanks to mentoring under UNODC'S
AIRCOP at Bissau airport, five passengers attempting
to smuggle cocaine were arrested in April. Those are
just two examples of the positive impact that capacity-
building can have as part of integrated support to
strengthen criminal justice responses and promote
peace and security. UNODC has developed a technical
assistance package for Guinea-Bissau, with clearly
identifies areas of intervention.

First, we need to do more to build capacities.
We will continue supporting the judicial police and
nationally owned inter-service elite units that have been
established and proven to be successful, namely, the
transnational crime unit and the joint airport interdiction
task force. That support for detection and investigative
skills should encompass intelligence-gathering and
analysis, profiling techniques and the sharing of
operational information at national, regional and
international levels.

Secondly, we need to help counter-illicit financial
flows. UNODC is ready to respond to the request received
from Guinea-Bissau's financial intelligence unit to
provide technical assistance to fight money laundering
and prevent and counter illicit financial flows.

Thirdly, we need to strengthen law enforcement
responses to maritime crime. The Bijagos archipelago
of 88 islands further exposes Guinea-Bissau to criminal
activities due to the difficulties of controlling vast
territorial waters.

Transnational organized crime, coupled with a
challenging political and security environment, law
enforcement capacity gaps and resource constraints,
represents a clear threat to Guinea-Bissau, the
region and beyond. Combating drug trafficking
and dismantling criminal networks clearly requires
specialized assistance, and it also requires funds.
Despite our intense efforts to mobilize resources,
funding for UNODC activities in Guinea-Bissau was
drastically reduced in 2017. Our Office must rely solely
on project funding, even to carry out urgently needed
technical assistance. However, donors remain reluctant
to engage in Guinea-Bissau in view of the current
political situation.

I would therefore like to take this opportunity
to urge the international community to enable
UNODC and other international agencies to provide
the comprehensive support Guinea-Bissau needs to
address drug and crime threats, in line with resolution
2404 (2018), to help re-establish momentum towards
progress. UNODC remains at the Council's disposal.

