Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me begin by joining
previous speakers in extending our appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for convening today's debate on a very
important issue.

We thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2010/181). We also would
like to express our thanks to Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Assistant Secretary-General Atul Khare and Ms. Hilde
Frafjord Johnson of UNICEF for their respective
briefings, as well as to Ms. Manju Gurung for her
moving testimony.

There is no doubt that progress has been made in
better protecting children in armed conflict. This
progress is indeed an encouraging sign. However,
despite the advances, children remain victims and
targets in many instances. That is truly regrettable.
Civilians must be protected at all times: in times of
peace and in times of war. This must be emphasized to
all parties. It must be made clear to warring parties.

Governments, even in the most complex of
situations, have and will always have the main
responsibility for providing protection and relief for
children. The first and most important step in
protecting children is in the prevention of conflict
itself. It is essential to build the capacities that can
assist Governments in resolving challenges
non-violently in order to prevent the outbreak of war.

The task of protecting children during armed
conflict becomes more complex every day. The ease
with which small arms and sophisticated weapons can
be delivered makes our efforts more difficult. It is even
more daunting to protect the rights of children in such
complex circumstances. Before their rights can be truly
protected and promoted, children must first be
extracted from armed conflict. It is unrealistic to
discuss protecting their rights when parties are at war
and children are in the midst of it. Children must never
be involved in armed conflicts.

Efforts to protect former child soldiers and child
victims should be conducted beyond the framework of
security or rights-based issues. Any strategy to resolve
armed conflict needs to take into account the
reintegration of these children into society through
programmatic responses at the community level, in
order to increase opportunities for children to
participate in society. For that reason, Indonesia has
been steadfast in its position that this issue should also
be discussed within the social, economic and

developmental framework. The Security Council, in
cooperation with other United Nations entities and
regional organizations, can play a role in guaranteeing
the achievement of this objective.

With regard to the report of the Secretary-
General, we would wish to see more systematic and
focused reporting on the resolutions. Reporting beyond
the scope of the annexes should take into account the
quality, reliability and objectivity of the information
provided, based on the monitoring and reporting
mechanism, as stipulated in resolutions 1612 (2005)
and 1882 (2009).

Protection of children is the ultimate objective. It
is therefore imperative that any consideration of
imposing targeted and incremental measures on
persistent perpetrators as a last resort should take into
account the vulnerabilities of children and avoid
unintended consequences to children.

We also wish to underline that extensive
consultation with the countries concerned should be
further strengthened so as to ensure that the
recommendations are implementable and their goals
realistic. Furthermore, we call upon the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict and the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
develop and refine a clear exit strategy for countries or
parties to be de-listed from the annexes. Such an exit
strategy would not only further clarify the steps that
the parties need to take, but would also provide
transparency and quell doubts about the work of the
Office of the Special Representative and the Working
Group; that is important if the process is to be seen as
legitimate and fair.

To conclude, we recognize the call to address the
challenges children face in armed conflicts on an equal
footing with gender issues. It is indeed advisable that
the work of gender experts be integrated with that of
Child Protection Advisers, particularly in the future
efforts of peacekeeping missions. War does not make
distinctions based on gender. Boys and girls are equally
traumatized and victimized by war. Thus, they need the
same protection. Efforts by the Security Council should
be to save lives without regard to gender, ensure that
warring parties lay down their arms, and establish
peace and security, as mandated by the United Nations
Charter.

