We thank you, Sir, for organizing this debate and welcome the participation of the President of the International Court of Justice, Judge Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf. The International Court of Justice is one of the primary instruments for the practical implementation of the key principle of modern international relations: the commitment to the peaceful settlement of disputes. That principle - enshrined in Article 33 of the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations (General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV)) - is the very raison d'etre of our Organization. A key element of that principle is each State's freedom to choose its own peaceful means of settlement, including those set out in the Charter of the United Nations. No solution must be preordained. Each State must be free to choose the means of settlement most appropriate to any given situation. Neither the difficulty of negotiations, nor the complexity of mechanisms nor time constraints should serve as a reason to forego that principle. The most important thing is the readiness to engage in dialogue and seek mutually acceptable solutions and compromises. The peaceful settlement of disputes is a prerequisite for the inviolability of another profound maxim of the Charter of the United Nations - the principle of the non-use of force. The Charter was a hard-won achievement for humankind following the horrors of the Second World War. It is important to remember that during the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations. People realized both the need to resolve disputes by peaceful means and the practicability of establishing an international judicial body long before the Charter of the United Nations was adopted. The peace conferences initiated by Emperor Nicolas II of Russia and convened in The Hague in 1899 and 1907 marked important steps in that process. The devastating consequences of the First World War led to the establishment of a standing judicial body - the Permanent Court of International Justice. However, it was the International Court of Justice that would eventually be endowed with the status of the main judicial organ of the United Nations. As such, it is independent and guided by international law. Even its geographical remoteness from the political battles of New York is full of legal symbolism. Each within its respective mandate, the International Court of Justice and the Security Council interact with one another and contribute to the peaceful settlement of disputes. Since the Court came into being, 178 cases have been referred to it. That figure alone shows what a significant role the Court plays in settling disputes between States. It is noteworthy that the very first of those cases was referred to the Court upon the recommendation of the Security Council. Russia firmly supports the stance that respect for the norms and principles of international law, including the peaceful settlement of disputes, is the central pillar of sustainable peace and security. We have unwavering respect for the International Court of Justice and its mandate. In order to maintain the global legal order, it is vital to faithfully make use of legal procedures to resolve legal disputes. Using judicial procedures to incite political discord is unacceptable. Over its many decades of work, the Court has managed to maintain high standards of justice. We have the highest confidence in the wisdom of its judges.
