Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico
is grateful for this open debate, which provides an
update of the sixth report of the Secretary-General on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. The
document is particularly important and includes
significant recommendations for the strengthening the
protection framework that the Security Council and the
United Nations system could provide in the field. We
thank Under-Secretary-General Holmes for his
unambiguous briefing this morning.

My delegation attaches great importance to this
topic and supports the holding of debates in the
Security Council in this area. On the basis of the
Secretary-General's report, my delegation would like
to reiterate the content of its statement at the 5781st
meeting, on 20 November, and to emphasize again that
parties in conflict, regardless of its nature, must respect
the norms of international humanitarian law and human
rights and comply with the principles of neutrality and
impartiality in protecting civilians during armed
conflicts.

The challenges faced by our Organization with
regard to the protection of civilians in armed conflicts
are very diverse and highly disturbing. Access to
humanitarian assistance, protection of civilians in the
mandates of peacekeeping operations, sexual and
gender violence and the use of cluster munitions
constitute some of the challenges that require specific
action and on which my delegation would like to make
the following comments.

First, Mexico acknowledges that the primary
responsibility for the protection of civilians rests with
States. This is crucial for States to avoid actions that
hinder the access of humanitarian assistance to
civilians. In some recent cases, access to basic services
and to humanitarian assistance has been limited, which
has made it difficult to guarantee even the minimum
conditions for their survival. In that framework,
Mexico expresses its concern over the increase in
pirate attacks off the coasts of Somalia, which
endanger the delivery of humanitarian assistance to the
civilian population of that country, given the fact that
80 per cent of the food assistance from the World Food
Programme to Somalia travels by sea.

Secondly, my delegation stresses the importance
of strengthening protection of civilians in armed
conflicts within the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. We believe it is crucial that in post-conflict
situations coordination mechanisms are established
with regard to security sector reform, both at
Headquarters and in the field, in order to strengthen the
rule of law, the administration of justice, the protection
of human rights and the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants.

Thirdly, gender Violence, including sexual
violence, whose main victims are women and children,
constitutes another significant challenge. Mexico
acknowledges the efforts made by the Organization to
combat this scourge, such as the adoption of General
Assembly resolution 61/291, on peacekeeping
operations in all its aspects, and Assembly resolution
62/214, on assistance and support to Victims of
exploitation and sexual abuse committed by United
Nations personnel. Those actions contribute to
strengthening the image, credibility and effectiveness
of the United Nations.

Lastly, Mexico reiterates its concern regarding
the use of cluster munitions and calls upon all States to
prevent their use in armed conflicts. Given their
indiscriminate nature and low reliability, they leave
behind many explosive remains that affect entire
civilian populations, especially after the conflict is
over. Mexico, along with other States, is participating
in the Dublin conference, where a legally binding
instrument to ban that category of weapons is being
negotiated.

Mexico believes that resolutions adopted by the
Security Council for the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts should be properly justified and guided
in the light of the principles and norms of international
humanitarian law. That would allow further
strengthening and development of such standards and
would grant more legitimacy to the Council's actions
and decisions.

My delegation emphasizes the importance of
cooperation of States, the Organization and particularly
the Security Council with the International Criminal
Court so as to strengthen the latter and enable it to
fully comply with one of the main purposes for which
it was created: to end impunity with respect to the
gravest crimes afflicting humankind.

We are convinced that a fundamental component
of the Security Council's work in the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts is that, among the measures
adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter in certain
situations, it would order States to act against those
responsible for committing international crimes.
Additionally, should the States be unwilling or unable
to carry out such measures, the Council would consider
submitting the matter to the International Criminal
Court.

Moreover, Mexico believes it important to heed
the Secretary-General's proposal to the Security
Council to create a working group charged with
guaranteeing the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts, as well as promote more systematic attention
to this issue in the Council's deliberations.

The work of this working group will have to put
special emphasis on the rules that operate during
hostilities so that all parties in the conflict refrain from
using weapons or methods that might cause
unnecessary losses or excessive and unnecessary
suffering, and that they comply at every moment with
the principles of international humanitarian law.

Taking all that into account, my Government
appeals to Member States to support the United
Nations and other stakeholders involved in efforts to
create a culture of protection, in which Governments
fulfil their responsibilities, armed groups respect the
norms of international law, the private sector
recognizes the impact of its commitment in countries
in conflict regarding international humanitarian law
and human rights and, finally, Member States and
regional and international organizations act swiftly and
decisively in humanitarian crises.

