Mr. Matuszewski (Poland): Allow me to begin by
expressing my delegation's full support for the statement
to be made at a later stage of this debate by the
representative of the Netherlands on behalf of the
European Union.

 

The Security Council is holding today its third meeting
in the last two months to consider the question of Angola.
This fact reflects not only the importance of the situation in
that country, but also the commitment of the international
community with regard to the peace process in Angola.

Recent developments, namely the adoption of
legislation concerning a special status for the leader of
UNITA, the incorporation of UNITA deputies into
Parliament and, finally, the inauguration of the Government
of Unity and National Reconciliation, are significant steps
towards peace and national reconciliation in Angola. We
wish to congratulate the people of Angola, the parties
concerned and their leaders for these crucial achievements.

However, many important tasks remain unfulfilled. We
believe that, with the new Government of Angola enjoying
the support of all political parties, the time has come to
make an additional effort to finalize the work. Prompt
normalization of State administration, completion of the
formation of a unified armed forces and a national police,
as well as a conclusion of the process of demobilization of
uncommissioned UNIT A military personnel, should figure
prominently on the agenda of the new Angolan authorities.
The same is true of the steps to be taken with regard to the
economic and social rehabilitation of the country, especially
those relating to the humanitarian situation and demining
programmes. Speaking of the acute problem of mines, we
feel obliged to express our concern at the slow pace of
demining.

My delegation believes that the new Government of
Angola, as well as the parties that constitute it, will show
enough resolve to overcome the difficulties which may be
encountered on the way to peace and security in Angola.

We also hope that a long-awaited meeting between
President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi will soon take place
within Angolan territory giving impetus to a prompt
resolution of all outstanding issues.

For many years the international community has been
investing substantial resources, both human and material, in
the settlement of the Angolan conflict. We believe that
now, with the Government and people of that country just
about to take the final steps in their common quest for a
peaceful future, this foreign assistance should not be
ceased. With this in View, the Polish delegation supports the
Secretary-General's recommendation concerning the
extension of the mandate of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) until 30 June 1997
and will vote in favour of the draft resolution the Security
Council is considering today. The extension of the
UNAVEM. III mandate for an additional 10 weeks would
allow time for the consideration of the modalities of a
future observer mission, as well as for the establishment
of mechanisms and arrangements for a smooth transition
from the current military operation in Angola into another
form of United Nations presence.

While welcoming the achievements of recent days,
we have to remember how complicated the Angolan road
to peace was. Consequently, we do not think that the
Security Council, or indeed the international community,
can afford to neglect further developments in that country,
which happens to be close to a region prone to social,
economic, political and military crisis.

My delegation shares the Secretary-General's view
that never before has Angola been so close to the final
resolution of the conflict and to the attainment of lasting
peace. The prosperous future of that country depends, as
it always has, on the wisdom and political will of
Angolan leaders and their people, as well as on their
ability to peacefully resolve their problems and
differences.

In conclusion, let me express on behalf of my
delegation our highest appreciation to the Secretary-
General, his Special Representative for Angola, Maitre
Alioune Blondin Beye, and the three observer States for
their tireless efforts aimed at promoting peace in Angola.

We also pay tribute to all the men and women of
UNAVEM. III and of the previous United Nations
operations in Angola for their courage and for the
sacrifices they made for the peaceful future of that
country.

