Mr. Akbaruddin (India): Mr. President, I thank you
for continuing the tradition of offering an opportunity
early in the year to articulate views on the important
subject of the protection of civilians.

The Security Council has, in the post-millennial
world, stretched the canvas of mandates and broadened
the ambit of action to include the requirement to protect
civilians under imminent threat of physical violence
in most United Nations peacekeeping operations
established since 1999. We therefore see today's debate
as an ongoing lessons-learned exercise. Permit me to
encapsulate our Views on this important subject.

First, India condemns the oppressive use of
violence against civilian populations, regardless of who
commits it. That malaise is not new. Wars in pursuit of
imperial ambitions testify to a history of scant respect
for civilian lives in times of military campaigns.
However, the nature of threats faced by civilians in
United Nations peacekeeping situations has undergone
significant changes in recent years.

Secondly, we believe that the protection of civilians
is primarily a national responsibility. Contributions to
national capacity-building, rather than intervention
mechanisms, should therefore be the priority. Local
societies have developed coping strategies for protection
before the deployment of a United Nations mission
and will apply them after the withdrawal of a mission.
Approaches that are drawn up during peacekeeping
should therefore be built on an appreciation for the
social capital of host communities to manage their own
protection.

Thirdly, solutions to threats of violence to civilian
populations should be sought within the framework
of international law. The response of the international
community must be based on the use of appropriate
methods in proportion to the perceived threat.

It is our experience that peacekeepers often rise to
the occasion when required. Let me recall the example
of Captain Salaria who led an Indian infantry brigade in
November 1961, as part of the United Nations Operation
in the Congo (ONUC) in operations against the
Katangese Gendarmerie Forces, for the establishment
of a neutral zone in North Katanga to restore peace
for the civilian population of Elizabethville. Captain
Salaria and the majority of 45 Indian peacekeepers
who died in ONUC paid with their lives, even though
the notion of the protection of civilians was not part of
that mandate. Yet, in 1962 India recognized that effort
of a Blue Helmet to protect civilians by posthumously
awarding its highest award for gallantry, the Param
Vir Chakra. Alas, it took the United Nations more than
35 years to decide on and confer the Dag Hammarskjold
Medal for the same deed of protecting civilians.

As a developing country with years of
peacekeeping experience, we feel that frequent and
regular consultation among the Council, the Secretariat
and troop-contributing countries will enhance the
credibility and effectiveness of the Council in protecting
civilians. The absence of consultation hurts everyone:
the country hosting the peacekeeping mission; the
troop-contributing countries that put their troops' lives
at risk in the service of the United Nations; the Council
as an institution; and the United Nations. It is ultimately
the United Nations as a body that gets a bad name when
the Council's decisions go wrong.

Finally, by definition, peacekeeping is a
temporary and transitional measure. The time has
therefore perhaps come to consider disaggregating the
complex, multidimensional nature of United Nations
peacekeeping mandates and address issues confronting
the protection of civilians in armed conflict situations
through focused peacebuilding activities, so that the
transition to a post-conflict society can be sustainable.
Efforts at peacebuilding should be initiated at the
beginning, and the cause of the armed conflict
addressed through national reconciliation and inclusive
political processes, giving all sections of society a stake
in peaceful coexistence.

