Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I wish to join in the words of welcome and good wishes
that have been expressed to you, Sir, and to convey to the
delegation of Argentina our gratitude for its organization of
today's meeting on the protection of United Nations
personnel, associated personnel and humanitarian personnel
in conflict zones. I would also like to thank Ms. Frechette,
the Deputy Secretary-General, and Ms. Bertini, the
Executive Director of the World Food Programme, for their
substantial statements.

The past decade has been marked by a disturbing
increase in conflicts, most often within States. These
conflicts pit legitimate Governments against factions and
movements led by rebel chiefs or warlords. In such
situations, characterized by the collapse of political
structures, humanitarian assistance operations are now
frequent, and the humanitarian personnel find themselves
increasingly exposed to grave risk as they carry out their
mission.

If in the past United Nations and associated
personnel and humanitarian personnel were victims of
conflicts between belligerents, now these workers are being
directly targeted by the parties. Mali forcefully condemns
the harassment, arrest, illegal detention, abduction, hostage-
taking, demands for ransom and deliberate attacks against
buildings housing United Nations personnel. We believe
such acts must be halted as soon as possible.

To this end the Security Council, in its presidential
statement of 29 September 1998, issued as document
S/PRST/1998/30, condemned attacks on or use of force
against the personnel of the United Nations and of other
humanitarian organizations taking part in United Nations
operations, as well as against the personnel of humanitarian
organizations, in violation of international law, including
international humanitarian law.

This major commitment of the Security Council
should be strengthened. The international community, and
the Member States of the United Nations in particular,
should, in our view, take a firm stand against violations
of international humanitarian law and impose sanctions on
all those who are guilty of such violations. Further, it is
first and foremost the responsibility of the States on
whose territory such acts have been committed to arrest
the guilty parties and bring them to justice.

The international community also should take a
stand against the culture of impunity and should support
all initiatives having this aim, in particular those clauses
of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
that define attacks against United Nations personnel,
associated personnel and humanitarian personnel as war
crimes - and thus as crimes coming under the
jurisdiction of the Court. We believe that the Rome
Statute, which my country has signed and will soon ratify,
will contribute to ensuring the security and protection of
these workers. This is why we believe it important that
this Statute quickly enter into force and that all States
sign and ratify it as soon as possible.

My delegation is pleased that the presidential
statement that the Council is going to adopt at the
conclusion of this debate confirms that the Security
Council is resolved to take energetic steps to assure and
guarantee the security and safety of United Nations
personnel, associated personnel and humanitarian
personnel in all conflict situations.

In conclusion I would like to state that Mali will
before long take the necessary steps to ratify the
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel, of 9 December 1994.

