The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Sierra Leone to participate in this
meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council welcomes the briefing
of the Executive Representative of the Secretary-
General in Sierra Leone, Mr. Jens Toyberg-
Frandzen, on 28 November 2012.

"The Security Council commends Sierra
Leone for the conduct and successful conclusion
of presidential, parliamentary, district, and local
elections, in particular acknowledging the important
role played by Sierra Leone's electoral institutions,
political parties, civil society groups, international
partners, and domestic and international observers.
The Council congratulates the people of Sierra
Leona on their large turnout in the elections, which
showed their strong commitment to democracy.
The Council welcomes the formal announcement
of polling results from the National Electoral
Commission and positive reports from observers
on the conduct of the elections.

"The Security Council recognizes the important
role played by the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Siena Leone (UNIPSIL),
the United Nations country team, and bilateral and
international partners in supporting Sierra Leone
during the electoral process.

"The Security Council calls upon all political
parties and candidates to accept the results and
to work with the Government of Sierra Leone in
a constructive manner through national dialogue
and reconciliation. The Council urges all parties
to resolve any grievances peacefully through the
appropriate legal means, in accordance with Sierra
Leone's national laws.

"The Security Council underscores the
significance of these elections and the wide
acceptance of the results as a key benchmark of
consolidating peace in Siena Leone. They were the
third set of elections to have been held in Sierra
Leone since the end of the civil war and the first
to be run entirely by Sierra Leone's democratic
institutions.

"The Security Council stresses that there is
important work ahead to further embed peace and
secure equitable prosperity for the benefit of all
Sierra Leoneans. The Security Council notes the
importance of the formulation and implementation
of a robust development and peace consolidation
programme that is inclusive and improves the
lives of all Sierra Leoneans, and urges the new
Administration and all political parties to finalise
the programme in a balanced and inclusive manner.

"The Security Council urges the international
community and development partners to continue to
provide coordinated and coherent support to Sierra
Leone to meet its peacebuilding and development
priorities.

"In addition, the Security Council requests the
Peacebuilding Commission to continue to provide
support to Siena Leone, in particular in international
resource mobilisation efforts and coordination of
international development partners.

"The Security Council recalls its request in
resolution 2065 (2012) for the Secretary-General to
deploy an inter-agency technical assessment mission
to Sierra Leone, and in particular for this mission
to consider detailed proposals and a recommended
timeline for the transition, drawdown, and exit
strategy for UNIPSIL by no later than 15 February
2013."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2012/25.

I now give the floor to the representative of Sierra
Leone.

