The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity as representative of Brazil.

The peaceful resolution of the question of
Palestine is, arguably, the single most important
objective for peace and stability in the world. For its
part, the continued expansion of Israeli settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territory became the most
important obstacle to concrete progress in negotiations
leading to a just and durable solution to this question.
It is therefore only natural that the Security Council
deal with this issue in a manner consistent with its
primary responsibility for international peace and
security. We welcome an increased engagement by the
international community, including through the
Security Council, in this matter.

The draft resolution that we had before us today
restated that all Israeli settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, are illegal and constitute a major obstacle to
the achievement of peace on the basis of the two-State
solution. It recalled Israel's obligations under the Road
Map endorsed by resolution 1515 (2003). It also called
for the immediate resumption of credible negotiations.

Brazil co-sponsored the draft resolution not only
because we fully agreed with its content, but also
because we firmly believe it could help us achieve the
two-State solution and therefore contribute to the long-
term security and stability of the whole region,
including Israel. In seeking to advance the peace
process, we also have in mind Israel's right to live in
security, free of attacks and threats to its existence.
Brazil and Israel are good friends and important
partners, both bilaterally and through MERCOSUR.

We also co-sponsored the draft resolution because
its adoption would have sent some urgent key
messages. The first is that continued disregard for
international obligations relating to settlement
construction poses a threat to peace and security in the
region. Second, halting settlement activities should be
seen not as a concession but as the lawful conduct
under international law. Third, unilateral action shall
not prevail. Upholding international law is always in
the interest of peace. The Security Council cannot
settle for less.

Over the years, Brazil has supported the
fulfillment of the legitimate aspirations of the
Palestinian people for a cohesive, secure, democratic
and economically viable State within the 1967 borders
and with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by
side and in peace with the State of Israel. As we have
strengthened our diplomatic relations with all countries
in the region, we have also deepened our commitment
to stability in the Middle East, our condemnation of all
forms of terrorism and our conviction that the peace
process must be accelerated.

Brazil's recent recognition of the Palestinian
State is fully consistent with our willingness to
contribute to a just and lasting solution to the question
of Palestine. As explicitly indicated at that time, that
decision did not mean abandoning the conviction that
negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians are
indispensable. On the contrary, we see it as a stimulus
for further negotiations. Only dialogue and peaceful
coexistence with all neighbours can truly advance the
Palestinian cause.

Many years of negotiating efforts have produced
a substantial basis upon which progress can be
achieved. It is our hope that the more intensive
schedule of meetings of the Quartet indicates a
willingness to take concrete steps that will lead to an
agreement on the final status issues by September.

We believe that the inclusion of more countries in
the peace process, including developing countries from
outside the region and with good relations with all
parties, would bring a breath of fresh air to the peace
process. Brazil stands ready to participate in and support
those efforts. We have been making our contribution to
the Palestinian Authority's State-building efforts,
including through bilateral and IBSA - India, Brazil
and South Africa - cooperation.

In times of unprecedented change in the Middle
East, it is even more urgent that progress be made on
the Israeli-Palestinian peace process. Now more than
ever, the brighter the perspectives for Palestinian
statehood, the greater the chances that the region will
advance more steadily towards stability and
democracy.

Halting the construction of settlements would be
a clear signal of political will to engage in serious
negotiations. To achieve an agreement, difficult
political decisions will be required. Brazil is confident
that the Israeli and the Palestinian leadership will
display statesmanship and will be ready to make the
painful concessions needed for the next generations to
enjoy the benefits of peace.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.

