Mr. Cevik (Turkey): I would like to thank the
presidency of Luxembourg for organizing this important
debate and Alhaji Babah Sawaneh for sharing his
touching story with us. We also welcome the adoption of
resolution 2143 (2014) on children and armed conflict,
which includes very important elements with regard to

the development and implementation of the framework
on children and armed conflict.

The legal and normative framework regarding
children and armed conflict has developed considerably
over the past 15 years, leading to significant
improvements on the ground. There has been increased
momentum, especially with regard to the prevention of
the recruitment of child soldiers, thanks to important
campaigns such as "Children, not soldiers".

On the other hand, the expansion of the framework
of children and armed conflict beyond child soldiers
to include the six grave violations has highlighted the
other challenges currently faced. The latest report of
the Secretary-General (S/2013/245) stresses that tens of
thousands of children continue to be recruited, killed
or maimed, sexually abused or deprived of their right
to education and health care, among other abuses.
We are particularly concerned about the widespread
and deliberate attacks against schools, educational
personnel and students, as well as the use of schools
for military purposes, including as barracks, fighting
positions, detention centres, interrogation or torture
sites, and weapons depots.

Sadly, we are witnessing a heartbreaking example of
how children are affected by armed conflict right across
our border with Syria. There are recent depictions ofthe
grave crimes committed against the children of Syria in
the report of the independent international commission
of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, released on
12 February, as well as the Secretary-General's May
2013 report on children and armed conflict. According
to UNICEF statistics, over 4 million Syrian children
are in need of assistance and 3 million are internally
displaced; 94,362 have lost their parents due to the
conflict; at least 5,000 out of 22,000 schools have been
partially or totally damaged, and a further 1,000 have
been used to shelter internally displaced persons; and
there are over 60,000 Syrian students at the camps in
Turkey.

A strong display of political will, unity and joint
action on the part of the international community would
be the most important tool for child protection. United
Nations and the other missions can be crucial sources
of trustworthy information and provide monitoring and
reporting functions, which could lead to awareness-
raising, as well as better planning, protection and
response. Therefore, it is crucial to mainstream
principles related to children and armed conflict into
peacekeeping mandates and the training programmes

of their personnel. Moreover, ensuring humanitarian
access, as well as full access to justice by children,
should be prioritized in areas of conflict.

New conflicts erupting around the globe, as well
as the evolving character of war and conflict, give rise
to new threats and challenges in relation to children
and armed conflict. The increased number and scope
of conflicts heightens the importance of cooperation
and coordination between the United Nations, regional
countries and organizations, troop-contributing
countries and other relevant actors that are active in
crisis areas. Regional and subregional organizations
can especially contribute to the protection of civilians
and child protection on a number of issues, ranging
from reporting, information-sharing and analysis
to mediation and a possible presence in the field,
especially during armed conflict. Towards that end,
those organizations, which are increasingly involved
in conflict prevention, mediation and peace support,
should further mainstream child protection issues in
their efforts.

While focusing on new threats and challenges,
we must not lose sight of the initial goal of mobilizing
efforts to end the recruitment and use of children by
armed groups. The Security Council must continue to
apply pressure on persistent perpetrators, including
through sanctions if necessary. Preventive measures,
such as the establishment of legal frameworks
and age-verification mechanisms, especially birth
registration, are of particular importance. Justice and
security sector reform processes must be supported to
foster investigative and prosecution capacities, as well
as national accountability mechanisms. On the other
hand, international organizations and non- governmental
organizations should refrain from drawing up any kind
of documents, including deeds of commitment, with
terrorist organizations, which can easily abuse that
situation to legitimize their existence and acts.

Finally, I would like to emphasize that children and
armed conflictis adevelopmentissue as well. Sustainable
development is dependent upon healthy, educated and
socially integrated youth in every society. As such, the
sustained denial of the right to health, education and a
safe and secure environment for children results in lost
generations, endangering the future of entire societies
and cultures. We appreciate the work done by UNICEF
and its partners in that respect, especially with regard to
the critical efforts made to minimize the impact of the

crisis on children, including in the life-saving areas of
health, nutrition, immunization, water and sanitation,
as well as investments in the future of children through
education and child protection.

In conclusion, I would like to voice our strong
readiness to extend our full support to international
and regional efforts related to child protection and
child soldiers. I would particularly like to commend
the valuable efforts of the United Nations, and express
our heartfelt gratitude to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zerrougui and her hard-working
team.

