Ms. Korjenie: My name is Selma Korjenie, and I
am Head of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Programme
for TRIAL International, a non-governmental
organization that fights impunity for international
crimes and supports victims in their pursuit ofjustice.
I am also honoured to address the Security Council
as a woman and citizen of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and to speak about my country's efforts aimed at
reconciliation and dealing with the past. My message to
the Council is based on consultations with several other
representatives of civil society organizations who work
on justice and peacebuilding in my country.

Where is Bosnia and Herzegovina today when it
comes to dealing with the past? For the average tourist
coming for a short visit, we are a country of great natural
beauty with a rich cultural heritage, delicious traditional
food, beautiful music and warm-hearted people. But we
are also a country where some of the worst atrocities in
Europe since the Second World War occurred, a country
where everyday life is profoundly affected by the war,
which ended 24 years ago, and a country still carrying a
heavy burden from the past. Many complicated issues,
including bringing war criminals to justice, satisfying
the needs of victims and their families and reconciling
peoples and communities, are not being handled in a
satisfactory manner.

For many years, a great emphasis was put on the
judicial response to the horrendous crimes committed
during the war. We believed that bringing war criminals
to justice would result in reconciliation, including
by acknowledging the suffering of victims and their
families. Although some positive developments were
made, progress has been slow. At the current rate of
prosecution, civil society is very worried that our
judicial institutions will not be able to meet the deadline
of closing all wartime cases by 2023. For the tired and
forgotten victims who are still alive today, this denial
of justice increases the suffering visited upon them
during the war.

The prompt fight against impunity remains of
paramount importance. But to provide a fuller sense
of justice to survivors in particular and to society as
a whole, the prosecution of perpetrators alone will not
be enough. In order to normalize relationships among
individuals as well as communities, we now also
need to fight the denial that such crimes were even
committed. Indeed, a perverse nationalistic rhetoric
is today flourishing and dominating the public space
more than ever. Leading political elites and the media
working at their service now openly propagate the
denial of genocide and other war crimes, at least when
the crimes in question have been committed against the
so-called opposing side. This discourse is accompanied
by the increased glorification of criminals from one's
own community.

Let me give Council members some examples. Public
spaces, such as streets, memorials and monuments,
have been named after legally convicted war criminals,
thereby justifying the atrocities committed by them.
In the town of Pale, for instance, a student dormitory
has been named after Radovan Karadzie. In another
location, Nevesinje, a mural of Ratko Mladie has been
unveiled. When verdicts are rendered against a member
of a community, nationalist circles often reject it, as
was seen recently in the Prosecutor v. Prlic et al.
case. These groups concentrate their attention only on
the crimes committed against their own community.
This biased celebration of past crimes is a refusal to
acknowledge the full truth and to accept the suffering
of all victims regardless of their community or origin,
and it takes many forms.

International and national courts are often
undermined. During public meetings, photographs of
convicted war criminals are brandished. Some of the
perpetrators released from prison are now welcomed at
gatherings of leading politicians. Some are even elected
to political positions, as was the case with convicted
war criminal Fikret Abdie, who became mayor of
Velika Kladusa. Associations are created that bear the
names of war criminals, and even fascist organizations
no longer fear appearing in public, which is comparable
to publicly admitting past crimes.

Moreover, there are almost no monuments or
memorials universally dedicated to war victims.
The initiatives for building memorials for victims
are often politicized, even at the local level, which
further frustrates survivors and their families,
thereby preventing efforts to achieve just satisfaction
and robbing them of their right to commemoration.
In contrast to war veterans, civilian victims - in
particular women survivors of sexual violence - have
been fighting for many years for their voices to be heard
and still have not been granted equal rights.

Efforts aimed at peacebuilding and reconciliation
are fundamentally blocked at all political levels.
Peacebuilding and reconciliation are not a main
concern for most politicians nor, tragically, for many
politically inclined media groups either. It follows that
even positive stories that show the normalization of
relations among individuals and communities are often
silenced and rarely find any place in the public arena.

Sadly, objecting to the nationalist rhetoric entails
risks. Those who dare to look at the past objectively,
with a real concern for the fate of victims, and those
who voice dissenting views about the events of the
war, are often exposed to public attacks. They receive
threats and sometimes have to leave their homes or
even the country in search of protection, because State
institutions are unable to protect their citizens from
such intimidation.

Even schools fall under the influence of such
policies and views about acceptable truths on what
happened during the war. Indeed, some formal
educational programmes create the basis for future
distrust towards other communities, keeping alive the
possibility of conflicts in future. For example, a new
history textbook in the Republika Srpska glorifies one
of the worst war criminals, Radovan Karadzie, as a
poet and the first President of the Republika Srpska,
without providing information about his responsibility
for genocide and numerous crimes against humanity.
Nothing is said of his conviction to life in prison by the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. Such
retrograde narratives are on the rise and cause tensions
among an already divided nation. Three generations
have now tasted the poison of hatred. Very little is
being done to prevent the same fate happening to the
next generation.

However, there is still a glimmer of hope. Work
aimed at delivering justice to affected individuals
and communities and providing engagement on
reconciliation and peacebuilding does happen, and
there are even successes to celebrate. But such work and
engagement result from the dedication of civil society
organizations, human rights activists and individuals
who seek to normalize relations among individuals
and communities through their activism. Some victims
and survivors are increasingly active in their quest for
justice and for opportunities to rebuild themselves, with
the support of numerous civil society representatives.
For example, for the past 12 years, my organization has
been working alongside with and supporting victims
of the war, including numerous survivors of sexual
violence. This long-term involvement, coupled with
a constant engagement with authorities to call for
upholding international standards and for guaranteeing
the basic human rights of victims, has made justice
processes a little more efficient, fair and inclusive.

Those results, combined with successes from other
sectors of society, show that the initiatives taken by
human rights activists, local civil society organizations,
war victims, former members of opposed armies, youth
from different ethnic backgrounds and individual
religious leaders to spread messages of peace and
tolerance can really sow the seeds ofjustice, truth and
reconciliation. Ordinary citizens want nothing more
than to leave the war behind them and look towards
a brighter future. Clearly, ordinary citizens are not
the ones preventing peace, but without the support of
the State and a comprehensive institutional approach,
reconciliation cannot have long-lasting effects. Without
a concerted effort to fight the denial ofpast crimes and to
combat nationalistic rhetoric, Bosnia and Herzegovina
will continue to be a ticking time bomb.

Next Saturday we will be commemorating the
destruction of the famous Mostar Bridge. The old
bridge was destroyed on 9 November 1993. It has since
been rebuilt, but Bosnia and Herzegovina still needs
the support of the international community to rebuild
numerous bridges between people and communities.
For that, I would humbly like to propose two paths for
the Council's consideration.

First, do not let denial and hate take stronger root.
The international community should not be afraid to
engage with Bosnia and Herzegovina on stricter terms.
It should not be afraid to demand respect for the verdicts
rendered by international and local courts. It should
make sure that denying, minimizing or justifying any
crime, regardless of its target, should be forbidden.
It should demand that victims can see their right to

justice, truth and reparations fully implemented. Only
these kinds of conditions will enable us to move ahead
as a nation and reconcile with one another.

Secondly, please do not despair of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. As a young Bosnian woman, I will not
despair of my country. I want to leave it to my children
free of the poison of hatred. There are many wonderful
people here, from multiple sectors of civil society,
including many human rights activists who fight on a
daily basis to make their country a better place. Our civil
society needs the trust of the Security Council. We need
it to help and support the initiatives aimed at rebuilding
bridges and delivering justice and reconciliation.

