Mr. Gahutu (Burundi) (Spoke in French): On
behalf of the Government of the Republic of Burundi
and on behalf of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation, I would like to extend my
sincere congratulations to you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of presidency of the Security Council for
the month of November.

The Government of Burundi would like to bring
the following facts to the attention of the international
and national community. In response to the recent
information circulated in some local media, the
Government of Burundi reiterates its political will
to protect the entire population of Burundi and all
foreigners living in the country against threats or
attacks from saboteurs and criminals of all stripes.
In order to accomplish that task, which is its primary
mission, the Government calls for the cooperation of all
its citizens and all foreigners and urges them to report all
troublemakers, including by providing any information
they may have about any acts aimed at destabilizing
Burundi or crimes committed on its territory.

The Government of Burundi takes this opportunity
to express its thanks to the bilateral and multilateral
partners working in Burundi and for the clear
cooperation they have demonstrated throughout its
long march to consolidate the peace process that began
more than a decade ago.

During this crucial period, Burundi has been
preparing itself for general and presidential elections for
the third time. It calls on the same partners to redouble
their efforts to ensure that the elections take place in
good conditions, ensuring the security, freedom and
transparency of the elections for all. The Government is
aware of the scale of the task before it, but is confident
that it will successfully carry out its responsibilities
with the help of the entire population and its regional
and international community in general. In that regard,
the Government would like to note that the road map
adopted by all political and Burundian stakeholders and
the consultations undertaken between the Government
and all stakeholders will herald a peaceful environment
for the elections of 2015.

The Government's discussion with political actors
on facilitating the role of the United Nations Office in
Burundi (BNUB) in our country reflects its resolve to
conduct an inclusive, fair and free electoral process.
Similarly, the current work of the media and civil
society in general, as well as the consultations begun
by the Government with religious groups, demonstrate
the Government's desire to open a political space to
all throughout the country. While the Government has
the primary responsibility for ensuring the security of
all those living in the territory of its country, it avails
itself of the opportunity to call on all political actors to
refrain from any action that could lead to heightened
tensions and to avoid political violence. In doing so,
it will be possible for us to bury once and for all the
hatchet that has bloodied our country's history and its
sanguinary past.

The Government of Burundi would like to recall
that BNUB's mandate expires at the end of 2014. It
is also aware that the drawdown will leave a vacuum
to be filled, which will be difficult on many levels.
However, it is time for the Government to assume its
responsibilities and prove that it is up to the challenge
in an effective and efficient fashion. The Government
is also aware that many challenges lie ahead. That is
why it calls on the United Nations Office in Burundi
and other partners involved to implement the joint
transition plan and the peacebuilding priority plan as
swiftly as possible.

It should be noted that an agreement between the
Government of Burundi and the United Nations with
regard to the deployment of the electoral observer
mission has also almost been reached. The same will
hold true with respect to other partners who may wish
to participate in the monitoring of the elections next
year in Burundi. In that regard, we should stress that
this is the same language that the Government has used
for the past month. The Government is also willing to
work with all partners in the area of human rights and
to do everything in its power to conclude the ongoing
process of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission.

The Government continues to work with other
Governments in the subregion and in Africa as a
whole to promote regional cooperation through the
organizations of which it is a member and with the
African Union. In the framework of the implementation
of the Vision Burundi 2025 and our second Strategic
Framework for Growth and the Fight against Poverty,
Burundi would like to see all the commitments made
at the Geneva Partners Conference, held in October,
2012, honoured by all partners. Indeed, the subsequent
sectoral conferences that were held led to specific
viable projects.

As a result, the Government of Burundi hopes that
the round table to be held on 11 and 12 of December
will produce specific and firm commitments, which
will immediately unblock the remaining financial
resources. In so doing, the international community
can demonstrate its willingness to help Burundi fill the
vacuum left by the drawdown of BNUB and to complete
any ongoing programmes for the various strategic
development instruments, such as Vision Burundi 2025
and our second Strategic Framework for Growth and
the Fight against Poverty, thus putting Burundi on the
road to progress, so as to build on what has already been
accomplished and position the country for achieving a
brighter future for its people. It is such action that will
create a foundation for sustainable development in the
medium and long term.

Lastly, the Government would like to conclude
by reiterating its willingness to work for peace and
development for all the people of Burundi, with the
support of all its partners.

