Mr. Menon (Singapore): I would like to take this
opportunity to express our deepest condolences to our
Indian colleagues as well as to all who lost loved ones
in the recent terrorist attacks in Mumbai. The attacks
have shown that terrorism is a threat that spares no
one. The fatalities from the attacks included more than
20 foreigners from at least nine countries. Singapore
was also not left untouched by this tragedy. A
Singaporean woman, killed in the Mumbai attacks, was
the first Singaporean to fall victim to modern-day
terrorists.

The tragic events in Mumbai are a grim reminder
that the scourge of terrorism continues unabated.
Singapore stands firmly behind the Indian Government
in its fight against terrorism. It is equally if not even
more important for countries in the South Asian region
to work closely with one another to tackle a scourge
that has cost countless lives and brought pain and
suffering to all within the region. Not to do so would
be to waste a golden opportunity and play into the very
hands of those who seek to sow the seeds of discord
among the peoples of the region.

Seven years after the 11 September attacks and
six years since the first bomb attacks in Bali, terrorism
persists. The latest attacks in Mumbai, as well as the
continued incidents in Iraq and Afghanistan,
underscore the common terrorist threat that we
continue to face.

Terrorists continue to adapt and evolve. By
decentralizing their networks, spawning independent
home-grown groups and harnessing modern
technology, they are making it that much more difficult
for security authorities to detect and predict future
attacks. We are also seeing more and more instances of
plots or attacks involving self-radicalized individuals.
These individuals are not recruited by any terrorist
groups; they become exposed to deviant ideology,
frequently through the Internet, and embrace the
radical ideas they come across. They then facilitate, or
worse, participate in, terrorism.

Singapore recognizes the diversity and constantly
evolving nature of terrorism. The Singapore
Government has adopted a multipronged strategy to
deal with terrorism. The first element of this strategy is
the use of a multi-ministry networked approach. Such
an approach integrates the work of otherwise separate
bodies, enables inter-agency coordination and allows
the Government to leverage the strengths of diverse
organizations.

The second element in our strategy is community
engagement. Singapore is a multicultural and
multireligious society; every community must play its
part to hold society together during a crisis.
Singapore's Prime Minister launched the Community
Engagement Programme in February 2006. This
Programme aims to strengthen understanding and
develop trust among various ethnic communities and
across society. The goal is to be able to maintain social
harmony after any terrorist attack. A number of
interfaith events, dialogues and forums have been held
under the auspices of this Programme.

Singapore also relies heavily on members of all
of its religious communities to help counter any
misrepresentations of religion. For example, after
several members of the Jemaah Islamiyah group were
apprehended for planning terrorist acts on Singaporean
soil, our Muslim community stepped forward to help
rehabilitate them. Muslim clerics from the Religious
Rehabilitation Group work closely with the Singapore
authorities to counsel the detainees and their families
to correct their misinterpretation of Islam. The
Religious Rehabilitation Group has also reached out to
the wider community, both Muslim and non-Muslim,
through forums and publications.

Another key element in our strategy is
cooperation with the international community.
Terrorism is a global problem and it obviously requires
a global response. The United Nations continues to
play an important role in sending a clear political
signal that the international community's
condemnation of terrorism in all of its forms and
manifestations is consistent, unequivocal and strong. In
this regard, Singapore welcomes the General
Assembly's review of the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in
September this year. Having assessed how far we have
come and what else needs to be done, we should leave
rhetoric aside and redouble our efforts to implement
concrete counter-terrorism measures. Singapore is
doing its part at the national and regional levels to
implement the Strategy. We look forward to continued
and closer cooperation with other Member States and

to interacting with the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force to further enhance counter-
terrorism efforts at the United Nations. Singapore also
looks forward to further progress in discussions on the
draft comprehensive convention on international
terrorism at the upcoming ad hoc committee meetings
during the current session of the General Assembly.

Terrorism cuts across national, geographic,
religious and ethnic boundaries. The transnational
nature of modern-day terrorism means that all
Governments will be faced with the challenge of
confronting this menace. Terrorists seldom work in
isolation and more often than not operate in well-
organized networks of individuals, cells and groups
around the world. The battle will be long-drawn-out.
Modern-day terrorists have deep ideological roots and
the adherents of these ideologies are prepared to go to
extreme lengths to achieve their aims. Therefore, it is
imperative that countries stay the course and continue
to work closely to combat this scourge and exchange
information on strategies to address the root causes of
the issue. It is only through our combined efforts that
we can hope to defeat the terrorist networks we are
currently facing.

