Mr. Theron (Namibia): I wish to join other
delegations in thanking you, Sir, for convening this
open meeting on the situation in Somalia. Let me also
take this opportunity to thank Sir Kieran for the
comprehensive and, indeed, useful briefing on the
overall situation in that country. I would like to also
thank the Permanent Representative of Djibouti,
Mr. Roble Olhaye, for a useful update on the
developments concerning the ongoing Somalia
National Peace Conference in Djibouti. We wish to
commend him for the dedicated, excellent and
innovative manner in which his Government is
organizing the Conference.

The question of Somalia will continue to be a
cause of concern for the international community. This
is particularly true for the Security Council, which is
charged with the maintenance of international peace
and security. It is thus essential that the Council give
its full support to the efforts of the Somali people to
rebuild their country. The absence of a central authority
in Somalia and the country's division between
antagonistic warlords and faction leaders, as well as the
violations of the arms embargo against Somalia, are,
among other things, of great concern to my delegation.
The Somali people have suffered for too long and it is
high time that favourable conditions are created so that
they can decide the future of their country.

In our view, it is therefore imperative that the
Security Council once again reassert its authority over
the situation in Somalia, which continues to be a threat
to peace and security in the region. The Council must
support the peace process in Somalia, the purpose of
which is to restore peace, stability and prosperity to
that country. It is against this background that my
delegation welcomed and fully supported the Djibouti
peace initiative of convening of the Somalia National
Peace Conference to enable the Somali people to
discuss the future of their country and with a view to
creating structures for the normal functioning of their
State.

In this regard, we strongly believe that the
Djibouti initiative should be endorsed by this Council
as the only viable mechanism for the peaceful
resolution of the question of Somalia. We also call
upon the international community to provide financial
and technical support so that the Government of
Djibouti can fulfil this task. I want here to echo
Mr. Prendergast's words that the international
community should not give up on Somalia, but rather
continue to assist the peace process.

My delegation is greatly concerned at the reports
we continue to receive from various sources regarding
the flow of arms into Somalia, despite the Security
Council resolutions imposing an arms embargo on that
country. In this regard, we commend the efforts of the
Chairman of the sanctions Committee for seeking ways
and means to strengthen the sanctions regime against
Somalia. We call upon Member States, particularly the
neighbouring countries of Somalia, to assist the
sanctions Committee by providing information related
to violations of the arms embargo.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, we
commend the excellent job being done by the
humanitarian agencies, despite the difficult conditions
in which they are operating. The agencies have been
able to deliver assistance to the needy - especially the
vulnerable groups, such as women and children -
amid threats and killings of their workers by the
militias. We were also concerned to hear from
Mr. Prendergast this morning that as many as 750,000
people are considered highly vulnerable, following
three consecutive years of below-normal rainfall and
dwindling household resources. We again call upon the
donor community to provide adequate financial
resources to the humanitarian agencies to enable them
to meet the challenges ahead.

