We thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing. In the light of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, Russia supports the timely call of the Secretary-General to immediately stop the hostilities, secure a ceasefire and introduce a humanitarian pause in conflict areas. This has particular relevance for the longest-running crisis in the Middle East, the solution to which is vital for the region - the Palestinian question. We welcome the ongoing contacts between Palestinians and Israelis to combat the coronavirus pandemic. The focus is on cooperation in the field of health care, but other issues are being discussed, too. We hope that those contacts will become part of a series of confidence-building measures in terms of a broader dialogue between the parties. We echo the concerns expressed by others about the potential consequences of the spread of the disease in the Gaza Strip. We note the deliveries of medical equipment by the World Health Organization and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). However, given the humanitarian situation in Gaza, those efforts should be increased and multiplied. The work of UNRWA and support for it by the international community is more important than ever. Of course, the safety of UNRWA staff is a priority. We are going through a difficult time in the Middle East peace process that is being even further aggravated by COVID-19. However, our principal approach remains unchanged. Russia supports a just and fair solution to the Palestinian question on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative, which provide the basis for the creation of an independent, sovereign, territorially contiguous Palestinian State within 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. Last month we took part in a teleconference of Special Envoys to the Middle East Quartet of international mediators and discussed the current challenges facing the Middle East peace process. It was agreed that it is important to revitalize the Quartet and to continue contacts. At the same time, we are ready to consider other formats for interaction, including through the participation of countries of the region and the League of Arab States. The Palestinian side has repeatedly stated that it was ready to resume negotiations on final-status issues. Israeli representatives have said the same thing. Consultations with both parties should be continued so that they can determine the parameters of such negotiations and proceed with them as soon as possible. Regrettably, reports indicate that settlement activities and the demolition of Palestinian property continue. Deadly clashes have not stopped. We took note of the understanding reached between Israeli political leaders on overcoming the domestic political crisis. However, we note with concern the plans, according to incoming reports, for the unilateral implementation of the so-called deal of the century with regard to the annexation of Palestinian territories. In this regard, we consider it critical, in order to preserve the peace process, to refrain from any provocative actions or unilateral steps. The task of achieving inter-Palestinian unity remains extremely urgent. Russia is making efforts to bring the Palestinian ranks together. We highly appreciate the role of our Egyptian friends in this regard.
