The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Serbia in which he requests that
the President of the Republic of Serbia be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, With the consent of the Council, to
invite the President of the Republic of Serbia to
participate in the consideration of the item, Without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I request the Protocol Officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. Boris Tadic', President of the Republic
of Serbia, to a seat at the Council table.

Mr. Boris Tadie, President of the Republic of
Serbia, was escorted to a seat at the Council
table.

The President (spoke in Chinese): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Boris Tadie, President of the Republic
of Serbia. In accordance with the understanding
reached in the course of the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Zannier to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance With the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
2

Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Skender Hyseni.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Hyseni to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/5, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Lamberto Zannier. I now give the floor
to Mr. Zannier.


