Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Mr. President, on behalf
of the Pakistan delegation, I would like to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council this month. It is a special pleasure to see the
fraternal State of Qatar and you, my dear friend,
preside over the Council at this important juncture.

Let me also express our appreciation to
Ambassador Voto-Bernales of Peru for his successful
presidency in November.

The visit of the Security Council mission to
Afghanistan last month was timely. We congratulate
Ambassador Oshima for the presentation of a factual
and objective report on its findings. The overview
contained in the report of the mission is similar to the
assessment that was presented in the report of the
Secretary-General in September (S/2006/727).

It is a euphemism to say that the security
environment is precarious. Certainly, it is dangerous,
but we must understand the reasons for that
environment comprehensively and honestly. In the
View of Pakistan, the deterioration in the security
environment in Afghanistan is the result of three major
failures.

First is the failure of governance. We have
rampant corruption and misgovernance both at the
centre and in the provinces. We have a drug-based
economy - 60 per cent of the gross domestic product,
according to Afghanistan's own figures. We have a
much-publicized failure of security sector reform in the
police as well as in the national army.

The second failure is the failure of reconstruction.
There has been some development in the northern parts
of Afghanistan, but there has been virtually no
development in the South and the South-East of
Afghanistan, which is largely terra incognita for the
Kabul Government. That is where there are large
sanctuaries for the militancy that today threatens
Afghanistan and Pakistan. Large tracts of land are out
of the control of both the Kabul Government and the
Coalition forces. There, the Islamic militants rule,
certainly by night and often by day. We must bring
reconstruction if the Afghan people and the people of
that region are to have a stake in peace and stability in
Afghanistan.

The third failure is the failure of reconciliation.
Large sections of the Afghan people, particularly the
Pashtuns, have been left out of the power structure,
both at the centre and in the provinces. Warlords rule
and fight against each other, and people have complete
insecurity. They therefore turn to anyone who can
provide that security for them.

Pakistan has a vital stake in peace and stability in
Afghanistan. The 25 years of war in Afghanistan have
destabilized and radicalized our frontier regions and
alienated some of the Pashtuns because of what is
happening in Afghanistan. Pakistan therefore desires
peace and stability in Afghanistan. If we are to serve
the larger objective of serving as a bridge between
Central Asia, South Asia and West Asia, we need peace
in Afghanistan. Above all, however, Pakistan's support
for Afghanistan and our cooperation with Afghanistan
are dictated by the natural affiliation between our
peoples of history, of faith, of ethnicity and of common
suffering during difficult years.

We are therefore pained to hear insinuations and
allegations such as those which were expressed today
by my brother from Afghanistan. The Foreign Minister
of Pakistan is today in Kabul discussing ways and
means by which we can cooperate with and help
Afghanistan. But help is based on mutual trust, and
when we hear our Afghan brothers mouth allegations
which are either untrue or grossly exaggerated, we
question the motives. We ask ourselves why they seek
to explain their own failure by pointing fingers across
the border. We wonder whether they are acting on their
own behalf or whether they are acting as a puppet of
those who desire to erode relations between Pakistan
and Afghanistan and the brotherly peoples of the two
countries. People speak about medusas, but believe in
Kali, the goddess of war. We ask our Afghan brothers
to refrain from such exaggerations and allegations if
they desire our cooperation.

The Taliban are an Afghan phenomenon. My
brother has quoted from the report of the Secretary-
General; let me also refer to that report. The Secretary-
General's report rightly notes that the insurgency in
Afghanistan is being conducted by "Afghans operating
inside Afghanistan's borders" (S/2006/727, para. 5).
The report also identifies five distinct leadership
centres of the insurgency, all located within
Afghanistan. According to the report, "[t]he foot
soldiers of the insurgency are Afghans recruited within
Afghanistan" (ibid., para. 9). We therefore reject
insinuations of Pakistan's providing sanctuaries or of
any training and recruitment in Pakistan. Certainly, we
would ask such friends as Denmark to come and check
before they repeat such allegations.

There are, of course, some elements of the
Taliban and their sympathizers who crossed over into
Pakistan following the post-9/ll military intervention
by the United States and Coalition forces in
Afghanistan. Those Taliban and militants from
Al-Qaida melded into the 3 million Afghan refugees
who have been hosted for the past 25 years by
Pakistan.

Pakistan is helping Afghanistan in the security
sector, including through the Tripartite Commission.
The United States, the International Security
Assistance Force, NATO and even Afghan officials are
aware of the nature and the extent of Pakistan's
support. Pakistan believes that the Taliban are a
common threat to Afghanistan and Pakistan. Their
Vision is contrary to the vision of modernism which we
are seeking to promote in our country. But the Taliban
are Afghans, operating in large areas of southern and
eastern Afghanistan. Those operations could not take
place unless the local population were sympathetic to
the Taliban and the militants who operate with
impunity in those large tracts of Afghanistan. Pakistan,
for its part, has made every effort to prevent illegal
border crossing. We have deployed 80,000 troops -
more than the total of Coalition and Afghan forces on
the other side. We have lost 600 of our personnel, who
have been killed in the 80 operations we have
conducted. Thus, there can be no doubt about the
sincerity and commitment of Pakistan to bring security
to the border regions of Afghanistan and Pakistan. But
that responsibility must be joint.

We do not accept that the onus is only on
Pakistan. We have 700 posts along the border with
Afghanistan and 80,000 troops. There is only a fraction
of that number on the other side. In the North
Waziristan area, we have 97 posts, while NATO-ISAF
has three and the Afghan army 21. We therefore ask for
a matching effort to control the long and difficult
border. One should refrain from making allegations
against Pakistan and seeking to transfer blame to
Pakistan.

I would add that the international community has
avoided seriously addressing the problem of the
Afghan refugees. There are 3 million refugees still in
Pakistan. Without any appreciable international
assistance, we support them, on our own. They
constitute one tenth of the total population of
Afghanistan. Many of the complaints regarding illegal
border crossings would end, if we could return the
refugees to Afghanistan.
We have proposed that the Afghan refugee camps
on the border be relocated to the Afghan side. We are
planning to return all refugees to Afghanistan within
three years. That should put an end to the allegations of
cross-border movement.

But it is surprising that the refugee issue does not
figure in the report of the Security Council mission. We
wonder, and would ask Ambassador Oshima, whether
the issue raised by the Kabul side. It is certain that it
was raised by the Foreign Secretary of Pakistan, when
he was consulted in Islamabad by Ambassador Oshima.
But that issue is totally ignored. We have said that in
order to prevent cross-border movement, we want to
fence the border - at least selectively. That was not
accepted by our partners. We proposed, more
drastically, to mine the border, but that is opposed on
humanitarian grounds, as we just heard from Canada.

People speak loosely about the agreement we
concluded in the North Waziristan area of our frontier.
We did so in order to calm the area and to prevent
cross-border action by militants. We made an
agreement with the tribal elders and not with the
Taliban. The result is that there is calm in North
Waziristan today and that can be independently
established. The incidents of violence in Afghanistan
have declined since September. That can be confirmed
by the statistics from NATO and ISAF.

The fighting currently taking place in
Afghanistan is mostly in Helmand Province, which is
quite a distance from the border. There too, United
Kingdom forces reached a similar agreement with
tribal leaders in the Musa Qala area, which has calmed
the situation there. Pakistan intends to convene tribal
jirgas in other parts of our frontier region to conclude
peace and development agreements that are similar to
that in North Waziristan. Jirgas in the tribal areas of
Pakistan and across the border in southern and eastern
Afghanistan are a time-honoured local tradition. It is a
process aimed at promoting consensus and
reconciliation by involving credible intermediaries and
tribal elders.

We believe that such agreements could be
replicated on the Afghan side to strengthen the tribal
and traditional leadership structures, end political
alienation, cease hostilities, bring about normalcy and
promote reconstruction and development. That
approach was endorsed at the summit meeting between
President Musharraf, President Karzai and President
Bush in September 2006, in Washington, DC. Foreign
Minister Kasuri is Visiting Kabul today for further
discussion on the modalities of the jirgas.

Pakistan will continue to provide its cooperation
and support to Afghanistan. But the problems of
Afghanistan need to be addressed through a holistic
approach based on political reconciliation, improved
security and governance and rapid and large-scale
economic and social development and reconstruction.

On its own, Afghanistan cannot achieve those
goals. It needs the support of the international
community. Despite its limited resources and its own
problems, Pakistan has committed $250 million for
reconstruction in Afghanistan. We have spent over half
of that amount and 60,000 Pakistanis are in
Afghanistan helping in the reconstruction.

As Ambassador Oshima appropriately warned in
his briefing, it is abundantly clear that Afghanistan
needs additional and sustained support and assistance
from the international community. Without such
support, there is no guarantee that Afghanistan will not
slide backwards into conflict and become a failed State
once again.
24

We believe it is necessary to win the hearts and
minds of the people through a political and economic
approach. Military means, often necessary, cannot
deliver in and of themselves. In that perspective,
President Musharraf has proposed the implementation
of a Marshall Plan-like programme of $4 to $5 billion
in south and south east Afghanistan. That amount is
only a fraction of what is spent on military operations
in Afghanistan. The international community should
seriously consider that proposal, which, under the
prevailing circumstances, could provide a realistic
chance of bringing durable peace and development to
Afghanistan.

