Mr. Valle (Brazil): Mr. President, as my delegation
warmly welcomes your presence here today, I
congratulate Ambassador Legwaila on his assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February. We are fully confident that under his wise and
skilled leadership the work of the Security Council will
be conducted in a highly effective way. He can count on
the full support and cooperation of the Brazilian
delegation. I also wish to take this opportunity to thank
his predecessor, Ambassador Emilio Cardenas, and his
very competent staff for the manner in which they
conducted the business of the Council during the month
of January. I again express appreciation for the important

 

steps taken with regard to transparency, a trend that, we are
pleased to see, has also become a concern of the current
presidency.

Again, we are pleased to extend our warmest welcome
to His Excellency Mr. Venancio de Moura, Minister of
External Relations of Angola. We would like to thank him
for the comprehensive statement he has just made. His
insights into the situation in his country and his analysis of
the next steps to be taken in the political, military,
humanitarian and economic fields are an indication of the
magnitude of the tasks to be accomplished in the pursuit of
lasting peace and stability in Angola. As in previous
statements he has made at the Security Council over the
last few years, his words stand for his Government's
unequivocal commitment to working with the international
community for the attainment of the objectives of peace
and national reconciliation in his country.

I also wish to express my Government's recognition of
President Jose Eduardo dos Santos' unfailing and constant
adherence to the cause of peace. His leadership and
political wisdom have been vital in the process that has led
to the signing of the Bicesse Accords and the Lusaka
Protocol.

Allow me also to express the great honour we feel at
participating in this important session in the presence of the
ministerial delegation from the Organization of African
Unity led by His Excellency the Honourable Mr. E. C. I.
Bwanali, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Malawi.

The presence of so many dignitaries from African
countries signifies Africa's firm support for and solidarity
with the Government and people of Angola at a time when
a major decision is to be taken at this Council on the next
stages of the protracted Angolan peace process. The
decision taken at the recent meeting of the OAU Council of
Ministers in Addis Ababa clearly reflects that organization's
resolve to participate actively in matters pertaining to peace
and stability in Africa.

These are indeed momentous times for the history of
Angola. Through the various phases of the prolonged
Angolan conflict we have managed to arrive at the
threshold of its final solution. After many years of conflict,
Angolans can finally expect to experience living in peace,
cherishing the moment that their country will be free of
war, fear and insecurity.

We very much welcome the decision to be taken today
to establish a new peace-keeping mission - UNAVEM
III - aimed at assisting Angolans in restoring peace and
achieving national reconciliation on the basis of the
Bicesse Accords and the recently signed Lusaka Protocol.
This is a decisive step by the international community in
the quest for lasting peace and stability in Angola.

The deployment of 7,000 military personnel - in
addition to the 610 military and police observers - with
an initial mandate of 18 months is a decision that
constitutes a critical turning point in the Angolan peace
process. The objectives and mandate of UNAVEM. III are
neither easy nor simple. They will involve activities in the
political, military, police, humanitarian and electoral
fields. It is worth mentioning that this is the first new
peace-keeping operation the United Nations has set up in
Africa since the successful conclusion of the peace
process in Mozambique and the peaceful transition in
South Africa.
Under the Lusaka Protocol, the United Nations
troops are called upon to perform a series of vital tasks.
These range from monitoring and verification activities to
controlling quartering areas, ensuring that armed elements
remain separate during the demobilization process, and
collecting weapons.

At this point in the peace process, not a moment
should be lost in the deployment of UNAVEM. III's
infantry units. In his report, the Secretary-General quite
rightly stated - and the Council in its wisdom has
concurred with him - that United Nations infantry units
should be deployed promptly in Angola. A step in the
right direction was authorizing the immediate dispatch of
the planning and support elements needed to prepare that
deployment and the subsequent deployment of additional
elements for the establishment of operational quartering
areas for UNITA forces. This reflects the international
community's clear support for the peace process and
makes a concrete contribution to creating the necessary
circumstances under which the infantry units will be
better able to discharge their mandate.

The momentum reached with the signing of the
Lusaka Protocol, followed by the positive initiatives
leading to the creation of a basis for mutual understanding
and trust, must be fully maintained. Fortunately, the
international community is doing its part with the
establishment of a sizeable peace-keeping operation and
by granting it the flexibility it needs to achieve results
within a reasonable time without imposing undue
preconditions or an overburdened timetable for results.

 

To accomplish the complex task before it, the
Organization can profit and learn from the experience
acquired in the recently and successfully concluded
operation in Mozambique. That operation clearly shows
that, to be effective, peace-keeping operations must be
adequately staffed and equipped and that unnecessary
delays in their deployment should be avoided at all costs.

Brazil has always supported a peaceful solution to the
conflict in Angola. Our ties with that sister country have
deep historical and cultural roots. In accordance with this
position, the Brazilian Government is ready to accept an
invitation to become a major contributor to the Angolan
peace process at this crucial juncture. At this moment, we
are in a position to take the necessary internal measures to
send a full infantry battalion, an engineering company and
two medical units to Angola without delay.

These are times for hope and optimism. Peace in
Angola will constitute yet another major achievement
within the process that began in South Africa and that has
just been completed in Mozambique - a process we expect
to be extended to other countries in the continent. Now it
is the time to begin the task of reconstructing the country
so that the immense potential with which Angola has been
endowed can be used to further the cause of the
development and welfare of its brave people.

