Mr. Liden (Sweden): A month ago the Security
Council adopted resolution 1199 (1998) on the situation in
Kosovo. The resolution spelled out a number of specific
demands, particularly on the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, but also on the Kosovo Albanian leadership.
The purpose of the resolution was, and remains, clear: to
halt an impending humanitarian disaster, to allow refugees
to return to their homes and to set the stage for a negotiated
political solution.

These objectives remain to be met. The number of
refugees is still alarmingly high as winter is approaching.
Most of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia troops and
special police that need to withdraw have not yet done so.
And the political negotiations between the parties on the
future status of Kosovo need to be accelerated.

With the agreements reached between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), the basis has been laid for the
international community to verify compliance with Security
Council resolutions 1199 (1998) and 1160 (1998). Sweden
welcomes these agreements and has begun recruiting
personnel for the OSCE Verification Mission in Kosovo.
We highly appreciate the efforts by the Contact Group and
by Mr. Holbrooke, which paved the way for these
agreements. At the same time, it is obvious that Yugoslav
acquiescence could be achieved only through strong
pressure, in which NATO planning played an important
role.

It is essential for the continued efforts of the
international community in Kosovo that the Security
Council now give its full endorsement to the OSCE and
NATO Verification Missions. In the draft resolution before
us, the Council also sends a clear message to President
Milosevic and to the Kosovo Albanians that it expects full
and unequivocal cooperation with the Missions. I trust
that the Council will not fail to act - and act with
appropriate firmness - if such cooperation is not
forthcoming. The Missions have an essential role to verify
that the resolutions of the Security Council are respected
and implemented. They deserve our full support.

