Mr. Huang Xia (spoke in French): I have the honour
to brief the Security Council on the report (S/20l9/783)
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.

I begin my statement with a hint of optimism
because the Great Lakes region is, more than ever,
firmly committed to its path towards stability.
Significant steps have been taken in the implementation
of the Framework agreement, thanks in particular
to the peaceful transfer of power in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the restated willingness of
the region's leaders to face together the challenges that
hinder its development.

After taking up office, Felix Tshilombo Tshisekedi,
President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
pledged to work closely with his peers to restore peace
and security in the east of the country. That diplomatic
overture was welcomed by all of the Heads of State I
met in the region, who assured me of their commitment
to supporting the momentum in cooperation. In that
regard, tripartite and quadripartite meetings, held
thanks to the good offices of the Congolese President
and the Angolan President, led to a rapprochement
between Uganda and Rwanda, with the signing of a
memorandum of understanding between those two
brotherly countries.

I would like to commend here the Government
of Uganda and the Government of Rwanda for their
commitment to easing tensions and restoring brotherly
cooperation between them. I must also commend
Angola and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for their determination to promote dialogue and the
peaceful resolution of disputes among the countries
of the region. I call on the Council to encourage the
continuation of those efforts.

The desire for cooperation in the area of security
has recently led to consultations among the security
and defence services of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and those of neighbouring countries, in
particular Burundi, Uganda and Rwanda, held with
a view to strengthening their cooperation in fighting
armed groups operating in the east of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Those initiatives underline the
relevance of a holistic regional approach to addressing
the security threat.

Given the observations I have made thus far, I can
assure members that there is considerable opportunity
to address the root causes of insecurity. Enhancing
regional cooperation is therefore of the utmost
importance to enable people to benefit from their
region's wealth. To that end, development programmes
must be strengthened and regional integration improved.
It is by understanding the correlation between peace
and security that are guaranteed, on one hand, and
development and prosperity that are more evenly
distributed, on the other, that the region will succeed in
changing its current approach, which remains focused
on conflict management. Indeed, many challenges
remain. The insecurity caused by the presence and
activism of foreign and local armed groups in the east
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo remains a
major concern. Moreover, the illegal exploitation of,
and trade in, natural resources fuel an illegal economy
that sustains those armed groups.

Forced population displacements caused by
insecurity remain frequent. In addition, greater efforts
are needed to protect and promote human rights in order
to ensure greater justice, equality and respect for the
dignity of individuals. In that regard, allow me to share
with the Council some initiatives led by my Office,
together with the other guarantors of the Framework
agreement, to support the signatory countries.

With regard to security cooperation for the
purposes of neutralizing negative forces, the guarantors
of the Framework agreement, together with the national
monitoring mechanism in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, facilitate consultations among the heads of
the intelligence services of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Burundi, Uganda, Rwanda and Tanzania.
That initiative is a follow-up to the guidelines of
the most recent summit of the Regional Monitoring
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region and seeks to strengthen the climate
of trust and promote a common approach in the fight
against foreign armed groups operating in the east of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In that context, my Office has undertaken
consultations with the countries concerned on the
issue of non-military measures that could complement
military operations. Although the military option
remains crucial, complementary programmes must
be put in place, with the support of the international
community, to facilitate the voluntary disarmament,
repatriation and reintegration of those groups in their
countries of origin, as well as the rehabilitation of
affected communities.

Furthermore, cross-border projects that create
employment for young people must be implemented.
Regional cooperation and integration are being
revitalized. The Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Burundi, Uganda and Rwanda have expressed their
interest in initiating a political conversation on the
issue of natural resources, with a view to using them
as a springboard for bringing about shared prosperity.

My Office is also supporting preparations for the
second iteration of the Great Lakes Investment and
Trade Conference, to be held in Kigali in March 2020.
The Rwandan President, Mr. Paul Kagame, assured
me of his firm commitment to holding the Conference.
1 call on the members of the Council to support that
initiative, which will enable highlighting the role of the
private sector in the search for lasting peace.

Judicial cooperation and the fight against impunity
have been strengthened thanks to the adoption of the
Nairobi Declaration on Justice and Good Governance
by the Ministers of Justice of the Great Lakes region in
May. Follow-up measures were undertaken to ensure
their implementation, including by the strengthening
judicial cooperation among the signatory countries.

Promoting the role of women, youth and civil
society is one of my priorities. In partnership with UN-
Women, the African Union, FemWise-Africa and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, my
Office is leadingjoint solidarity and advocacy missions
to encourage women's participation in decision-making
bodies and political and peace processes, as well as a
definitive rejection of the culture of impunity, above all
with regard to gender-based violence.

My Office is also working closely with civil
society for a concerted and inclusive approach towards
bringing peace and development of the region. To
that end, consultations between the guarantors of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and
civil society took place in Nairobi in September and
led to recommendations for improving civil society's
involvement in political processes and the achievement
of gender parity.

It is fitting to note that the Democratic Republic of
the Congo will succeed Uganda at the helm the Regional
Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region and that the next summit
of the Mechanism will be held in Kinshasa.

There is more hope than ever, and we must redouble
our efforts to support the region on the path it has
embarked upon towards positive change.

In conclusion, I thank Council members for their
valuable guidance dating back to the very beginning
of my mandate. I duly remain at their disposal so that
together we can support the countries of the region
in their drive towards achieving lasting peace and
shared prosperity.

