Mr. Amon-Tanoh (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): On behalf of the President of the Republic of
C6te d'Ivoire, His Excellency Mr. Alassane Ouattara,
and the Ivorian Government, I wish every success to
the Bolivian presidency of the Security Council and
pay tribute to Uruguay for the effective way in which
it steered the deliberations of this important body
last month.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to address the Council on this occasion
of historic importance to my country and the
Organization. Indeed, rare are the moments when the
success of a United Nations peacekeeping operation,
such as that which brings us together today around the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI),
has been celebrated in the Chamber.

This is an opportune time for me to pay tribute
to Secretaries-General Kofi Annan and Ban Ki-moon,
who through their actions made a major contribution
to resolving the crisis in Cote d'Ivoire. I would also
like to pay tribute to the current Secretary-General
and thank him for his support for my country in his
previous functions and for the special attention that he
has continued to pay to Cote d'Ivoire since his election.
Our thanks also go to all the Member States that served
on the Security Council during the crisis in my country
and to all those that have made their troops available
to UNOCI. In particular, I would like to pay tribute to
those soldiers who made the ultimate sacrifice for the
return of peace to Cote d'Ivoire.

Today's celebration is of very special importance
for us as it coincides with my country's election this
morning as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council for the 2018-2019 term. This is a symbolic
moment, and we place great hopes on the lessons and
experience drawn by Cote d'Ivoire from the 13 years
of UNOCI's presence in my country and which will,
in the course of our mandate in the Security Council,
provide an example for other countries to follow.

The meetings Ihave had with all the States Members
of the United Nations over the past few months, and
especially the past three weeks, have enabled us to
share their expectations. We are confirmed in our
decision to work within the Security Council in order
to come up with coherent collective responses to the
global challenges of our time through dialogue and
mutual respect. I thank everyone for the kind words
expressed to my country and for the welcome that
was extended to us on our candidacy and thus our
election to the Council. Allow me, in turn, to express
to the Council and all the other States Members of
our Organization the gratitude of the President, the
Government and the nation of the Republic of C6te
d'Ivoire.

Time will certainly allow us to further clarify the
elements that have led to the success of UNOCI. For
the time being, we can rightly stress that the success
of UNOCI arises from the convergence of several
factors, including the political will and high sense of
responsibility of the President of the Republic of Cote
d'Ivoire, which have put the State and its resources
at the service of peace in its country. It is also due
to the exceptional synergy between UNOCI and
the Government and to the unity and resolve of the
Security Council and the international community,
which have facilitated the implementation of the
Council's resolutions in all confidence. I would also
cite the strong human relations between the President
of the Republic and the various Secretaries-General
of the United Nations, the good relations established
between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Government, and the high quality of the
Special Representatives appointed by the various
Secretaries-General to Cote d'Ivoire. In that regard, I
pay special and well-deserved tribute to Mrs. Aichatou
Mindaoudou for her outstanding contribution to peace
in my country and to the success of UNOCI.

UNOCI leaves behind a stable and peaceful
country endowed with strong and modern institutions,
and whose economic dynamism, despite the difficult
context of the cocoa market, allows the Government
to make significant progress every day in fighting
poverty and creating opportunities for its young people.
Nonetheless, we are aware of the challenges ahead in
the process of establishing stability and peace in our
country once and for all. These include completing
the construction of a genuinely homogeneous and
republican national army. This process has been
somewhat unsettled of late by ill-tempered movements
of veterans claiming their bonuses. After the final
settlement of this issue by the Government and the
adoption of strong measures for the benefit of the
armed and security forces as a whole, ex-combatants
no longer have any objective reason to disturb the
tranquility of the Ivorians and the forward movement
of the country.

While they do not call into question the quality of
my country's emergence from crisis or its important
achievements, these ill-tempered movements remind
us, as I said in February last year in this Chamber
(see S/PV.7880), of the need to accelerate the reform
of the security sector and the professionalization of
the national army in order to identify and give several
thousand soldiers a republican identity and ethos. Our
Government is working to that end through the full
implementation of the Military Planning Law, whose
adoption has been well received by professional soldiers.

The success of the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire and its closure will not slow down the
pace of the Government's reforms. On the contrary,
emphasis will be placed, inter alia, on consolidating the
rule oflaw, strengthening the framework for combating
impunity, and accelerating the appropriation of national
reconciliation and social cohesion by the Ivorian
people. Moreover, the President of the Republic is
pursuing his policy of extending his hand and listening
to the opposition, in the interests of the country.

As may well be imagined, the cooperation that
binds my country to the United Nations will survive
the closure of UNOCI and remain an important
vehicle for the international community's support to
the Ivorian people. To that end, we hope that more
resources will be allocated to the country team so that
it can fulfil its mandate in better conditions. At the
same time, we call on our bilateral and multilateral
partners to maintain their commitment to our country
and to help us face the major challenges facing all
nations today. Our friends must therefore remain
more than ever mobilized alongside us in order to win
together our tireless battles against poverty and youth
unemployment, which are our Government's priorities.

The success of UNOCI is the happy end to a
painful sequence in the history of my country. It
must not make us forget that thousands of Ivorians
have lost their lives so that the values ofpeace, unity, In conclusion. I would like to assure the Security
conviviality and democracy might triumph in our Council of the determination of the Ivorian people to
country. These women and men, torn from the bosoms
of their families, and who will miss out on the work of
perfecting our nation, forbid us forever to allow new
tragedies to visit our country. The meeting rose at 4.35 pm.

defend and preserve the peace so dearly won, with the
support of the friends of Cote d'Ivoire.
