Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
Lithuania for taking the initiative to hold this debate on
the humanitarian situation in Ukraine. I would also like
to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs; Mr. John Ging, Director of the
Coordination and Response Division of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs; and Mr. Ivan Simonovie, Assistant Secretary-
General for Human Rights, for their briefings.

Chad is very concerned about the grave security
and humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine, despite
the recent calm that has prevailed following the signing
of the 12 February agreements.

The fighting and blind bombings between the
Government and the separatist groups have primarily
affected the civilian population. The report on human
rights in Ukraine covering the period from 1 December
2013 to 15 February 2014 states that 1,012 people were
killed and 3,793 injured in the fighting in eastern
Ukraine. In total, from April 2014 to February 2015, the
conflict has caused 6,000 deaths, including 375 women
and 63 children, and over 14,000 injured, including 650
women and 150 children. The conflict has also resulted
in over a million internally displaced persons and
refugees, including thousands of vulnerable people, in
particular elderly and handicapped persons found in the
combat zones without access to humanitarian aid. In
addition, there has been a massive destruction of public
and private infrastructure, including schools, health
centres and homes.

It is a heavy toll, and the humanitarian situation
highlights the responsibility of political actors and
leaders to find lasting solutions for the affected
populations. Such solutions must include the
implementation of the Minsk agreements, including the
ceasefire, the prohibition on the use of heavy weaponry
and other relevant provisions of the agreements.
Priority should be given to free and unhindered access
to conflict areas in order to allow for the quick and
non-discriminatory delivery of necessary humanitarian
aid to internally displaced persons; the strengthening of
evacuation measures; lasting solutions to the issues of
shelter, jobs and integration for refugees; and the release
of all persons detained illegally or arbitrarily; and the
identification of effective measures to counter violence
against women, guarantee the freedom and security
of the media and put in place educational measures to
allow students to pursue their studies.

Finally, the implementation of such measures must
be carried out with respect for international norms
and the recommendations contained in the report of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and in line with General Assembly
resolution 68/262 on the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine.

