Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Secretary General Liu and Ambassador Aboulatta for
their briefings.
"We have some planes." That was one of the first
radio transmissions air traffic controllers heard on
11 September 2001. More than 16 years later the pain of
that barbaric act of terrorism remains. We continue to
mourn the victims and honour their memories. Across
the United States, Americans remember vividly exactly
where they were and what they were doing when they
got word that a plane had struck the World Trade Centre.
None of us will forget.

Just as we never forget what the victims of 9/11
suffered that day, we must never forget the lessons we
learned. We know that terrorists are determined to
target civil aviation. They want to attack the links that
connect our countries and bring down the infrastructure
that is the backbone of modern society. Despite the
many improvements made to aviation since 9/11, the
threat is still all too real.

The threat of civil aviation continues to evolve at
a rate that challenges even our best efforts to secure
the global aviation system and recent terrorist attacks
against aircraft in Egypt and Somalia make that clear.
At the same time, a reliance on airplanes to facilitate
the movement of people and goods continues to grow.
As the global economy continues to be more and more
reliant on aviation, keeping that system secure becomes
more and more important.

Last year, through resolution 2309 (2016), the
Security Council recognized the importance of aviation
security in our global counter-terrorism efforts. The
resolution was built on previous work to strengthen
global standards to address the terrorist threat.
Resolution 2309 (2016) highlighted the importance
of mobilizing more resources and deepening our
cooperation to respond to changing threats. We
welcome the work of the global aviation community in
response to resolution 2309 (2016), including through
the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).

ICAO has developed the Global Aviation Security
Plan, and the United States calls on the ICAO Council
to endorse that plan as soon as possible. It is a vital
next step towards increasing international cooperation
on aviation security. Once the global aviation security
plan is approved, it will be up to Member States to
work with ICAO to make sure its recommendations are
implemented and progress is monitored.

United Nations counter-terrorism offices should
focus on helping Member States follow through on
ICAO's plans. However, ultimately, keeping air travel
safe requires each Member State to do its part. Just
one weak link in the sprawling international system
can become a catastrophic vulnerability. Consistent
with resolution 2341 (2017), the United States calls
on all Member States to strengthen the protection of
critical infrastructure, such as airports. Member States
must also be vigilant about preventing foreign terrorist
fighters from travelling across borders.

The United States has helped to lead efforts
in expanding information-sharing on known and
suspected terrorists and improving border security
through enhanced traveller screening. However, we
have more to do to counter the foreign fighter threat.
That is especially true as fighters from the battlefields
in Syria and Iraq try to return home or move to other
war zones.

Despite the progress we have made, the terrorist
threat to aviation, airports and air travellers remains.
Many countries still struggle to consistently implement
and adhere to international security standards and
practices. As Member States, we must hold each
other accountable to ensure that international security
standards are both rigorously implemented and
adequate to meet new threats. No country should be left
behind. We must continue expanding intelligence and
law enforcement information-sharing and accelerate
efforts to implement advance passenger information
and passenger name record collection analysis and
sharing to identify terrorists and criminals.

It is up to each of us to recognize our unique
vulnerabilities. We must take a hard look at current
threats and anticipate future ones. The United States
will continue to take a hard look at our system of
air travel to make it stronger. We look forward to
continuing our work with fellow Member States and
United Nations entities to ensure the security of the
global aviation system.

Above all, we cannot forget the fundamental role
that air travel plays in our lives today. The fact that
leaders from around the world gathered here at the
United Nations last week is a timely reminder of that.
It is simply impossible to imagine the modern world
without aviation. We all rely on the knowledge that
when we board a plane, we will reach our destination
safely. If we were to think for a moment about the stakes
of keeping aviation safe, we would all agree that there
is no time to waste in strengthening that vital system.
That should push us to deepen our cooperation. The
United States stands ready to help.

