Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): On 2 November 1917, almost exactly
100 years ago, a British colonialist declaration
was issued unilaterally and without consulting
the Palestinians - the landowners. The Balfour
Declaration, adopted by the League of Nations, tried to
legitimize that act by inserting into it what was referred
to as the British Mandate for Palestine in 1922.

We heard our British colleague this morning
express the pride of his country's Government in
issuing that Declaration, which is known legally and
internationally as a promise from someone who does
not own something to someone who does not deserve it.
By then the League of Nations operated as a colonialist
company, which replicated in Palestine the experiences
of the East India Company and the British South Africa
Company. Both experiences generated racist regimes,
including in South Africa in what used to be called
Southern Rhodesia.

The United Nations did not seek to rectify the
mistake of the League of Nations, as it did with
many other issues. Instead, it continued the same
approach with regard to Palestine and adopted General
Assembly resolution 181 (II), in 1947, which provided
for the partition of Palestine and the creation of the
Israeli entity. That entity later enjoyed membership
of the United Nations following pressure exerted by
powerful States.

The support, assistance and protection provided
to Israel by certain States, including some permanent
members ofthe Security Council, as well as the systemic
and deliberate obstruction of the implementation
of dozens of resolutions intended to end this brutal
occupation, have led to Israel's arrogance in both
the region and the Security Council Chamber. It has
led to Israel's expansion and further expropriation of
Palestinian Arab land and the perpetration of crimes,
aggression and systematic violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law that could
constitute war crimes and crimes against humanity.

General Assembly resolution 273 (III), of
1949, outlined the conditions for approving Israel's
membership of the United Nations. Israel was to
comply with resolution 181 (II), which provided for
the establishment of the Palestinian State. It was also
required to comply with resolution 194 (III), of 1948,
which provided for the return of Palestinian refugees
to their homeland. However, unfortunately, what
happened afterwards was the complete opposite.

The United Nations implemented half of resolution
181 (II). It allowed for the creation oflsrael in Palestine,
but denied Palestinians their right to establish their
State. It has also completely abandoned implementation
of resolution 194 (III), which provided for the return
of Palestinian refugees to their homeland. That served
to compound the injustice suffered by the Palestinian
people, whose destiney has remained under a racist
occupation that is unparalleled in history.

My country, as the Council is aware, is a key party
in Security Council debates on the situation the Middle
East, and we reiterate once again that Syria's sovereign
rights in the Golan Heights, along the borders of 4 June
the 1967, are not subject to compromise or surrender. All
of our occupied lands and rights will be returned fully
to their rightful owners - the settlers will have to leave
our land sooner or later. We will not abandon our right
to reclaim our occupied land and liberate our citizens
living under Israeli occupation in the Syrian Golan,
using all the instruments available under the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations and the principles
of international law and the Council's resolutions.

The world's suspicious and continuing silence in the
face of Israel's policies and practices has encouraged
Israel to continue to violate the Separation of Forces
Agreement and the resolutions of Security Council. It
has provided all forms of support to armed terrorist
groups in the area of separation, including Jabhat
Al-Nusra and Da'esh, and has facilitated those groups
taking over sites of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force, thereby jeopardizing the lives of its
personnel. In fact, groups of troops were kidnapped
from the Fiji and Philippines contingents.

Israel has continued to commit crimes by providing
direct and indirect support to Da'esh and other terrorist
groups and launching repeated attacks on the territories
of the Syrian Arab Republic. That means that Israel
is not only supporting Da'esh in the occupied Syrian
Golan but also supporting terrorist elements inside
Syria itself. It is supporting the Da'esh terrorist gangs
in Syria.

My country believes that the Security Council still
shoulders a historical responsibility in rectifying its
course and restoring justice. The goal that has brought
us here every month for many years must take the form
of immediate, necessary measures by the Security
Council - if it is indeed keen to achieve peace and
security in the region in order to end the Israeli
occupation of Arab territories, including the Syrian
Golan. That must include Israel's withdrawal from the
occupied territories in the Syrian Golan, Palestine and
parts of southern Lebanon, to the borders of 4 June
1967, as well as the implementation of resolutions 497
(1981), 338 (1973) and 242 (1967).

