Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): I too would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno
for his comprehensive briefing. It is unfortunate that
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, Mr. Hans Haekkerup, is not able to meet with
the Council today. I think, as Ambassador Lavrov said,
it would have been useful to meet him early in his
term, and my delegation looks forward to his
addressing the Council soon. At the same time, we
extend our support to him as he carries out the difficult
tasks ahead.

In the interest of time, I will not read out my full
statement, which we will post on our Web site. Today I
shall try to summarize the statement, which touches on
three key areas: the new violence in Kosovo, the
situation in the Presevo Valley and the preparations for
the elections.

In our statement at the Council's open meeting on
Kosovo last month, we emphasized the aim of
returning Kosovo to normalcy. Unfortunately, the
events since the meeting seem to serve as a warning
that things could move in the opposite direction if the
Council, the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) do not prevent the security situation in
Kosovo, especially in Mitrovica and the Presevo
Valley, from deteriorating further.

We therefore believe, as many other speakers
have said, that all necessary steps must be taken to
improve the security environment in both Kosovo and
the Presevo Valley. What happened in Mitrovica
especially was shocking. There were even grenade
attacks on KFOR troops, UNMIK civilian police
officers and civilian workers, resulting in scores of
soldiers and policemen being injured. This cannot be
condoned when the very people who are sent to
provide security and enforce law and order become the
objects of violence; then things have gone seriously
wrong, as several speakers have noted.

The practical effects of such developments are
clear. United Nations humanitarian agencies and non-
governmental organizations were forced to withdraw
their staff from the effected area of Mitrovica and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner of
Refugees (UNHCR) had to temporarily suspend
freedom of movement past lines. This is, incidentally,
reminiscent of the events we witnessed in the refugee
area in West Timor last year, when, we recall, the
Council actually reacted strongly.

Given this dangerous situation, we welcome, like
France, the declaration made by the Kosovar-Albanian
leaders, which condemned the violence in Mitrovica,
and we call on all Kosovars to remain calm and to
refrain from further acts of violence. We hope that
UNMIK and KFOR can do what is appropriate and
necessary to improve the security situation in
Mitrovica, and, like others, we would also like to give
our full support to the priority Mr. Hans Haekkerup has
given to strengthening law and order in Kosovo.

Let me now turn quickly to another hot spot: the
Presevo Valley. When the situation was heating up
towards the end of last month, the Council made a
statement to the press, and, unfortunately, all the
elements of the press statement still remain valid
today: violence in Presevo should cease, all ethnic
Albanian extremists groups should be dissolved, all
non-residents engaged in extremist activities should
withdraw from their areas, and so forth. We want to
impress on the parties involved that these calls should
be heeded. Here - if we may make an additional
suggestion - it may be useful for the Council, from
time to time, to assess whether its calls, in press
statements or presidential statements, have been heeded
or ignored. This may show whether our press
statements are actually heeded or not.

We are glad that the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia has formulated a peace plan for
the Presevo Valley. We welcome its resolve to settle the
problem peacefully and to integrate ethnic Albanians
into the local structures. In the end, we believe that the
solution must be a political one. This is why we are
concerned to read press reports that the Liberation
Army of Presevo, Medvedja and Bujanovac (UCPMB)
has rejected the peace plan, including the political
measures, and has said that it will settle for nothing
less than the Presevo Valley becoming part of ethnic
Albanian-dominated Kosovo. We hope that the ethnic
Albanians will pursue peaceful negotiations and that
the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
will continue to exercise restraint. It is also imperative
that UNMIK and KFOR take all necessary measures to
prevent the movement of extremists and arms from
Kosovo to the Presevo Valley.

Finally, on my third point, turning to non-security
issues, we certainly take note of and support the
priorities that have been spelled out by Mr. Haekkerup
and also by Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno this morning.
The legal framework for Kosovo-wide elections must
be developed before they are held. The process should
involve all the relevant parties, including the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. In
this regard, we believe that UNMIK's establishment of
direct contacts with the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and an office in Belgrade is a
move in the right direction. The release of political
detainees from Serbian prisons and the revelation of
the whereabouts of missing persons in Kosovo, should
also be resolved as a matter of priority. Here again, we
support the call that Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno made
when he referred to this.

We believe that these measures will contribute to
the reconciliation that is essential for improving the
security situation. Building public administration
capacity and economic reconstruction are also
important and necessary for bringing Kosovo back to
normal. All these priorities require that the United
Nations and the international community continue to be
actively involved in Kosovo.

