Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
you, President Duda, for organizing today's important
debate. It is not often that we take time to think deeply
about why we are here and what we want to accomplish,
and I therefore appreciate this opportunity. I would like
to welcome Judge Owada, thank him for his briefing
and express my deep appreciation for his many years
of distinguished service. I thank President Meron for
his statement and particularly for his important work
on international criminal law. I am also grateful to
Ms. Viotti for her remarks.

Although this is a debate about international law, it
is worth stepping back to think about what the people
who wrote the Charter of the United Nations set out
to create. The Preamble to the Charter begins, "We
the peoples of the United Nations", echoing the United
States Constitution, which begins with "We the people
of the United States". Joining the United Nations is an
act of sovereign peoples who, as the Preamble says,
came together

"to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in
the dignity and worth of the human person, in the
equal rights of men and women and of nations large
and small".

In that way, the Charter makes a clear connection
between respecting human rights and upholding and
promoting peace. Respect for the freedom and dignity
of the individual is fundamental to international law.
It is also fundamental to the founding values of the
United States. Our long-standing national commitment
to human rights is why the United States made human
rights a key theme of its most recent presidency of the
Security Council. Durable peace cannot be separated
from respect for human rights. In the past year, the
United States has championed a number of efforts to
highlight that connection. We have emphasized the
connection between the way in which the Iranian,
Syrian, Venezuelan and North Korean regimes treat
their citizens and the threat to peace and security
that those Governments pose internationally. The
Security Council has also recognized the connection
between human rights and peace. We mandate many
of the Council's peacekeeping and political missions
to promote human rights and report on human rights
violations and abuses. In many places, those missions
are the first to know about human rights violations and
abuses. We need to support them and ensure that they
fulfil their role in protecting human dignity.

A related issue is the obligations of Member States
under international humanitarian law. Here, too, the
Security Council has never been clearer about what
it expects of parties to conflicts. The Council has
adopted resolutions and statements on the protection of
civilians, children in armed conflict, medical neutrality
and famine in armed conflict. Many of our resolutions
addressing conflicts include a demand for unfettered
humanitarian access. Many of our sanctions regimes
allow for the listing of individuals and groups that
obstruct such humanitarian aid. The Security Council
has been increasingly outspoken and demanding where
respect for human rights and international humanitarian
law is concerned. That is important, but the challenge
that remains is a familiar one - it is follow-through.
Human rights violations and abuses, and humanitarian
needs, have only increased on our watch, and our
response has been completely inadequate.

Some argue that the Security Council has no
business in a nation's domestic disputes. A nation's
sovereignty, they argue, precludes any outside action,
even when people are suffering and abused and that
nation's neighbours feel the consequences. We too
recognize and cherish our sovereignty and that of other
nations. But here is the thing: joining the United Nations
and pledging to abide by the words of the Charter
represent an act of sovereign peoples and sovereign
nations, an act that is freely chosen. Governments
cannot use sovereignty as a shield when they commit
mass atrocities, spread weapons of mass destruction
or perpetrate acts of terrorism. In such instances the
Security Council must be prepared to act. That is
why we are here. That is why the Council has such
wide-ranging authority to impose sanctions, establish
tribunals and authorize the use of force. We have those
tools because the people who drafted the Charter
realized that there might be times when the Council
needs to resort to its broad authority under Chapter VII.
It is the inability of the Council to follow up, especially
when it comes to human rights and humanitarian issues,
that allows suffering to continue. It is that inability to
act that erodes our credibility and makes it more likely
that more people will suffer in the future.

I once again thank the President of Poland for
calling for this critical debate. There are so many places
in the world where human dignity and well-being are
under assault today. There is much more good work that
we could be doing. As I mentioned earlier, the reasons
for our failures are often obvious, but the Security
Council's continued paralysis in the face of so much
suffering is unacceptable. It should be unacceptable to
all of us. We have accepted this mandate. We have the
tools necessary to follow through. The time has come to
recall the fundamental purpose of the United Nations,
and for the sovereign peoples who make up the United
Nations to come together to take meaningful action to
fulfil it.

