Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank the
French presidency of the Security Council for organizing
this timely and important debate on strategic force
generation for United Nations peacekeeping operations.
I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix, and Ambassadors Momen and Blanchard, of
Bangladesh and Canada, for their briefings.

Conflict prevention and maintaining peace are
among the key founding objectives of the United
Nations, and an efficient peacekeeping system is a
primary requisite for achieving them. We therefore
fully endorse the Secretary-General's initiatives aimed
at reforming United Nations peacekeeping, with a
focus on effectiveness, mission accountability and new
partnerships. While we want to emphasize the primacy
of politics in conflict prevention and resolution, our
peacekeeping forces remain a valuable tool for ensuring
the creation of conditions conducive to political
solutions. We have been witnessing significant changes
in the United Nations peacekeeping system, with
Member States making important new commitments at
the leaders" summit on peacekeeping in New York and
subsequent ministerial meetings on the topic.

Kazakhstan has declared its unit and number of
individual officers in the Peacekeeping Capability
Readiness System (PCRS). We believe that the PCRS
has shown itself to be the right instrument for ensuring
adequate preparedness on the part of the troop-
contributing countries (TCCs) and police-contributing
countries (PCCs) to be deployed. It can also provide
the United Nations with a range of contingents for
filling operational gaps in field missions, if properly
facilitated by the Secretariat.

The Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO), with its unique database on the capabilities
and strengths of Member States, plays a key role in force
generation through its targeted outreach approach and by
facilitating partnerships between TCCs and PCCs that
can increase co-deployments. Enhancing cooperation
between regional and subregional organizations is
a vital contributing factor. We are certain that the
flexibility and partnerships that can enable the active
involvement and engagement of countries new to United
Nations peacekeeping will increase the effectiveness of
peace operations. We would like to note the DPKO's
forward-looking approach to engaging the emergency-
response capabilities of Member States that have solid
rapid-deployment capacities, something that will be
invaluable when we need to react immediately to crises
while peacekeeping forces are still being generated.
With the further improvement and development of the
PCRS, we believe that the problems the United Nations
has with critical gaps in missions will be dealt with.

At the same time, the hybrid United Nations-
African Union missions have shown that the deployment
of regional forces can be effective. Such cooperation
should be strengthened on the political, humanitarian,
human rights and development fronts as well, as
indicated in the agreement on the Joint United Nations-
African Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security, signed on 19 April. Collaboration
with regional structures can also enable concerted
action in tackling security challenges. The Security
Council's recent adoption of resolution 2378 (2017) is
a great step forward in the efforts to improve United
Nations peacekeeping. Kazakhstan would like to
emphasize the importance of strengthening triangular
consultations between the Security Council, troop- and
police-contributing countries and the Secretariat, which
will encourage shared responsibility for meaningful,
inclusive and dynamic consultations and enhance their
dialogue with host countries so that they can fully
implement their peacekeeping mandate.

Kazakhstan is committed to peacekeeping and will
continue sending well-qualified military observers
and increasing its contribution. Kazakhstan is
currently preparing an infantry unit for participation in
peacekeeping operation and exploring the possibilities
for co-deployment to one of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations. As an emerging troop-
contributing country, we are constantly increasing
our preparedness levels, as the DPKO has confirmed.
Kazakhstan attaches great importance to achieving
high performance standards and has therefore
established its own peacekeeping training centre,
KAZCENT, which has already been recognized as
achieving international standards. We conduct courses
on a regional basis and will work to attain the status of
a regional training centre.

Lastly, Kazakhstan stands ready to support
effective peacekeeping and thereby further the mandate
of the Council.

