Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): Like other speakers, I
wish to thank the Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, for his thorough briefing today.

As Greece fully associates itself with the
statement to be made later by the representative of
Finland on behalf of the European Union, I shall be
brief.

Over approximately the past two months, we all
became witnesses to an incredible tragedy in the
Middle East - one with severe repercussions not only
for Lebanon, but for the entire region. With the
adoption of resolution 1701 (2006), the Security
Council took a bold and ambitious step not only to
ensure that there would be a full cessation of hostilities
between the warring parties, but also, at the same time,
to provide a sound framework for the achievement of a
political solution. That solution would form the basis
for a lasting ceasefire and, eventually, for a lasting
solution to the problems underlying the current conflict
in Lebanon.

In that context and owing to the complexities of
the several issues at hand, it is understandable that
negotiations within the Council took longer than many
of us would have preferred. This crisis, however,
forced all members of the Council, and the
international community as a whole, to revisit and re-
examine in detail the dynamics at play in this troubled
region.
During the adoption of resolution 1701 (2006), a
number of representatives, including Greece's Foreign
Minister, stressed the need to reinvigorate and relaunch
in earnest the Middle East peace process, in particular
with regard to the question of Palestine. As we say in
Greece, we cannot hide behind our fingers, that is to
say, we cannot continuously ignore and avoid the
realities and the truth. The Palestinian question lies at
the heart of developments in the region. We must all do
our share.

The international community must not lose sight
of the plight of the Palestinian people and their
legitimate aspiration for statehood. Without a just and
viable solution to the Palestinian question, peace in the
Middle East will remain as elusive as ever. The
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories is dire and a cause for grave concern. We
fully share the Secretary-General's concerns over the
continued killing and injuring of hundreds of civilians,
including children, in Gaza by Israeli forces. Likewise,
the arbitrary arrest of many senior Palestinians is a
cause of particular concern, since it further undermines
Palestinian institutions, which must be preserved if a
two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is
to be achieved.

The long-term effects of the crisis in Lebanon on
the wider region will depend to a large degree on how
all the players in the region and the international
community react to it and decide how to deal with it, as
well as how to handle the entire problem of the Middle
East in all its forms, and how to promote long-term
solutions. Indeed, the current crisis can be turned into
an opportunity - an opportunity for all involved to
realize that causes cannot be promoted or achieved
through violence and, at the same time, that security
cannot be guaranteed by military means alone.

The principles that should form the basis for a
comprehensive and lasting peace in the region are well
known. These include all relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973); the terms of reference of the Madrid
Conference, including the principle of land for peace;
and the Arab Peace Initiative.

In another bold and ambitious step, the Security
Council, by adopting resolution 1515 (2003), endorsed
the Quartet's performance-based Road Map to a
Permanent Two-State Solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
Conflict and called on the parties to fulfil their

obligations under the Road Map with a view to
achieving the Vision of two States living side by side in
peace and security. We reiterate that call here today. At
the same time, we call on the international community,
in particular the Quartet, to remain actively committed
and dedicated to assisting the parties in achieving that
shared vision. Moreover, we encourage the countries of
the region to promote ways to facilitate the resumption
of dialogue among all sides and to constructively
engage with international partners to that end.

Greece will remain committed to the goal of
achieving a comprehensive and lasting peace for the
Middle East. We must re-energize the peace process as
soon as possible. If we want peace to prevail, we must
look to the future without recriminations or arbitrary
actions, which only take us backwards without hope.

