Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of this meeting and we
thank Mr. De Mistura for his important briefing.

We have been closely following developments
in Syria in the wake of the agreement reached in
September between Turkey and the Russian Federation
on the establishment of a demilitarized zone in Idlib,
which has averted the humanitarian disaster we all
feared. We emphasize the important role that Turkey
and the Russian Federation have been called on to play
in order to guarantee the ceasefire. In that regard, we
want to point out that their efforts must be guided by
international humanitarian law and by the need to
respect the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity
of the Syrian Arab Republic.

We also want to highlight the removal of heavy
artillery from the demilitarized zone and encourage the
parties to make further progress in implementing the
agreement, thereby encouraging an easing of tensions
and improving the necessary ability to distinguish
between civilians, rebel groups and terrorists. We
believe that this progress should bring the parties to
the conflict to a situation that is more conducive to
achieving a political settlement with prospects for a
lasting peace in Syria. In that regard, the international
community is hoping that an inclusive, credible
and representative constitutional committee will be
established and can start work. More than eight months
after the Sochi National Dialogue Congress, we hope
that a date can be set for the commencement of the
committee's work, as indicated by the Special Envoy.
We hope that the upcoming meeting in Geneva between
the Astana guarantors and the Special Envoy, as well as
their consultations in Damascus, will produce tangible
results with regard to the committee's formation,
operating mechanisms and decision-making. We note
that further delays would pose a genuine risk to the
credibility and legitimacy of the process.

We also believe that confidence-building and
reconciliation measures should be adopted between
the parties. In particular, we expect to see substantive
developments in identifying missing persons, the
handing over of human remains and the release of
detainees and missing persons. It will also be essential
to address the plight of the millions of refugees and
internally displaced persons, which will require the
political will and adequate financial resources needed
to ensure their return under safe conditions and in a
dignified manner, in accordance with internationally
accepted standards. Their property rights must also be
respected. We would also like to remind all parties of
the importance of making progress on accountability
for the heinous crimes committed during the protracted
Syrian conflict.

I want to stress how important it is that the Astana
guarantors and other countries with influence over the
parties to the conflict help to prevent further escalation
and take concrete measures, such as the commencement
of work by the constitutional committee, to advance the
political process in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and
the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).

Lastly, I must mention our special gratitude to
and recognition of Mr. De Mistura for the hard work
he has continued to do not only to achieve a political
solution, but also to avoid escalations that could have
caused the Syrian people further suffering, as we have
witnessed in recent months. We are saddened by the
announcement of his departure, but we understand his
reasons, and we hope we will still be able to count on
his valuable counsel and experience.

