Mr. Acharya (Nepal): First, I would like to
express my sincere gratitude to you, Sir, and to the
other members of the Council for yet another
opportunity to discuss United Nations support for
Nepal's indigenous peace process, which has made
miraculous achievements over a short span of time. I
would like to thank Mr. Ian Martin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Nepal, for
his comprehensive presentation today. I would like to
take this opportunity to express our sincere
appreciation to Mr. Martin and his team in the United
Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN) for their excellent
work in executing the mandate of the Council to meet
Nepal's request in certain aspects of the peace process.
We appreciate the report of the Secretary-General on
United Nations support of the peace process
(S/2008/670).
08-59080
On behalf of the Government of Nepal, I would
like to take this opportunity to express our sincere
gratitude to the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his recent visit to Nepal and his
continuous support for the peace process.

Nepal has witnessed historic political
transformation through the peace process. The signing
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, successful
elections to the Constituent Assembly, the declaration
of Nepal as a federal democratic republic and the
formation of the coalition Government under the
leadership of the Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist)
are changes of historic proportions which our peace
process has achieved quickly, smoothly, democratically
and peacefully.

Nepal's peace process is unique in its
characteristics and is based on multiparty democracy,
inclusiveness, accommodation, dialogue and
recognition of the people as the ultimate arbiter. Our
peace process is a truly original and creative
innovation of the Nepalese people and its political
leadership. One of the keys to its success lies in
national ownership of the entire political process. The
political leadership across the board has taken into
account the broader aspirations of the Nepalese people,
who have voiced their choice for peace and democracy.
The leadership has demonstrated a spirit of true
accommodation, dialogue and respect for the choice of
the people in arriving at all key decisions.

Yet another key to our success is the
inclusiveness of the political process. After the signing
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, several other
agreements were concluded with a View to bringing
into the national mainstream the most inclusive
possible participation by the representatives of the
people in all their ethnic and geographic diversity. I am
proud to say that Nepal's Constituent Assembly is one
of the most inclusive assemblies that has ever been
elected to write a constitution anywhere in the world.
Nepal's Constituent Assembly has the widest
representation of women, ethnic groups and indigenous
peoples, Madhesis, Dalits and people from rural areas,
who have traditionally remained marginalized.

We have also advanced this far by placing the
verdict of the people at the core of all decisions made
to date. That was the basis of the declaration of Nepal
as a federal democratic republic, the abolition of its
240-year-old monarchy and the formation of the
Government under the leadership of an erstwhile rebel
party, which has itself undergone a huge transformation
from an insurgent movement into a leading democratic
political force.

The current Government is committed to working
together with all political parties represented in the
Constituent Assembly in writing a new constitution of
the federal democratic republic within the stipulated
time frame of two years. As part of that process, the
Constituent Assembly is finalizing its rules of
procedure and is expected to start the drafting process
soon.

The Government is also committed to bringing
the peace process to a logical conclusion by resolving
all of the remaining issues in a spirit of dialogue and
accommodation and in accordance with the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. It has already
constituted the special committee to finalize issues of
the integration and rehabilitation of former rebel
combatants who are in cantonments monitored by the
United Nations Mission. The special committee is
expected to reach its decision on the issue soon.

Among other things, the United Nations Mission
in Nepal was mandated to monitor the cantonments and
assist in the peace process through arms management.
It is our view that the presence of UNMIN will not be
required after this process is completed. If the process
extends beyond the end of the current mandate on
23 January 2009, the Government, in consultation with
the special committee and the political parties, may
request an extension of the mandate of the Mission as
soon as such a decision is reached. In such a situation,
the presence of UNMIN, which has been significantly
downsized already, may be required for a maximum
period of another six months with further adjustments,
with a view to allowing it to came to an end by that
time.

In that regard, we have taken note of the report of
the Secretary-General regarding consolidation of
cantonments. The special committee, which is
mandated to look after the comprehensive issues of
arms management, is yet to begin its work formally
and is yet to take a decision in that regard. Such
consolidation or rearrangement would be likely to
unnecessarily complicate the process and exacerbate
the already poor infrastructure and facilities in the
cantonments. It could also unwittingly prolong the
process of integration and rehabilitation, which is key

to the logical conclusion of the peace process. Those
and other issues will be taken into consideration by the
special committee in adopting its decision on the
process of integration and rehabilitation. The
Government is committed to taking measures to
accelerate the implementation of the decisions of the
Special Committee so that UNMIN can complete its
tasks in accordance with the mandate of this Council.

In conclusion, I take this opportunity to thank
each one of you individually and the Council
collectively for the continued support and
understanding of Nepal's requests in relation to the
peace process.

