I thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing. Before I begin my remarks, I would like to express our gratitude to him and to his deputy, Ms. Khawla Matar, and I wish her a speedy recovery from her injuries suffered during the 4 August explosion in Beirut. Before I begin today, I want to take a moment to note the irony in discussing this issue after the results of last Friday's vote on renewing an arms embargo on Iran (see S/2020/803). Iran continues to engage in activity in Syria that is counter to the interests of the Syrian people, and yet many members of the Council voted on Friday to enable Iran to buy and sell even more deadly weapons. Iran's support for its proxies in Syria only helps to bolster the Al-Assad regime and undermine the United Nations process. How will giving Iran access to more weapons serve the interests of international peace and security? I hope that our colleagues who voted against or abstained in Friday's vote will explain to the Syrian people today how their support for the Iranian regime is helping to improve the lives of Syrians. The Syrian people deserve that from them. On today's topic, the political situation in Syria, the United States remains encouraged and hopeful that the third meeting of the Constitutional Committee in Geneva only five days from now will yield a clear path forward for the political process. The Syrian people are relying on every representative to the Constitutional Committee to make the 24 August meeting count. Now is the time for urgency, compromise and action. It is our hope that next week, the Committee, under Special Envoy Pedersen's facilitation, can achieve the following goals. First, it is important that the parties move beyond previous discussions of first principles and instead directly address constitutional reforms. We encourage the United Nations facilitators to push back against attempts by any delegation to stall the substantive work of the Committee and, if necessary, publicly challenge any attempts to obstruct the proceedings. Secondly, we hope that the Committee members are willing to remain in Geneva for weeks, if possible, and engage in substantive discussions on future constitutional reforms for more than just a day or two. Thirdly, we encourage the parties to agree to a schedule of future rounds of Constitutional Committee meetings throughout the autumn to show that all parties are committed to advancing the political process. The 10-month gap between the second and third round of Constitutional Committee meetings sapped the hard-earned positive momentum that the Council had helped generate for the parties to successfully launch the Constitutional Committee in October 2019. A schedule for future meetings will advance trust among the parties and, most importantly, show the Syrian people that progress is being made with regard to building a new, inclusive Syrian constitution that will pave the way for new United Nations-monitored elections as soon as possible. The Trump Administration extends its full support to Special Envoy Pedersen for his efforts to facilitate the Committee's work towards the drafting of a new constitution in line with resolution 2254 (2015). Next week, the United States Special Envoy for Syria, Ambassador Jim Jeffrey, and Special Envoy Joel Rayburn will travel to Geneva to underline United States support for the United Nations- led political process and to ensure the success of the Constitutional Committee. It is absolutely critical that this next round of meetings be constructive. They must help to chart a path forward for future meetings and progress in creating a truly representative constitution in order to make up for time lost due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The key to achieving a credible, long-lasting political solution to the Syrian conflict is a permanent, nationwide ceasefire. The Council must remain united in its shared commitment to there being only one way forward to bring about a just and lasting peace, namely, that the Al-Assad regime must pursue a direct, negotiated political solution with the Syrian opposition, facilitated by the United Nations. We call upon the Al-Assad regime and its Russian and Iranian enablers to commit to that political process by halting all further attacks, including the killing of civilians and the destruction of critical civilian infrastructure. We note the disturbing, yet unsurprising, trend of the increase in COVID-19 cases in Syria. The risk of COVID-19 is especially great for the more than 100,000 Syrians who remain in arbitrary detention in putrid, overcrowded regime prisons. Those detainees must be released immediately and without preconditions, in line with resolution 2254 (2015), to ensure their safety and to lay the groundwork for progress towards a political solution. We reiterate our position that there will be no reconstruction, no diplomatic recognition and no sanctions relief until a political process in line with resolution 2254 (2015) is irreversibly under way. The United States' policy of maximum diplomatic and economic pressure on the Al-Assad regime and its backers is focused on using every tool in our toolbox to protect civilians from further violence and to bring the Al-Assad regime back to the negotiating table in order to fully implement resolution 2254 (2015). There is much work ahead to achieve the reforms necessary to facilitate Syria's political transition from a Government at war with its own people to a Government that serves the Syrian people. A legitimate political process facilitated by the United Nations will form the backbone of a new, post-war Syria, together with a new constitution, a nationwide ceasefire and United Nations-monitored elections that represent the Syrian people. It is time for Al-Assad's needless brutal war and rampant corruption to come to an end. The regime must heed the calls of Secretary-General Guterres and Special Envoy Pedersen to agree and adhere to a nationwide ceasefire, provide all Syrians with access to humanitarian aid, which has been generously provided by many of those on the Council, and engage meaningfully on the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). A political solution is the only solution that can truly protect the Syrian people and chart a course for a better future. We ask each member of the Council to work with us in support of the political process so as to ensure that the legitimate aspirations of Syrians from all corners of the country and the diaspora are fulfilled.
