Mr. Burian (Slovakia): At the outset, I would
like to express my delegation's appreciation to the
delegation of China for its efforts in preparing the
introduction to this year's Security Council report to
the General Assembly. We are very grateful to the
Chinese delegation for its hard work, high degree of
professionalism and very constructive approach. In this
context, Slovakia is pleased to say that we see this
year's introduction to the annual report as a solid text
that reflects well the complex and wide-ranging work
of the Security Council. Let me also express our thanks
to the Secretariat for its hard work throughout the year
in making sure that the entire annual report contains all
the necessary facts and data.

In recent years, we have been experiencing an
increase in the number of Security Council agenda
items, meetings and decisions. That is a logical
2

reflection of the increased role and involvement of the
Security Council in addressing threats and challenges
to international peace and security. We are convinced
that this should also go hand in hand with an increase
in the Security Council's relevance, authority and
effectiveness. All of these things are closely connected
with how the Security Council's work is perceived and
understood on the outside - first and foremost within
the General Assembly, of course.

In that context, Slovakia strongly believes that
the Security Council's annual report to the General
Assembly is a very important document and should by
no means be just a routine exercise of an administrative
or statistical nature.

Mr. President, the technical and procedural
aspects of the preparation of the annual report, as you
mentioned, are covered in section XI of the annex to
the note by the President of the Security Council of
19 July 2006 (S/2006/507), which contains language
recollected from previous Security Council documents.
In our view, this provides very useful guidance.
However, we believe we need to go further in our
efforts in this regard and concentrate more on the
substance of the report and on key political messages
about the important work of the Security Council.

Also, as the current Chairman of the Security
Council's Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions, I would like to take
this opportunity to invite all colleagues to join forces
and to redouble their efforts in this very important area.
We truly believe that further progress can be achieved,
building upon this year's positive experience under the
able leadership of the Chinese delegation. Moreover,
there are a few practical ideas that will be further
discussed in the Informal Working Group. I would like
to invite all my colleagues to join the efforts to further
improve the work on the preparation of the
introduction.

