Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): At the outset, let
me thank Ambassador Ne'stor Osorio for his briefing
and to commend him and his team for two years of
intensive work leading the sanctions Committee on Iran.
Under his able leadership, the Committee managed to
advance the implementation of resolution 1929 (2010)
and contributed to the efforts of the international
community to seek clarification on the nature of Iran's
nuclear programme.

Let me also thank the Panel of Experts for its
useful work in assisting the Committee. In that context,
I want to emphasize the importance of acting on the
recommendations ofthe Panel's final report (S/2012/395, annex), including the designation of specified entities
that have engaged in proliferation activities or
prohibited arms export actions. The Committee shall
continue to issue guidance to Member States. We are
convinced that one of the best ways to do so is to adopt
implementation assistance notices that would advance
compliance with Security Council resolutions.

Regrettably, the resumption of serious and credible
talks with Iran has not yet materialized, nor has Iran
fully complied with all its international obligations
as set out in Security Council and International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Board of Governors'
resolutions. In particular, Iran continues to fail to
provide the necessary cooperation to enable the Agency
to credibly assess that all nuclear material in Iran is for
peaceful purposes. Consequently, Portugal reiterates
its serious and deepening concern with the continuing
expansion of Iran's nuclear activities as reflected in the
most recent IAEA report (GOV/2012/55) as well as with
the fact that Iran continues to deny access to the Parchin
military site. The 16 November report also stated that
Iran continued to install more centrifuges for uranium
enrichment at Fordo and Natanz sites. Despite the
intensified dialogue between the IAEA and Iran since
last January, the report also concludes that no concrete
results have been achieved in resolving outstanding
issues. Hence, without thoroughly addressing all these
pending issues in close cooperation with the IAEA,
Iran will fail to restore international confidence in the
peaceful nature of its nuclear activities.

Portugal calls on the Iranian authorities to act
responsibly and to comply with their international
obligations, thereby bringing sanctions to an end.
Portugal reaffirms its longstanding commitment to
a diplomatic solution to the Iranian nuclear issue in
accordance with the dual-track approach. In support
of that approach, my country welcomes the statement
of the E3+3 foreign ministers on 27 September in New
York and fully endorses the efforts led by the High
Representative of the European Union on behalf of
the E3+3 in that regard. We sincerely hope that Iran
will commit to serious negotiation process, exercise
flexibility and reach early agreement on concrete
confidence-building steps.

