Mr. Da Rosa (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): A decisive stage has just come to a close in
Angola. The progress registered to date in the peace
process would not have been possible without the activity
of the Secretary-General, who, immediately upon taking
office, began to work with determination, with the support
of his Special Representative, Maitre Blondin Beye, the
personnel of the third United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM. III) and the countries members of the
troika, all of whom have actively striven together to
achieve a settlement to the problem of Angola. Guinea-
Bissau is deeply interested in the success and progress of
the peace process in Angola.

The international community has been fully involved
in the search for a solution to the Angolan crisis.
Considerable financial means have been necessary to
ensure the proper unfolding of this peacekeeping

 

operation, considered to be the most important to date. This
reflects the magnitude of our responsibility to continue to
see that everything occur as planned towards the full
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol.

However, it is critical that our Angolan brothers work
to complete the remaining tasks under the peace accords,
because the international community cannot accept the
indefinite perpetuation of the peace process. Indeed, very
important stages lie ahead, particularly the conclusion of the
final political aspects of the peace process. These include
the normalization of state administration throughout the
national territory; the transformation of UNITA's radio into
a non-partisan station; the completion of the formation of
the Angolan Armed Forces; the integration of UNITA
personnel into the National Police; the demobilization and
reintegration of the ex-combatants; and the removal of
mines and other explosive devices. These are currently
some of the areas that require the Council's urgent
attention. In my delegation's opinion, the accomplishment
of these tasks will ensure the political and military stability
of the country.

My delegation notes with some satisfaction that
Angola is advancing step by step towards peace. But we are
nevertheless concerned by the recent turn of events
described to the members of the Council by Maitre Blondin
Beye on 27 June. We are indeed deeply concerned over the
repeated hindrances and numerous acts of hostility directed
against UNAVEM. III in its implementation of its mandate.
We call on the parties to cooperate unconditionally with the
Mission and to refrain from any act that could hamper the
pursuit of its mandate.

My delegation, like others, believes that only the
determined political resolve of the parties to implement the
entire peace agreement will allow irreversible progress to
be made.

As our delegation has already had the opportunity to
say, if peace in Angola is to be consolidated and lasting, all
Angolans must contribute to a national movement to bring
all the available competencies to bear in perfect synergy.

International assistance will certainly be required for
a long time to come. We therefore support the analysis and
recommendations contained in the most recent reports of
the Secretary-General.

We support the Secretary-General's proposal to create,
as of 1 July 1997, the United Nations Observer Mission in
Angola (MONUA). We believe that it deserves our full
consideration, insofar as it takes into account the need to
maintain the established political equilibrium and to create
the conditions necessary to allowing the Angolans
themselves to take charge of their destiny. This Mission
will also help the Angolans to perfect their new system of
Government, amongst whose largest responsibilities is to
guarantee all citizens the full enjoyment of their civil and
political rights.

In the light of the important role of the Mission, my
country, Guinea-Bissau, will support the draft resolution
before us.

In conclusion, we should like once again to express
the hope that President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi will
have the opportunity to meet as soon as possible to
establish that climate of confidence so sorely needed to
strengthen peace in Angola.

