Mr. He Yafei (China) (interpretation from Chinese):
We welcome the open debate today in the Security Council
on the situation in Burundi and believe that this will help
the international community reach a common understanding
on a proper settlement of the question of Burundi.

We are of the view that the key to settling the
Burundian question lies in national reconciliation, peaceful
coexistence and power-sharing by the two ethnic groups in
Burundi, while the only way to achieve this objective is for
all parties in Burundi to cease all hostilities immediately
and to enter into dialogue and negotiations unconditionally,
with a view to seeking a political solution for lasting peace,
stability and security in the country. We believe that the
international community should also take this into
consideration in its efforts to settle the question of Burundi.
The pressing task for the Council now on this question is
to make all Burundian parties clearly understand this
situation, renounce the use of force and devote themselves
to genuine peaceful negotiations.

We share the Secretary-General's View that the
Burundian question is not susceptible to a military solution
and that a political solution should be found instead. There
are complicated historical and present-day factors
underlying the Burundian question. It is therefore by no
means easy to settle it once and for all. However, we
believe that this question must and can be thoroughly
resolved, which will not only benefit the Burundian people,
but also contribute to peace and stability in the region. The
Burundian people, who have already suffered enormously
from chaos and conflicts, aspire to stability. We are of the
view that a final settlement of the Burundian question lies
with the Burundian people themselves. We strongly urge
the leaders of all Burundian parties to proceed from the
aspirations of their people and their national interests; to
renounce violence and pursue dialogue; to forsake ethnic
hatred and strive for national reconciliation; and to halt
interfactional fighting and work for their national interests.
We will, as always, support all measures that will
contribute to peace and stability in Burundi.

We wish to express our understanding of the efforts
that have for some time been made by African countries,
particularly the neighbouring countries of Burundi, for the
settlement of the Burundian question. In this connection, we
particularly appreciate the untiring efforts made by former
President Nyerere of Tanzania in mediating the crisis in
Burundi. The Chinese Government provided assistance,
within its capacity, to President Nyerere in his activities to
resolve the Burundian question, and we will continue to
give our support in all areas in the future. We hope that the

 

Burundian parties will cooperate closely with President
Nyerere so as to bring their country back onto the path of
peace, democracy, unity and recovery at an early date.

The Chinese Government has all along shown great
interest in the destiny of the African people. We deeply
sympathize with the Burundian people in their sufferings,
caused by protracted fighting and poverty. We hope that
these sufferings will soon be a thing of the past and that
the Burundian people will live a happy and tranquil life
at the earliest possible date. We will work together with
the international community to this end.

