Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French): I
should like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this important meeting on the report of the
Monitoring Mechanism on the sanctions against
UNITA.

We warmly welcome the return to this Chamber
of the Minister for External Relations of Angola,
Mr. Joao Bernardo de Miranda, and I should like to
thank him for his earlier comments to us. His presence
here is entirely appropriate. At issue is nothing less
than the Council's commitment to the people of
Angola. Also at issue is the credibility of the Security
Council - indeed, of the United Nations itself - that
is, all of us.

The members of the Monitoring Mechanism,
under the leadership of Ambassador Larrain, are to be
commended for the excellent and detailed report
(S/2000/l225) that they submitted to this Council.
Theirs is extraordinarily difficult work. They have
done it well, with dedication and professionalism,
despite the often frustrating disregard for their work by
the apparently paralysed United Nations bureaucracy.
All of us - this Council and the Organization - are in
their debt.
The findings of the Monitoring Mechanism are
entirely consistent with those of the Panel of Experts
on Angola. Each report corroborates the other, despite
having been prepared by separate groups of experts,
appointed through different processes.

(spoke in English)

The report of the Monitoring Mechanism
provides welcome reading insofar as it demonstrates
that progress is being made and that some Member
States - Belgium and Bulgaria, for example - have
taken serious steps to correct the deficiencies identified
by the Panel of Experts. The Governments of Belgium
and Bulgaria, and the other Governments that have
made a genuine effort to improve the implementation
of the sanctions against UNITA, are to be commended.
The purpose of sanctions enforcement monitoring is
not to punish, but rather to ensure that the sanctions in
question are being applied, that behaviour is being
changed and that loopholes are being closed.

We also welcome the Monitoring Mechanism's
conclusion that "there is no doubt that the sanctions...
are hurting UNITA's ability to wage war"
(S/2001/1225, para. 250).

The report provides distressing reading, however,
insofar as it demonstrates that a small number of
Member States have not been respecting the decisions
of this Council regarding UNITA. Indeed, it is of
particular concern that one Member State was cited not
only by both monitoring bodies on Angola, but also by
the Panel of Experts on Sierra Leone - that is, by
three separate, independent groups of experts. Such
action by a Member State constitutes a challenge to
this Council and to this Organization, and therefore to
us all.

In resolution 1295 (2000) of 18 April 2000,
which was adopted unanimously, this Council formally
expressed

"its readiness to consider appropriate action in
accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations in relation to States it determines to have
violated the measures" (res. 1295 (2000), para. 5)

against UNITA. An initial decision in this regard was
to have been taken by 18 November, but that deadline
was missed because of delays in the appointment of the
Monitoring Mechanism, which we all remember. It is
crucial, in our judgement - both to the credibility of
the Council and to the realization of the objectives for
which the sanctions were imposed - that this difficult
decision be taken soon. In cases where the Council's
decisions are deliberately flouted, the Council must not
shrink from an appropriately vigorous response.

In our view, the imposition of secondary
sanctions targeting the sanctions-busters is an entirely
appropriate option to consider. Sanctions violators are
well aware of their responsibilities and of the potential
consequences of evading them.

Other options for Council action might include a
requirement for States deemed to be in violation of the
sanctions to report regularly to the Council on steps
taken to comply with them. This could be
supplemented by periodic visits to those States by
delegations of Council members to ascertain that the
remedial steps are adequate and have in fact been
taken. The point is that violators should be censured by
the international community until they comply with
Security Council-imposed and internationally accepted
standards of behaviour.

Resolution 1295 (2000) also took up the majority
of the recommendations contained in the Panel of
Experts' report and provided a blueprint for further
action in each of the areas covered by the sanctions
regime. When fully acted upon, these stand to further
degrade UNITA's capacity to wage war by reducing its
revenues, increasing its costs and choking off its

supply.

Significant progress has been made in some of
these areas - for example, on conflict diamonds -
under the leadership of South Africa and other southern
African producers, with the participation of the United
Kingdom and other countries. The diamond industry
has taken impressive preliminary measures of its own
to reform its operations. These must be consolidated
and built upon if the industry is to live up to its
promise as a true partner in eliminating conflict
diamonds.

Action in other areas is underway, including with
regard to the implementation of arms embargoes. There
will be a conference of experts convened by Canada
and Hungary in the coming months and one by
Switzerland on financial sanctions. The appointment by
the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity of an ad hoc committee to evaluate the
implementation of resolution 1295 (2000) is especially
welcome. We look forward to the committee's report,
due this month. The Southern African Development
Community is also seized at the ministerial level in the
implementation of resolution 1295 (2000). That, too, is
very welcome.
More remains to be done, by no means in Africa
alone. The full implementation of resolution 1295
(2000) should be a priority for the Council. So, too,
should be the early implementation of the additional
recommendations contained in the report of the
Monitoring Mechanism - recommendations that we
believe to be both realistic and achievable. The report
of the Monitoring Mechanism emphasized new areas
requiring Council attention, most notably the roles of
arms brokers and air transport companies in sanctions
violations.

In the course of our work as Chair of the Angola
sanctions Committee for the past two years, the
Canadian Government became absolutely convinced
that enforcement monitoring is necessary if targeted
sanctions are to work. Quite simply, if the Council is
not willing to monitor and enforce its sanctions, there
is no point in pretending to impose sanctions or in
retaining them. The world can recognize fraud when it
sees it. "Let's-pretend" sanctions make the world safe
for perpetrators and tarnish the reputation ofthe United
Nations. We therefore welcome the Council's decision
to extend the mandate of the Monitoring Mechanism, if
only for three months, as evidence of the Council's
intentions. We are grateful to the five members of the
Mechanism for agreeing to remain engaged despite the
personal inconvenience and sacrifice this may involve.

Existing ad hoc monitoring arrangements are not
sustainable over the medium or longer term. We look to
the Council to take quick and positive action on the
draft resolution before it for the regularization of the
Council's monitoring arrangements. That draft
resolution, under the stewardship of France, appears to
enjoy widespread support. We are aware of
reservations on the part of only three delegations and
we appeal to those delegations today to join the
majority on this crucial issue.

The monitoring office proposed in the draft
resolution would not constitute a supranational entity,
untethered to the Security Council and its various
sanctions Committees, nor would the proposed office
be at risk of evolving into a costly and large new
bureaucracy. A small, dedicated office with ongoing
contacts with other organizations would suffice. What
the small office would do is provide an institutional
memory and a centre of expertise. It would be
mandated by the Council, which would thereby retain
full discretion regarding the renewal or non-renewal of
that mandate and would report through the sanctions
Committees. The office would enable the monitoring of
targeted sanctions to be made more effective and more
efficient. It does not make sense to start from scratch
each time a monitoring body is decided upon, nor does
it make sense to have two or more uncoordinated
monitoring bodies operating simultaneously,
duplicating each other's efforts and travelling to the
same capitals to talk to the same people about the same
perpetrators.

In the meantime, while the proposed monitoring
office or alternative means of achieving the same
objectives are being discussed, it is essential that the
Secretariat continue to improve its ability to support
any ad hoc monitoring bodies and to facilitate
cooperation between them. It is also important that the
Secretariat improve its ability to interact with other
relevant bodies. For example, since the visit of my
predecessor, Bob Fowler, to Lyon in July 1999, the
Security Council has enjoyed exemplary cooperation
on the part of Interpol in the area of sanctions
monitoring. A single point of contact needs to be
established with Interpol and, until the monitoring
office can be established, the Secretariat should
identify that point.

In the range of possible actions open to it in times
of need, the Security Council has few options between
issuing well-intended but not necessarily compelling
statements and authorizing the use of expensive and
risky military force. We believe it to be essential that
sanctions be preserved and enhanced as an effective,
precise, credible and, above all, available diplomatic
tool and as a viable alternative to words or to war.
Effectiveness depends on monitoring. We are not
talking about unwarranted interference. We are talking
about enhancing the United Nations effectiveness.
With respect specifically to Angola, the
sanctions' objective is to foster a durable political
settlement to the war by curtailing UNITA's ability to
pursue its objectives through military means and to
take through force what was denied to it in 1992 by the
voters of Angola. Sanctions on their own cannot end
the human catastrophe that has unfolded in Angola
through three decades of fighting, but they can help to
create the conditions conducive to stopping the war
once and for all. To do so, they must be monitored and
they must be enforced. We call upon the Council to
take the action needed to hasten an end to this horrific
civil war. We call upon the Council to give itself the
means to monitor its sanctions decisions. History will
judge us all by what the Council does.

I would like to extend my thanks for the very
gracious comments directed towards us and towards
my predecessor by various speakers. I would also like
to offer my best wishes here in this public forum to
Ambassador Richard Ryan, who is doing an excellent
job and who can count on our cooperation.

