Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): My delegation
would like to express its appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for having convened this meeting. We
would also like to express our appreciation to the
briefers for their comprehensive inputs.

Foremost, let me express our appreciation and
greatest support to the former Special Representative,
Jose Viegas Filho, and his team, including the United
Nations country team in Guinea-Bissau, for their
tireless efforts in contributing to the peace and stability
of Guinea-Bissau.

My intervention will be restricted to two points:
the political situation and drug trafficking in Guinea-
Bissau.

On the political front, my delegation wishes to
commend the Government of Guinea-Bissau for the
significant progress achieved to date. Following the
legislative elections on March 10, a new Government
has been put in place, as well as a new Prime Minister. In
this regard, we look forward to the presidential elections
set for 24 November, which are crucial in continuing
to set a trajectory of stability in Guinea-Bissau. In
particular, we must commend the notable inclusion of
women in the new Government, who now hold eight
of 16 ministerial and three of 15 Secretary of State
positions. Furthermore, we urge the parties to address
the reforms stipulated in the Conakry Agreement.

South Africa would like to commend the work done
by the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the African Union, the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries, the European Union,
the United Nations and international stakeholders and
on their steadfast commitment in breaching the political
impasse and their mediation efforts. We urge ECOWAS
to continue safeguarding this welcome progress; the
support of the international community is paramount
in this regard.

The maintenance of regional stability in Guinea-
Bissau is a necessary condition for further unlocking
fragile regions of the area such as Mali and the other
countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel and for
promoting broader peace on the African continent.

As the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) continues its
drawdown process, and in the light of the impending
presidential elections, we must be prudent in our
approach to ensure that we do not leave a vacuum. It
is important that we safeguard the gains that have been
accomplished by UNIOGBIS in partnership with the
Government and regional bodies.

On the drug-trafficking challenges, South Africa
commends the work being done by the new Partnership
Coordination Forum on countering drug trafficking
and transnational organized crime, and particularly
recognizes the mammoth task that it is undertaking.
South Africa supports the Secretary-General's call on
the international community to support and curb this
epidemic. Moreover, the regional implications of the
drug-trafficking trade route are worrisome, as they
are also utilized for arms and human trafficking. The
recent seizure ofa significant consignment destined for
Mali underscores the urgency of providing support to
curtail this pandemic. Most concerning is the fact that
drug trafficking could possibly be utilized to fund and
fuel terrorist activities in an already volatile region.

Lastly, the decades of political instability have made
it difficult to implement public policy; consequently,
the level of human development remains low in Guinea-
Bissau. Most worrisome is the negative impact on young
people in the absence of conducive socioeconomic
conditions, as mobilization for terrorist activities may
thrive as a result. It is therefore imperative for us as
the international community to redouble our efforts to
supporting continued peace in Guinea-Bissau while
also supporting the aspirations of the African Union's
efforts to silence the guns.

