Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Guehenno for his
briefing and for his personal impressions of his trip to
Kosovo. We take note of the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Haekkerup, and the Mission he heads to establish
normal life in Kosovo and to implement resolution
1244 (1999). We believe Mr. Haekkerup's recent visit
to Belgrade, mentioned by Mr. Guehenno, was very
important. We believe that all the questions that were
discussed during the Special Representative's talks
with the President of Yugoslavia will be developed and
that the agreements will be fulfilled. We are convinced
that unless there is this kind of cooperation with
Belgrade, the Mission will not be able to discharge its
mandate.

Of course, one of the central questions that
everyone is talking about today is the preparation for
the Kosovo-wide elections. We are convinced that in
order to hold these elections, we need to make sure that
the security conditions exist there that would guarantee
a genuinely democratic expression of the will of all the
province's ethnic communities and the fair
participation of these communities in all self-
government bodies.

We therefore attach importance to ensuring that
before elections take place, displaced persons and
refugees are able to return to Kosovo. We are
convinced that excessive haste in holding the elections,
forcing them through without the conditions in place to
enable all the residents of Kosovo to vote, would
strengthen the mono-ethnic nature of Kosovo and
increase the nationalistic mood there.

We take note of the work being undertaken by the
United Nations mission in seeking to harmonize the
legal framework for the future transitional self-
government organs. Such work should be strictly in
keeping with the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999),
with the participation of Belgrade. We note that this
problem was discussed during the talks between
Mr. Haekerrup and President Kostunica, and we
encourage that dialogue. We also reaffirm our position
that the modalities for the elections, and the timetable
for holding them, must be endorsed by the Security
Council.

I remind the Council of our proposals to dispatch
a Security Council mission to Kosovo which would, of
course, also visit Belgrade. We believe that this should
be undertaken before decisions are made on the legal
framework and the timetable for holding the elections.
Sending such a mission to Kosovo would help to calm
the mood of the minorities and show them that the
Security Council does not intend to disregard their
legitimate concerns. It would also be of practical help
in supporting the process of cooperation that has been
established between the United Nations mission and
the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and in bringing about the cooperation that was agreed
to during the visit paid by Mr. Haekerrup to Belgrade.

At this stage, however, we agree that it is
important for the international presence to make a more
active effort to ensure that there is security there for
all, including, of course, the members of the Serb and
other non-Albanian communities. So far, there has been
no success in establishing such security, and the report
of 3 April that was published jointly by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees notes that there has been
no decrease in attacks on the members of the non-
Albanian people of the province, and that such violence
is clearly organized. That report provides concrete
facts. In this regard, we would like very seriously to
warn against any hasty steps with regard to Mitrovica,
Unless the legitimate interests of the Serbs are taken
into account in resolving the question of Mitrovica,
there is a real danger that the entire territory of Kosovo
will be ethnically cleansed. We therefore earnestly call
upon the United Nations mission fully to cooperate
with the Serbs on the question of Mitrovica,

We are concerned that the Albanian media in
Kosovo is publishing articles stating that the leaders of
a number of radical Kosovo parties are expressing full
support for the activities of the so-called national
liberation army in Macedonia, and newspapers in
Kosovo are publishing lists of former commanders of
the KLA who are now taking part in hostilities in
Macedonia. Such people are portrayed as being
national heroes. I am sure that this is well known to the
United Nations mission in Kosovo, and we are
convinced that both the mission and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) must, as the Security Council has already
demanded, step up their efforts to put an end to
extremism in Kosovo and halt the export of violence
from Kosovo to other regions of Yugoslavia and to
neighbouring countries, in particular Macedonia.

We believe that it is now clear to everybody that
the root cause of this situation lies in the policy of
placating Kosovo extremists, which was pursued by the
previous leadership of the mission. The fact is that all
of the problems that have arisen in the region,
including the problem of violence, have their origins in
that policy. They come from Kosovo; nobody is
disputing that fact. In this respect, I would like to recall
the comments of the Special Rapporteur on Yugoslavia,
Mr. Dienstbier, during the fifty-seventh session of the
Commission on Human Rights. He said that there was
a direct link between extremism in Kosovo and ethnic
Albanian terrorists who are operating beyond the
confines of Kosovo. Bosnia is already suffering from
the after-effects of the Kosovo problem; extremists
there are starting to use the same methods that are
being utilized by the Kosovar Albanian terrorists.
There are similar occurrences in the Croatian part of
the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, with
international personnel becoming the direct victims of
armed attacks and being taken hostage. Such
occurrences show that that bad example is contagious,
and if there are no strict measures to put an end to
extremist terrorist activities, many people would like to
recreate this kind of scenario in other areas of the
Balkans.

We are concerned about reports that there has
been a recent revival of the activities of the foreign
network of Albanian extremists, in particular those in
Switzerland, and that this network is being used to
provide support for activities in Kosovo and
Macedonia.

We again draw attention to the need for a clearer,
more insistent implementation of resolution 1160
(1998) regarding the arms embargo to Kosovo. We
stress the need finally to bring the demilitarization to
its logical conclusion and to ensure that the combatants
of the former KLA are truly disarmed. Recently, in
Krivenik, a Kosovo village near the Macedonian
border, a huge illegal cache of weapons was found.
KFOR needed four trucks to remove it. These caches
are really not difficult to find, but I do not want to
comment further on that point.

We believe that, in order to stabilize the Balkans,
we need approaches that are based first and foremost
on the political will of the States of the region, with the
active support of the international community. That is
the precise thrust of the proposal that the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Russia, Mr. Ivanov, put forward in
Skopje on 21 March, when he suggested that countries
of the region should adopt a legally binding document
establishing mutual obligations regarding the strict
observance of the basic principles of inter-State
relations, primarily, the inviolability of borders,
sovereignty equality, respect for each other's territorial
integrity, the non-use of force, and preventing the use
of their territories for incitement or for the provision of
assistance to terrorist activities or participation in such
activities in respect of other States. At first glance, this
is a very simple proposal, but we are convinced that
including these principles within the framework of a
legally binding document would have a very positive
effect on the entire situation. The Security Council
could act as the guarantor of such an agreement. The
international community would be sending a very clear
signal that there should be absolutely no new attempt
to carve new borders in Europe, including in the
Balkans.

