Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
expresses its profound concern about the very serious
consequences of the announced referendum in the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea, the holding of which
could lead to an escalation of the crisis in Ukraine. It
is critical for the Council to contribute to ensuring the
maximum stability and the moderation of the parties,
and to use all appropriate means to find a peaceful
solution to the crisis.

We thank you, Sir, for organizing this timely
meeting, and the Prime Minister of Ukraine,
Mr. Arseniy Yatsenyuk, for his participation in this
meeting. We also thank Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for his briefing,
and welcome the work of the Secretary-General and the
mission of good offices in Ukraine ofDeputy Secretary-
General Eliasson, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General Robert Serry, and Assistant Secretary-General
for Human Rights Ivan Simonovic'.

Chile reiterates the necessity to respect the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Ukraine. It is essential that all parties involved in
the situation refrain from actions that are in breach
of the Charter of the United Nations or international
treaties and pacts to which Ukraine is a party. In that
context, it is essential to respect the rule of law at both
the international and national levels. At the national
level, that must be reflected in full respect for the
Ukrainian Constitution, which is particularly relevant
and important today on the eve of the referendum to be
convened by the Autonomous Republic of Crimea.

Chile appeals to the authorities of Ukraine to pursue
their efforts to establish an inclusive national political
process. At the international level, the parties must
respect and adhere not only to the Charter of the United
Nations, but also to the 1997 Treaty on Friendship,
Cooperation and Partnership and the Budapest
Memorandum. All the mechanisms provided for in
those instruments should be used to find a peaceful
solution to the dispute. We call for compliance with
the Budapest Memorandum, which obliges the parties
to respect the independence, sovereignty and current
borders of Ukraine and to refrain from the threat or use
of force to undermine the territorial integrity or political
independence of the country. By the same token, we
recall paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV), which states:

"Any attempt aimed at the partial or total
disruption of the national unity and the territorial
integrity of a country is incompatible with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations."
We regret that Mr. Simonovie was not allowed to
enter Crimea and that the observers ofthe Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) are
still being prevented from doing so. It is essential for
Mr. Simonovie and the observers to have secure access
to Crimea. We urge that the efrforts of the United
Nations and the OSCE to find a peaceful solution to
the crisis not be hindered. Chile also reiterates its call
on the Russian Federation and Ukraine to make use of
existing mechanisms of dialogue to find that solution.
We need to give time to diplomacy.

In conclusion, I reaffirm that it is for the people of
Ukraine, in all its diversity and unity, to decide its own
destiny in the framework of an inclusive process that
guarantees the rule of law, human rights, fundamental
freedoms and respect for the rights of minorities.

