Mr. Yel'chencko (Ukraine): First of all, I would
like to commend your initiative, Sir, of inviting the
United Nations High Commissioner to brief the Security
Council on the refugee situation in Africa. I wish to thank
High Commissioner Ogata for her thoughtful intervention
and interesting suggestions. I would also like to take this
opportunity to express our deep appreciation to the
dedicated international and local staff of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), who help many people in need, often serving
under extremely difficult and dangerous conditions and
running great personal risks.

The rise of inter-State and inter-ethnic conflicts in
Africa in the past decade uprooted a huge number of
persons from their places of origin and caused them to
flee their countries of residence in search of personal
security and safety. This especially complex situation,
which has exacerbated the old refugee problems and
created new crises of immense proportions, represents a
tremendous challenge to the international community. The
analysis that we have just heard from Mrs. Ogata goes to
the very core of the problem and gives us quite a
disturbing picture.

We have no doubt that the UNHCR and other
relevant agencies working in the field have sufficient
experience and knowledge to deal with all types of
situations. This discussion, however, should focus rather
on what we in the Security Council and the international
community as a whole can do to facilitate their work and
contribute to the solution of the problems of refugees and
internally displaced persons.

In this connection, I would like to mention two new
factors which make the solution of refugee issues more
difficult. They are the gradual loss of the host countries'
tolerance, caused by the massive refugee populations'
staying on for prolonged periods of time, and the
ever-growing reluctance of the donor countries to provide
necessary assistance - so-called "donor fatigue". While
the former should, in our opinion, be addressed, including
by the Security Council, on a case-by-case basis, the latter
is of a more general nature and requires a coordinated

 

approach and a commitment of solidarity on the part of the
donor community.

It has become increasingly evident that humanitarian
assistance alone cannot solve the political problems that
cause internal displacement and outflows of refugees and
internally displaced persons. Only the political solution of
conflicts can ensure durable solutions of refugee problems
and sustainable peace. This is precisely the area where the
Security Council can and must make its meaningful
contribution.

In this connection, I would like to draw members'
attention to one of the aspects of the refugee problem in
Africa that, we believe, deserves the special attention of the
Council and has clear relevance to the ability of the
Security Council to contribute effectively to building a
culture of conflict prevention. In particular, I wish to refer
to the cases where refugees and internally displaced persons
themselves become a source of instability and renewed
strife, thus spreading the virus of conflict to new territories.
Large numbers of refugees and internally displaced persons
in camps and settlements, even if they are taken care of by
the UNHCR or other appropriate agencies on the ground,
often contribute to the depletion of local resources and the
destabilization of labour markets, thus creating likely
sources of tension with the local population or becoming
the easy targets of various opposition and rebel groups that
recruit new members into their forces. On previous
occasions, the Security Council has addressed the problem
of refugee camp and settlement security, the curtailment of
arms flows to such camps and settlements, and the
disarmament and demobilization of former combatants.
Nevertheless, we believe that more should be done in this
context.

In particular, the Security Council, while discussing
specific conflict situations in Africa or peace-building
measures following such conflict situations, may consider
sending, at regular intervals, special missions to major
refugee camps and areas in order to assess the situation on
the ground, as well as to assess the possible impact of the
refugee crisis both on the host country and on the security
situation in the region. The Security Council may also
consider the establishment, with the consent of the host
country, of preventive deployment missions, if
circumstances so require. Taking into account general
understanding among the members of the Security Council
on the need to strengthen the preventive dimension in its
activities, we consider that such missions could become an
effective instrument in the context of today's issue. These
ideas are not new; they are in principle reflected in the
previous presidential statement on the role of the Security
Council in the prevention of armed conflict. What is
needed is their proper application in this particular
context.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
commend the work being done by the existing United
Nations inter-agency arrangements and by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in the provision
of humanitarian assistance and protection to internally
displaced persons and other persons in areas of conflict.

