Mr. Moriko (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation congratulates Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his briefing on the current
situation in the country. We also thank Ms. Aisha
Khurram, Afghan Youth Representative to the United
Nations, and Ambassador Adela Raz, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan to the United Nations, for
the great relevance of their briefings, which prompt my
delegation to make observations regarding the political,
security and humanitarian aspects of the situation.

Concerning the political situation, my delegation
welcomes the fact that, despite a difficult security
backdrop characterized by deadly attacks and attempts
at intimidation, the Afghan authorities successfully
held presidential elections on 28 September. The
holding of the elections reflects the commitment of the
Afghan people to peace, progress and the building of a
democratic society.

However, the current impasse in the political process
as a result of the delay by the Independent Election
Commission in announcing the election results, three
months after the voting, remains a source of concern
for my country. It is therefore important that the results
of the election be published as soon as possible and that
the parties undertake resolutely to relaunch the peace
process, which is key to the lasting stability to which
the Afghan people aspire.

In that context, all initiatives aimed at promoting
peace in schools, university peace clubs and civil-
society groups, as well as the peace programmes
of most Afghan universities, are worthy of support
and encouragement. C6te d'Ivoire, which has always
advocated dialogue as the best method of resolving
conflict, welcomes the resumption of talks between
the United States and the Taliban three months after
their interruption, on 7 September. In this regard, we
invite the Taliban to demonstrate its determination to
participate in the negotiations by putting an end to the
violence and resuming direct political dialogue with
the Afghan authorities. My delegation also calls on all
countries of the region to support those talks so as to
ensure regional peace, stability and security.

With regard to the security situation, my country is
concerned about the continuing violence and insecurity
in Afghanistan. According to available information,
it is estimated that 40,000 civilians have been killed
since 2001 and more than 120,000 injured. Moreover,
since the beginning of the war, at least 62,000 Afghan
soldiers and police officers have lost their lives. The
year 2019 was particularly deadly, with 1,174 civilians
killed in the third quarter, which, according to the
United Nations, represents an increase of 42 per cent
from the previous year. My country therefore believes
that the efforts of the international community and,
above all, those of the Council must seek to end to
the deadly violence that will have a lasting impact
on the most vulnerable segments of the population,
particularly women and children.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, we
must recall that, 18 years since the fall of the Taliban
regime, the protection of civilians and the delivery of
humanitarian assistance remain significant challenges,
especially in provinces under Taliban control.
Accordingly, my delegation commends the outstanding
work of the United Nations and its partners in providing
relief to more than 3.5 million people in need. My
delegation urges the entire international community
to maintain its financial support for the humanitarian
response plan for Afghanistan in order to provide the
assistance necessary to populations in dire need.

Cote d'Ivoire therefore deplores the restrictions
on humanitarian agencies' access to vulnerable
populations, as well as attacks on humanitarian
workers, which constitute a violation of international
humanitarian law. Cote d'Ivoire encourages the forces
engaged in Afghanistan to further strengthen joint
operations with the defence and security forces in the
provinces most affected by insecurity and calls on
stakeholders to honour their funding pledges to the
Afghan army.

Furthermore, my delegation welcomes
Afghanistan's continued commitment to regional
cooperation and welcomes in particular the opening
of the Torkham border crossing, a confidence-building
measure that sends a strong message with regard
to the implementation of the Afghanistan-Pakistan
Action Plan for Peace and Solidarity, which is likely
to contribute to the resolution of security issues in
the region.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire commends
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto and the entire UNAMA
team for their tireless efforts to end the conflict in
Afghanistan and assures them of its full support in
carrying out their mission.

