Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Ethiopia welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2368 (2017), on
the review of the sanctions regime on Al-Qaida and
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) under
resolution 2253 (2015). I would like to express my
appreciation to the penholder for successfully steering
the review process, and to the members of the Council
for their flexibility. We are pleased to have co-sponsored
the resolution.

Ethiopia finds itself in one of the most volatile
regions of Africa, which is facing increasing levels
of terrorism and radicalization. Therefore, Ethiopia is
firmly committed to combating the scourge ofterrorism
in order to ensure its own peace and security in the
region, where Al-Shabaab and other terrorist groups
affiliated with ISIL and Al-Qaida are very active.
Ethiopia recognizes that its fight against terrorism
cannot be effective without forging the required
regional and international cooperation. In the light of
that, sanctions are indeed one of the most important
tools at the disposal of the Security Council in the fight
against terrorism. That is why the sanctions regime
against ISIL and Al-Qaida remains very important.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/467),
as well as the reports of the Monitoring Team, have
highlighted the impact of resolution 2253 (2015) with
regard to the criminalization of terrorism, financing,
measures taken to freeze the assets of those supporting
terrorist organizations or individual terrorists, increased
integration of financial intelligence into counter-
terrorism work, raising and moving funds, as well as
other matters related to the fight against terrorism.
In that connection, we consider vital the inclusion
in resolution 2368 (2017) of the issue of addressing
foreign terrorist fighters and returnees, language
against terrorism financing, updated language on the
work of the Ombudsperson, all while recalling recent
Council resolutions and their transitory provisions,
which have strengthened the sanctions regime. We
believe that, if the resolution is properly implemented,
it would definitely serve as a very good tool in the fight
against ISIL, Al-Qaida and their affiliates. We hope
that it will contribute to promoting international peace
and security.

