Mr. Fowler (Canada): We are assembled tonight to
consider a tragic event, one that has occurred in the
context of a military action brought about by a nation's

 

abuse of its own people. As the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) seeks to bring an end to the gross
and persistent violence visited upon the Albanian population
of the province of Kosovo by a brutal regime in Belgrade,
accidents and errors have inevitably and very regrettably
occurred. NATO is engaged in an action designed
exclusively to stop the Serbian authorities from prosecuting
their policy of ethnic cleansing, which has already resulted
in two thirds of the population of Kosovo - about a
million and a half people - having been expelled from
their homes, many suffering much worse fates at the hands
of Serb security forces.

Bringing a halt to such action, protecting the people of
Kosovo and permitting their safe return are NATO's only
purposes. NATO does not attack embassies or target
civilians under any circumstances. Canada deeply regrets,
therefore, the damage caused to the Embassy of the
People's Republic of China in Belgrade, which is
apparently the result of NATO's air action. Above all, we
are saddened by the death of members of the staff of the
Chinese Embassy and by the injuries sustained by many
others in this most unfortunate accident.

Just a couple of days ago, Foreign Ministers of the
Group of Eight, meeting in Germany, produced a blueprint
for a possible settlement of this conflict that, by resolution
of the Security Council, would end the persecution of the
ethnic Albanian population of Kosovo, see the departure
from Kosovo of Serb forces engaged in such nefarious
activities, facilitate the return of all Kosovar refugees,
guarantee their protection through an international civil and
military presence in Kosovo, and thus allow the bombing
to be concluded.

For the first time in many weeks we have seen the
shape of a possible settlement, and we are anxious to
pursue it as vigorously as we can. In the meantime, we
express our deepest condolences to the people and
Government of China over the deaths and injuries they
suffered some hours ago.

