Mr. Ebner (Austria): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Ould
Abdallah for his brieflng today. I also highly welcome
the participation in this debate of His Excellency
Mr. Abdurahman Ibrahim, First Deputy Prime Minister
of Somalia, and of His Excellency Mr. Ramtane
Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union.

At the outset, let me underline that Austria fully
aligns itself with the statement of the European Union
that will be delivered later today.

Austria highly welcomes the fact that, despite the
difficult security and humanitarian situation, Somalis
have made some progress in the Djibouti peace
process. Austria commends the signing of the
agreement with Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama'a. Now the
focus should be on its implementation and further
outreach, with a special focus on a bottom-up approach
taking into account the firmly rooted clan structure of
Somali society.

Austria would like to once again confirm its
support for the Transitional Federal Government (TF G)
and the continuation of the political process, which
should be as broad-based as possible. We hope that the
TFG, with the support of the international community,
will be able to assume in unity its responsibilities to
build security and rule of law institutions and to
embark on a reconciliation process.

Let me also underline the important contribution
of African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), its
troop-contributing countries Uganda and Burundi, the
United Nations support package for AMISOM, as well
as the substantial support of the European Union (EU)
to AMISOM. in bringing security and stability to the
country. I would also like to highlight that the EU has
decided to step up its engagement to promote peace
and development in Somalia and last month launched a
training mission in Somalia to contribute to the training
of Somali security forces.

We welcome the proposal contained in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2010/234) to review the
implementation of the United Nations strategy for
Somalia and are looking forward to the presentation of
the results to the Security Council. It is indeed
important to better coordinate the work of the United
Nations entities on Somalia. We also look forward to
the upcoming Istanbul Conference on Somalia.

We are very concerned about the fragile security
situation and the impact of this environment on the

humanitarian and human rights situation. Some
3.2 million people, almost half of Somalia's
population, are in need of humanitarian assistance.
Food insecurity and restricted humanitarian access
exacerbate the situation. Concerning any irregularities
in the management of humanitarian aid raised in the
report of the Monitoring Group on Somalia
(S/2010/9l), we consider it of utmost importance that
they be investigated and addressed properly.
Humanitarian deliveries must resume as soon as the
security situation allows. At the same time, I would
like to reiterate Austria's appreciation for the
dedication and engagement of the many humanitarian
workers who accept high risks in order to alleviate the
plight of the civilian population in Somalia.

The human rights situation in Somalia continues
to be very problematic. We are extremely concerned
about the devastating consequences of the armed
conflict on civilians and the continued impunity for
human rights violations and abuses. We call upon all
parties to ensure the protection of civilians in
compliance with human rights law and international
humanitarian law. We also reiterate our condemnation
of the recruitment of children by armed groups and our
request that they be released immediately. We warmly
welcome the TFG's measures to focus on the
protection of human rights as an essential element of
the peace process. We are also very encouraged by the
TFG's intention to ratify the Convention on the Rights
of the Child.

Austria firmly condemns recent terror attacks,
and we are deeply worried about foreign support to the
insurgents. All Security Council resolutions, including
those that impose targeted sanctions and an arms
embargo, must be implemented fully and in good faith.
These measures are directed not against the people of
Somalia, but against those who threaten peace security
or stability.

The security situation for the Somali population
is still unacceptable and does not allow for the
provision of urgently needed help for the people. The
abundance of arms and armed groups is also a root
cause of the surge in piracy. It is important to see
piracy not only as a threat to key international shipping
lanes, but also as a factor further aggravating the
security and humanitarian situation in Somalia. Austria
therefore stresses the importance of determined
activities to curb piracy in the region, such as the EU's
naval Operation Atalanta.
Finally, we also hope that in the future the report
of the Secretary-General will be issued within a time
frame that allows it to be fully taken into account in
preparation for the debate.

