Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I, too, would like to take the opportunity to pay
tribute to the skill with which Ambassador Kafando
08-53841
guided our work in September, which was a
particularly busy month.

France welcomes the fact that the Security
Council has sent a strong political message by
unanimously adopting resolution 1838 (2008), with
many sponsors from various regions of the world. The
news in recent months has shown that the threat posed
by pirates to Somalia and to the international
community as a whole is now global. The entire
international community is called upon to respond and,
if necessary, to use of force, in line with international
law, particularly the law of the sea, or as authorized
under resolution 1816 (2008). It is essential that the
Security Council remain seized of the matter and that it
can in November extend the measures provided for by
resolution 1816 (2008).

The Permanent Representative of Somalia, whom
I welcome, has sent a letter to the Security Council in
support of those actions, calling on Member States to
take action, including militarily, against pirates. The
resolution that we have just adopted demonstrates the
will of the Security Council to act over the longer term.

France hopes that each Member will assume its
responsibility and use fully the provisions of resolutions
1814 (2008) to protect World Food Programme ships
and 1816 (2008) to combat piracy in general.

The States Members of the European Union (EU)
in particular are working to that end. On 15 September,
the EU created a coordination cell to facilitate the
actions of those currently deployed in the region, such
as France and Spain. The French presidency is working
actively to ensure that the European Union should soon
be able to take a decision to deploy a European mission
under its foreign and security policy. France hopes that
other partners will intervene alongside the European
Union.

The Ambassador of South Africa has just stressed
that the Security Council must not lose sight of the
situation in Somalia itself. France agrees with that
point of view. It is sufficient to recall that the situation
continues to deteriorate on the ground. Yesterday, 11
civilians were killed in a single day and a new attack
was launched against humanitarian staff in the South of
the country, killing a Somali humanitarian worker and
injuring an Italian worker. We would like to pay tribute
to the courage of the staff of non-governmental
organizations and the United Nations, be they
international or Somali, who risk their lives every day.
3
We await with interest the report that the Security
Council has asked the Secretary-General to present in
November with regard to the deployment of an
international stabilization force. However, that should
in no way be seen as a reason not to take action now
against piracy. Between now and the end of 2008, the
fate of 3.5 million people will depend on the security
of World Food Programme vessels. Every day, pirates
are slowly killing the Somalian people. It is urgent that
we act; that is the purpose of resolution 1838 (2008).

