Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate Sweden on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month. I thank you, Mr. President, and wish you every
success in your new role. Likewise, I would like to
thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, for
his strong and important statement this morning, and to
wish him every success in his new role and assure him
of the full support of Jordan as he works to discharge
his agenda.

We are committed to security and peace. They
are objectives that we want to meet first and foremost.
We align ourselves with the statement many by the
representative of Norway on behalf of UN70.

The world is today seeing very complex and
prolonged conflicts, and their scale and impact is
growing, sometimes beyond the capacity of the United
Nations to respond. It is not just a question of conflicts
in specific geographical regions. Far from it: there are
some regions, such as the Middle East, which are of
major significance, given the waves of instability that
they face and of which they are Victims, but we see
many more conflicts and threats.

Our region is facing major political and ideological
challenges. The populations in the region are facing a
number of different problems, whether we are talking
about the occupied Palestinian territories or Syria or
Yemen. But all of this means that we need to make
sustainable peace and security within our region a
priority and find fair and holistic solutions to conflicts
and the causes of conflict, in order to respond to
the aspirations of our peoples to a life that is secure
and dignified.

As I have said, we face major challenges, such
as genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity, as well as extremism and terrorism.
Those challenges have become a threat around the world
as well as a threat to international humanitarian law and
human rights law. The responsibility for the prevention
of conflicts and for maintaining peace should be a real
commitment that goes beyond international reports and
declarations. We have to work seriously on the ground
if we indeed want to save future generations from the
horrors of those conflicts.

The primary responsibility for prevention falls to
States. From previous experience in prevention, and
to carry out these efforts with success, efforts must
be national in nature. Given the deterioration of peace
and security around the world, the role of the United
Nations has become more urgent than ever. There is no
alternative to the prevention of conflicts. This should
be an objective in all of the different bodies and all of
the different organizations within the United Nations
and should indeed be their ultimate objective, as the
Secretary-General said this morning. The United
Nations should adopt an effective approach to uprooting
evil and do so in cooperation with all partners from
international organizations, regional organizations,
civil society and international financial institutions.

With that in mind, Jordan supports the Secretary-
General's agenda for peace and for the reform of the
Secretariat, while also supporting the tools at our
disposal, by which I mean the role of the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General and the
political and regional offices as well as the special
political missions. All of this will allow us to
prevent conflict.
We reiterate the importance of very quickly
implementing a strategy to make sure that peace is
sustained and to modernize the monitoring mechanisms
that we have for peace, in order to take into account the
context of each country. This includes the fundamental
elements that need to be offered to respond in a timely
fashion and to manage the unconventional challenges
that we may face today.

Jordan is ready to participate in peacekeeping
operations, given its moral commitment to the United
Nations strategy for preventing conflict and to
providing a response. We support the development of
peacekeeping mandates so that they are complementary
to national policies and so that they are able to meet the
scale of the challenge. With this in mind, the Security
Council, given its mandate and the different tools at its
disposal, has a specific role to play, a role of mediating
in conflict. We also must take into account the Articles
of the Charter. The Security Council should work in
close cooperation with the Secretary-General so that
he can make use of mediation and good offices, among
other tools. All of those factors should play a part,
based on the long experience of the United Nations. I
would also like to commend the important role played
by regional organizations in mediation and diplomacy,
indeed in preventive diplomacy. This allows for
peace negotiations to take place and for expertise and
assistance in capacity-building to be offered.

To sustain peace, we need to include the whole of
society without any kind of discrimination, in particular
of women and young people. These two groups should
have an opportunity to participate in an effective way.
Jordan has done everything it can to increase awareness
of development and the inclusion of young people,
in particular respect for, and the implementation,
of resolution 2250 (2015), as adopted by consensus,
on youth, peace and security. This really is a way of
making our processes more inclusive. It allows us to
move forward.

The role of women is very important, as it supports
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and helps to uphold peace and security
in the face of challenges. It also helps to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) in Jordan. We are aware of the
conflicts in the region and of the large migratory flows
into our country. Health services and education are

offered to those migrants. We therefore need continued
international coordination, with Jordan's involvement,
so that we are able to discharge our duties.
In conclusion, Jordan reaffirms its responsibility
for, and its commitment to, upholding the values of
peace, security, tolerance and reconciliation. In that
way, we can respond to people's specific aspirations
of moving beyond violence and extremism, as well as
carry out our international cooperation activities, in
particular with the United Nations.

