Mr. Paet (Estonia): At the outset, allow me to
thank the Rwandan presidency of the Council for its
initiative to convene this open debate. I highly value
open debates as a measure of greater transparency and
inclusion of the wider United Nations membership in
the issues discussed by the Council. I recommend that
every presidency follow suit.

I congratulate the Council on its adoption of
resolution 2167 (2014) today. I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing. Estonia also fully
aligns itself with the statement made by the Deputy
Secretary General of the European External Action
Service.

United Nations peacekeeping provides essential
security and humanitarian support to millions of people
in conflict zones and supports fragile institutions in
countries emerging from conflict. United Nations
peacekeeping and peacebuilding help societies in
desperate need of stability to return to the path of
peace and development. United Nations peacekeeping
facilitates the protection of human rights and
strengthens democracy, which I believe is the best way
to ensure one's stability and well-being.

Estonia has actively contributed to international
peacekeeping since 1995. During that time, there has
not been a single day when an Estonian peace soldier,
policeman or expert has not been on a peace mission.
This spring, Estonian soldiers began their first mission
on the African continent, namely, in the Central African
Republic, where our infantry platoon is deployed as a
part of the European Union (EU) mission. We realize
the importance of cooperation and mutual support in
solving problems in the international arena.

By taking part in peace operations, Estonia first
aims to protect civilians and achieve a peaceful outcome
in situations with escalating tensions. But we also
understand that all tensions, instabilities and conflicts,
close or distant, will sooner or later have an effect on
us. There is therefore a link between peacekeeping
and our own security. Based on our own experience,
I should like to elaborate on some elements of the
President's concept note (S/2014/478, annex), which I
find comprehensive and forward-looking.

Both politically and operationally, we agree that
there are comparative advantages to regional action.
That applies not only to Africa but also to other regions
where we have witnessed some positive results of joint
regional action. Let us recall operations and missions
in the former Yugoslavia or in Afghanistan, where the
European Union, NATO, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the United Nations
have worked together and shared the burden. Regional
and subregional organizations sometimes have more
knowledge and experience to handle local affairs,
and they might also have better suited capabilities for
regional action. Therefore, the complementary roles of,
for example, regional economic communities such as
the Economic Community of West African States or
the African Union - speaking of Africa - should be
reinforced in the future.

In that respect, the experience gained by the
European Union or NATO in peace operations could
be used. Their increased cooperation with the United
Nations, the African Union and regional economic
communities could improve their overall capacity
for carrying out the missions. Over the years, some
progress has been made, but ongoing crises demonstrate
that it is not enough. Conflicts continue to erupt and
instabilities to arise. Our response to them is still very
often too slow or cautious.

It is understandable that even the United Nations
has its operational limits, and its capabilities have
to be used first of all to counter the most serious
crises. With regional organizations taking more
responsibility, the excessive burden facing the United
Nations can be relieved. Regional organizations are
very often better suited to taking preventive action
because they can detect rising tensions more quickly
and accordingly respond sooner, using their good
offices and mediation tools. Political will is the first
and foremost prerequisite for more regional actions,
as are the existing decision-making framework and
operational capabilities. In that regard, joint planning
and information-collection capabilities, as well as the
pooling of troops and necessary expertise, are of great
importance.

During the past decade, in the light of the growing
necessity for raising readiness and enhancing the
capacity to counter crises and take timely action, both
the European Union and NATO have worked to improve
their toolbox in order to streamline their operational
and planning capabilities, as well as their readiness
for prompt action. The EU concept of battlegroups
and the NATO Response Force could be used as good
examples for other regions to follow. The battlegroups,
for example, are based on contributions from member
States and are staffed and equipped in a rotational
manner. It is a battalion-size force reinforced with a
combat support element. There are 18 such groups,
and they undertake military tasks of a humanitarian,
peacekeeping and peacemaking nature. Even more
importantly, the groups are prepared in a unified
planning and training framework.

Speaking of peacekeeping, we should not overlook
what happens in a conflict zone after peace has
been restored. The international community should
keep looking for ways to facilitate the return of the
country concerned to a peaceful and sustainable path
of development. Disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration should be an integral part of the mandates
of peacekeeping operations and for post-conflict peace
consolidation. Comprehensive security sector reform is
vital to ensuring the development of effective, efficient,
affordable and accountable security institutions. In
that regard, Estonia commends the work of the United
Nations Peacebuilding Commission.

I would like to touch upon one important feature
of peacekeeping, namely, financing. We have seen the
United Nations peacekeeping budget increase year
by year. Exceeding $8 billion, it places an enormous
burden on Member States, but especially on the
countries that contribute financially. Estonia welcomes
the very last-minute agreement of the Fifth Committee
on the peacekeeping budget for 2014-2015, but allow
me to remind the Council that the agreement was a hard
compromise and was hindered, surprisingly, by the
strong unwillingness of many countries.
Estonia has always taken its responsibilities for
the United Nations peacekeeping budget seriously. In
1999, Estonia made a unilateral voluntary decision to
contribute to the peacekeeping budget on level B and
has continued to follow that pattern since then. I would
like to call upon Member States to follow suit, especially
those that have enjoyed considerable economic growth
during the past 10 to 15 years and that today have a
greater capacity to pay than in the past.

I also have to emphasize that the peacekeeping
budget is not the only resource we allocate to peace and
stability. Estonia has contributed to the United Nations
Peacebuilding Fund this year. Funds are also allocated
to conflict-torn countries through different United
Nations bodies, such as UNICEF and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to
name only a few.

Peace on the African continent is a prerequisite
for a better future for the whole world, and Estonia
is therefore ready to take on more international
responsibilities and is willing to contribute increasingly
to African stability. To bolster African countries'
peacekeeping capacities, Estonia supported the
European Union decision to commit to double spending
on the African Peace Facility, a joint EU-African
Union fund supporting African-run peacekeeping and
conflict-resolution missions. The European Union will
give €800 million to the Fund over the next three years.

We highly value the role of international actors and
international law in safeguarding peace and security.
But there is also a need for stronger national and
regional ownership on the part of the Governments of
countries struggling for peace and stability. Societies
must demand more from their elected leadership, and
we remain a devoted supporter of that principle.

Here I come back to prevention and its importance.
One effective measure of prevention, among others, is
the general understanding that perpetrators must be
held accountable. Atrocity crimes have no justification,
and those who commit them must be brought before to
justice and subjected to trial. Therefore, we must all
treat the international tribunals and the International
Criminal Court with respect and dignity and help and
support them in carrying out their tasks. Otherwise, we
will lose an important element of international justice
and law, and already complicated peace efforts will
become even more complicated.

To conclude, allow me to stress that these issues
should be brought to wider international attention. We
should ask for more international reaction, including
on the part of the Security Council. But at the same
time, there is no real alternative to increasing the
local, national and regional comprehensive approach to
tackling protracted and violent crises. We stand ready to
contribute and assist. The more we invest in prevention,
the less we will have to deal with consequences. But
prevention can be successful only if we strive for it
together. I am convinced that we will be successful in
that endeavour. We shall commit ourselves here today
to act together for a better, safer and more prosperous
future for our children.

