The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2019/263, which contains the text ofa draft resolution
submitted by France.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/20l9/159, which contains a letter
dated 15 February 2019 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council, and
document S/20l9/218, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by Show ofhands.

In favour:
Belgium, China, Cote d'Ivoire, Dominican
Republic, Equatorial Guinea, France, Germany,
Indonesia, Kuwait, Peru, Poland, Russian
Federation, South Africa, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America

The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2463 (2019).

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of France.

France welcomes the adoption of resolution 2463
(2019), which renews the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). By unanimously
adopting it, the Security Council has again demonstrated
its unity on the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

First of all, I would like to highlight the progress
made by the Democratic Republic of the Congo on
the road to stability and democracy. The December
elections, held with the support of MONUSCO, enabled
the peaceful transfer of power with the election of Felix
Tshilombo Tshisekedi. I would like to pay tribute to all
Congolese, as they have been patient in exercising their
right to vote and in expressing their desire for change
and the transfer of power, even after elections had
been postponed for two years. Those elections are an
important step.

I would like to stress that the United Nations
has played an important role in such progress. In 20
years, the United Nations Observer Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO
have stood resolutely with the Democratic Republic
of Congo. We take note of recent developments and
invite the country to go further in the exercise of its
sovereignty. Nevertheless, and this is the reason for the
mandate renewal, MONUSCO's action is still essential
for meeting existing security challenges, in particular
those posed by armed groups in the east of the country.

The mandate that has just been adopted marks
a transition. The nine-month period will allow the
Secretariat time to conduct a strategic review of
the Mission, with the objective of gaining a better
understanding of issues and needs and adapting the
Mission's mandate accordingly. It will then give the
Security Council, as well as the Secretariat, time for
discussions with the Congolese authorities. We are all
convinced that a country that hosts a peacekeeping
operation on its soil must have a voice. In that regard, I
welcome President Tshisekedi's commitment to greater
cooperation with the Mission. Lastly, the nine-month
period will allow us to reflect on what happens after- a
gradual disengagement that goes hand in hand with the
effective exercise of the full sovereignty of the State
over the entire territory.

Two priorities have been identified for the
mandate: the protection of those under greatest threat
and support for the stabilization and strengthening
of institutions. To implement them, we will rely on
the full and exemplary commitment of MONUSCO's
military, police and civilian personnel, who work
with the armed and domestic security forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Council
strongly encourages MONUSCO to use the mandate to
implement the internal reforms it has already initiated.
The Mission made initial adjustments, which were
necessary. It must become increasingly responsive
and mobile, in particular the Intervention Brigade,
whose robust mandate helps in effectively combating
armed groups.

Considerable challenges remain, of course, but I
hope that the mandate will lead to significant progress.
It is particularly essential in the east of the country,
in terms of combating armed groups, in particular the
Allied Democratic Forces. That is a genuine concern
that requires enhanced regional cooperation. The
issue of security in the east is inseparable from the
fight against the Ebola epidemic, since armed groups
disrupt humanitarian efforts in a manner that is cause
for serious concern. The fight against Ebola is one of
the elements of the protection of civilians mission of
the new mandate. Above and beyond the situation in
the east, we believe that the election of Mr. Tshisekedi
provides a window of opportunity to address, through
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes, the issue of armed groups continuing their
abuses in the Kasai region and Ituri, in particular. We
will continue to support the Congolese authorities on
all of those issues, as we have always done.

Lastly, I would like to point out that respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms ensures
peace, stability and confidence. Such criteria are vital
to ensuring that the Democratic Republic of Congo
will approach its future with a renewed sense of calm.
President Tshisekedi's initial commitments on that
issue are very encouraging. I welcome them. I would
mention in particular the release of those imprisoned
for political reasons and of measures taken to open up
the public space.

In our view, those are the conditions under which
MONUSCO will be able to fulfil its peace mission and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo will continue to
make progress on the path of sovereignty. Rest assured
of France's commitment in that regard.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council who wish to make statements.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of C6te
d'lvoire.


