Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Mr. Mark Lowcock and Ms. Henrietta Fore for their
valuable and comprehensive briefings. I also thank
the Ambassador of Peru in his capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014). I will focus on two topics: the political and
security developments and the humanitarian situation.

First, on the political and security developments,
resolutions 2451 (2018) and 2452 (2019) established
a mechanism for monitoring and verifying the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement, namely,
the Redeployment Coordination Committee (RCC).
The Committee held a number of meetings that led to a
phased redeployment outside Al-Hudaydah, supervised
and approved by the RCC and its three parties.

We took note of the unilateral withdrawal from
Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa seaports last
Saturday. That is part of the first phase of the concept
of operations. I would like to point out that the tripartite
supervisory Committee must play a pivotal role and that
the Yemeni Government should perform its sovereign
role in monitoring the redeployment in Al-Hudaydah.

Over the past five months, the political
developments in the Yemeni crisis have been
characterized by monitoring the implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement. Despite that, no measures were
taken and the desired outcome was not achieved. Taiz is
still suffering from a blockade. The blockade has been
making civilians, including women and children, suffer
for four years. No tangible action has been taken to
implement the memorandum of understanding on Taiz.

In addition to the agreement on exchange of
prisoners and detainees, and despite the meetings of
the supervisory committee on the implementation of
the prisoner-exchange agreement, there have been
a number of challenges in the implementation of the
agreement pertaining to the release of all detainees,
prisoners and abductees. We affirm our full support
to the work of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Yemen and Head of the United Nations
Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement and the
Redeployment Coordination Committee. We recognize
that there can be no military solution to this crisis. In
that regard, we reiterate how crucial it is for all three
components of the Stockholm Agreement to be fully
implemented, because that is the best path towards a
resumption of the consultations, whose next round will
focus on the overarching aspects of ending the crisis,
based on the relevant Security Council resolutions, in
particular resolution 2216 (2015), the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism,
and the outcome of the National Dialogue Conference.

With regard to the developments on the security
front, Kuwait condemns in the strongest terms the attacks
on Saudi Arabia's oil installations by seven drones. We
support the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in taking action to
maintain its security. The continued aggression by the
Houthis against Saudi territory is a flagrant and direct
threat to regional security and stability and a reason
to impose the arms-embargo provisions in accordance
with Security Council resolutions.

Secondly, concerning the humanitarian situation, we
stress once again the ultimate goal of the humanitarian
dimensions of the Stockholm Agreement in seeking to
alleviate the critical humanitarian consequences that
our brother people of Yemen are facing, by opening safe
corridors for the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
meet the growing needs of the people in all the areas
affected. The United Nations and its agencies must be
allowed access to the Red Sea Mills, which contain vast
amounts of grain that could feed 3.7 million people for
30 days. From the start the Government of Yemen has
said that it will facilitate safe access to the Mills and
open routes for humanitarian assistance, despite the
serious security challenges involved. In that regard,
we commend the role of the Government's Economic
Committee in providing permits at the beginning of
April to 16 tankers to transport 275,000 tons of oil
products to Al-Hudaydah seaport, after the tankers met
the necessary conditions. That should meet the needs
for this vital commodity so that it is not subject to
speculation on the black market, which has a negative
impact on the economy and is helping to depreciate the
Yemeni rial.

In conclusion, we once again call on the parties in
Yemen to fully implement the Stockholm Agreement
on Al-Hudaydah and its three seaports, the prisoner-
exchange agreement and the memorandum of
understanding on Taiz in order to complement the
Special Envoy's efforts to bring about a political
solution underpinned by the three agreed terms of
reference - the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and its Implementation Mechanism, the outcome of
the comprehensive National Dialogue Conference and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolution 2216 (2015). That would end the crisis
and ensure Yemen's independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity, as well as preventing any
interference in its domestic affairs.

