Mr. El Hadj Ali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to join previous speakers in
thanking the Presidents and the Prosecutors of the
International Criminal Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and for Rwanda for their excellent
briefings. I would also like, through them, to pay
tribute to the work being carried out by those two
courts in fulfilment of the missions entrusted to them
by the international community.

I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Judge Fausto Pocar on his election to the
presidency of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia and to pay tribute to his
predecessor, Judge Theodor Meron, for the important
work that he carried out.

My delegation reiterates its commitment to the
accomplishment of the mission entrusted to the
Tribunals by the international community and to the
achievement of the objectives of the completion
strategies.

We welcome the work tirelessly carried out by
the various organs of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, as well as for the
efforts carried out, in accordance with regular
procedures, to improve pre-trial investigations and to
speed up proceedings in the Trials and Appeals
Chambers.

We also believe that referring cases involving
mid- and lower-level accused to the State jurisdictions
of the former Yugoslavia will contribute to reducing
pressure on the Tribunal and will shorten the time
required to fulfil its mission. The completion of that
mission, however, is still a cause for concern, in
particular since it is becoming increasingly difficult, as
the two recent Security Council reports make clear, to
foresee a completion date for the accomplishment of
the Tribunal's mandate.

We believe that in this regard the united efforts of
the international community, such as those that led to
the recent arrest of Ante Gotovina, as well as the full
and complete cooperation of the parties concerned with
the Tribunal, remain essential if it is to overcome the
difficulties that it faces in apprehending and bringing
to justice all of those accused who are still at large, in
particular Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic.

The updated completion strategy for the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda reaffirms
that the deadlines set out in resolutions 1503 (2003)
and 1534 (2004) can still be achieved, but that they are
subject to conditions that are not solely within the
control of the Tribunal. Those conditions include the
full and complete cooperation of the States concerned
in apprehending and trying individuals still at large, as
well as the availability of means.

Constraints linked to the competence of the
courts of certain countries and to the applicability of
their laws to mid- or low-level accused transferred to
them for trial may well further slow the pace of the
work of the Tribunal as it seeks to complete the trial
proceedings by 2008 and to conclude all of its work by
2010, as stipulated in resolution 1503 (2003).

Although the establishment of a fourth courtroom
and the lifting of the recruitment freeze are likely to
improve the functioning of the Tribunal, it remains
clear that the expected increase in the caseload during
the appeal phase will put additional pressure on the
Tribunal and further delay the conclusion of its work.
The fact that not all of the forecast achievements for
this year have been realized shows that challenges
remain.

We note with satisfaction the recent sentencing of
former high-level Rwandan officials, including retired
Lieutenant Colonel Aloys Simba, accused of having
played a leading role in the massacres in 1994. That is
further proof of the importance of the mission
entrusted to the Tribunal of ensuring that those crimes
do not go unpunished, despite the difficulties faced.

Finally, we hope to see cooperation between
Rwanda and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda with a view to further ensuring a strong
foothold for peace and national reconciliation. Given
the constraints facing the judicial system of that
country and other African countries, we call upon the
international community to provide material and
financial support and to strengthen their capacity for
trying the cases transferred to them.

