Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2397 (2017) in response to the
ballistic missile launch by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea on 28 November, in Violation of
relevant Security Council resolutions.

As has been repeatedly stated here in the Council,
only a peaceful and diplomatic path exists to resolving
the crisis in the Korean peninsula because we all know
that the other alternative is unthinkable. Therefore, the
Security Council has no other option but to put greater
pressure on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
acting under Article 41 of the Charter of the United
Nations, to suspend all its nuclear and ballistic missile
activities and return to the negotiating table.

No doubt, the various additional new restrictive
measures introduced by resolution 2397 (2017) will
further tighten the sanctions regime on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, which is already one of
the toughest regimes ever imposed by the Council. We
appreciate the consensus achieved on the resolution, and
we commend the United States and China on their efforts
in that regard. We look forward to the resumption of the
Six-Party Talks, which are prominently highlighted in
the resolution we have just adopted.

As we have stated time and again, the unity of
the Council in handling the issue of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea is absolutely indispensable.
Here too, there is no better option because it is a
basis for avoiding the unthinkable. That is why the
call for unity in the Council is not vacuous. We are
pleased that this has again been demonstrated today,
with the adoption of resolution 2397 (2017), thereby
sending an unmistakable message to the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to immediately abandon
all nuclear weapons and existing nuclear programmes
in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner. The
full and effective implementation of that and previous
resolutions adopted by the Council on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea remains very critical to
achieving the objective of curbing the advancement of
the nuclear and ballistic missile-related programmes of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, while, at
the same time, making it clear to the country that it has
no other option but to return to the negotiating table.

We therefore take this opportunity to reaffirm
Ethiopia's commitment to continue fulfilling its
obligations in that regard. It is our hope that the unity
within the Council will continue to be maintained.
There is no other sane option.

