Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to welcome the presence of Mr. Javier
Solana, High Representative for the Common Foreign
and Security Policy of the European Union (EU), and
to thank him for his briefing. I should also like to thank
Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno and Mr. Ibrahim Gambari
for their briefings.

My delegation fully associates itself with the
statement made earlier by the Permanent Representative
of Germany, which holds the EU presidency. I will thus
limit myself to a few brief observations.

France is pleased to have participated in
Operation EUFOR RD Congo, established by the EU at
the request of the United Nations to contribute to the
security environment at the end of the transition in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In 2003, France assumed the role of lead nation
for the operation that the EU had deployed in Ituri,
Operation Artemis. The deployment in 2006 of a new
operation headed by another lead nation is a major
development for the European Security and Defence
Policy. We are pleased that this new stage has been
achieved in Africa, particularly in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Indeed, the success of the transition process that
that country is completing is essential for the stability
of the African continent as a whole. Following the
transition period, the international community must
continue to assist the country. The United Nations and
the European Union will each have a role to play
during this new period.

The deployment of Operation EUFOR RD Congo
also illustrates the usefulness of cooperation between
the United Nations and the EU. That cooperation
should continue to expand, particularly in the areas of
crisis prevention and peacekeeping. In that regard, we
should benefit fully from the experience acquired
during Operation EUFOR RD Congo.

Finally, my delegation would like to commend
the Congolese people for their sense of responsibility,
which enabled them to hold elections that went
smoothly, and to complete the transition in a generally
peaceful atmosphere. The resolve of the Congolese
people to take their future into their own hands and the
responsible commitment of all Congolese political
actors will be the key to the reconstruction and
development of the country.

