Mr. Belle (Belgium) (spoke in French): I should
like first of all to thank Mr. John Holmes, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for his
statement and his highly relevant comments on the
topic of discussion today.

Belgium associates itself with the statement
which our Slovenian colleague will be making soon on
behalf of the European Union. I would like to limit
myself here to a few considerations that are important
for my delegation.

Belgium is deeply devoted to having the Security
Council periodically revisit the question of the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts. Such a
review unfortunately has a negative connotation. It
reminds us of the lack of progress in the area of the
protection of civilians. But such a review also provides
the opportunity to take note of positive developments.
It allows us to show that when the United Nations acts
in a sustained fashion, it can indeed make a difference
in the field.

For those who would still doubt the usefulness of
this exercise, we would like to recall here both our
Charter, which says

"We the peoples of the United Nations,
determined to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime
has brought untold sorrow to mankind",

and also the Preamble of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, which says

"the advent of a world in which human beings
shall enjoy freedom of speech and belief and
freedom from fear and want has been proclaimed
as the highest aspiration of the common people".
We desire those essential objectives of our
Organization, to be pursued with the unflagging
support of the Security Council for all measures and
actions conducive to their achievement. In that context,
Belgium advocates more systematic and regular
follow-up by the Council, as Mr. Holmes also
mentioned in his statement.

During the presentation of the report of the
Secretary-General on this question on 20 November
2007 (5 781st meeting), we already voiced our concern
regarding several priority subjects for Belgium: access
to victims, sexual violence as an instrument of war and
the effect of certain conventional weapons such as
cluster bombs, which cause unacceptable damage and
suffering to civilian populations. We have already
emphasized the important contribution of the Security
Council in dealing with those problems with a view to
reducing and even eliminating their negative effects.

In this context, we welcome in particular the
initiative of the United States to organize, during its
Council presidency next month, a ministerial debate
focused, inter alia, on the problem of sexual violence
in armed conflicts. We are convinced that that exercise
will help us in further developing a collective response
to this scourge, for which impunity is intolerable.

Under-Secretary-General Holmes has just
emphasized the impact of hostilities on civilian
populations by citing various examples. Those
examples illustrate the diverse nature of conflicts. It is
in taking this diversity into account that the Security
Council must demand of all parties, without exception,
respect for the protection of civilians. Moreover, it
must act in concert with all actors in the international
community: the United Nations, the International
Committee of the Red Cross, civil society, etc.

Finally, access to humanitarian aid is closely
linked to the protection of civilians. That relationship
is not limited just to the framework of armed conflicts;
it can also go beyond. The objective remains, above all
else, the protection of civilians. They deserve that
everything be done to ensure this, as we have done in
Myanmar. If the Security Council can add value here, it
should do so to the best of its ability.
