Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica would like to thank the Indian presidency
for convening the fifth open debate on improving the
Security Council's working methods. We would also
like to welcome and highlight the work carried out by
Portugal as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
One year ago, Costa Rica attended a similar debate
(S/PV.6672) aimed at reiterating our commitment
to and interest in this matter and at proposing ideas.
At that time, the Small Five Group, of which we
were a member along with Jordan, Liechtenstein,
Singapore and Switzerland, had already circulated
draft resolution A/66/L.42/Rev.2 aimed at providing
new impetus to the improvements. The draft resolution
referred to the existing Security Council, not the
Council that could potentially exist at some point if we
succeed in achieving its comprehensive reform. Thus,
the suggestions contained in the annex to the draft
resolution are still valid. They lay out a clear road map,
which is always subject to change, for improving the
Council's transparency, accountability, distribution
of tasks and fulfilment of responsibilities through a
stronger use of our Organization's legal and political
instruments. In other words, the recommendations
aim to further improve what we are already doing,
and are based on Articles 10 and 25 of the Charter,
which confers responsibility for and authority over the
Council's performance on all Member States.

Unfortunately, opposition to the proposal was
fierce, particularly on the part of the five permanent
members and those countries that believed that the status
quo best protected their interests. Furthermore, that
opposition did not, unfortunately, rely on substantive
arguments, but rather on procedural legalism, which
was unjustified but institutionally legitimate and which
forced us to withdraw the draft resolution. Nevertheless,
the countries that are united in that effort - both within
and outside of the group of five small nations 4 have
not wavered in our commitment. Therefore, Costa Rica
would like today to insist on the need for the Security
Council to commit to the recommendations found in
the annex to draft resolution A/66/L.42/Rev.2.

In addition, we would like to emphasize the following
proposals. First, an action plan must be adopted for the
complete and systematic implementation of presidential
note S/2010/507 and its updates. Secondly, transparency
in the work of the subsidiary bodies and the selection
and independence of the panels of experts must be
improved. In addition, the process leading to the
election of the chairs of the subsidiary bodies must be
more inclusive. Thirdly, the Council's actions in relation
to the codification and development of international
law must be limited. That is something that, in addition

to being outside of the Council's jurisdiction, has a
negative impact on the Council and its mandate for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Fourthly, cooperation with the International Criminal
Court must be strengthened. That cooperation should
be guided by impartial and general principles that
scrupulously respect the independence of the Court and
the respective jurisdictions of both bodies. Fifthly, the
Council's relationship with the Human Rights Council
must be strengthened, above all because of the role that
the independent commissions of inquiry established by
the Human Rights Council play in several situations on
the Security Council's agenda.

Collective security is everyone's security, by all
and for all. But the main responsibilities fall to the
Security Council, which is, among other things, the
basis for its enormous importance and the need for it
to be more efficient, transparent, inclusive and open.
Much progress can be made by improving the working
methods of the Security Council. All that is missing is
the political will to do so. We hope that this debate will
succeed in fostering it.

