Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I
apologize once again for taking the floor.

I shall begin where the Syrian representative
ended, asking the Security Council to implement its
own resolutions on counter-terrorism. I, in turn, call on
the Syrian authorities to implement the resolutions of
the Council on chemical weapons and political affairs,
foremost among which is resolution 2254 (2015). That
is the official position of Kuwait in public meetings of
the Council. He knows Kuwait's official position very
well. We want a political solution in Syria - one that
is based on Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex). I do not think that
this position should bother our brothers in Syria.

Another position concerns the fight against
terrorism, which does not exempt any party from its
responsibility to respect international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. That is our
position and we always reiterate it. We are consistent
in our position with those of the League of Arab States
and the Organization ofIslamic Cooperation, as well as
international law, the Charter of the United Nations and
relevant Security Council resolutions.

Concerning what the Syrian representative said
about the existence of Kuwaiti terrorists, he always
refers to documents with the names of Kuwaiti citizens
who are fighting in Syria. We are aware that there are
foreign fighters in Syria. That is why Kuwait and a
group of States have sponsored a General Assembly
resolution on human rights in Syria, the text of which
demands the exit of foreign fighters, condemns them
and prohibits their presence in Syria to fight for any
party. We know also that certain militias are fighting
alongside the Syrian Government. Some of the militias
in the region are considered by many countries around
the world to be terrorist militias. There are nationals of
the same country fighting on both sides. That is why we
have presented a draft resolution demanding the exit of
all foreign forces.

The reason I am taking the floor is that the
representative of Syria cites numbers and gets his
information from the press, claiming that a sergeant,
as stated by the New York Times, raised $400 million.
That is in addition to an earlier claim that an individual
managed to raise billions of dollars and sent weapons.
That is beyond reasoning. When there is evidence, we
take action against them. We reject the very idea that
individuals have links to terrorist groups.

At the beginning of the crisis in Syria, no one had
heard anything about Daesh or the Al-Nusra Front.
At the time, the international community and League
of Arab States adopted resolutions in the interest and
support of the Syrian people. Then resolutions were
adopted to suspend the membership of Syria in the
League of Arab States and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation. Its membership is still suspended to date.

