Mr. Prasad (Fiji): First of all, let me thank the
Council for this opportunity to address the members
of the Security Council. This is the first time in our
40-year history of United Nations peacekeeping that we
have been given an opportunity to address the members
of the Council. My sincere appreciation goes to the
United States presidency for opening these discussions
to troop-contributing countries.

I take this opportunity also to thank Under-
Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Ms. Sarah
Blakemore of Keeping Children Safe for their insightful
briefings this morning.

This year the United Nations celebrated its
seventieth year of peacekeeping. Fiji, which has
been an independent country for 48 years, is
commemorating its fortieth year of United Nations
peacekeeping. Throughout those 40 years, we have
consistently contributed to this most noble ideal and
mission of the United Nations. It is through United
Nations peacekeeping that Fiji has chosen to serve the
world community, and we are proud of our service. We
have contributed more than 30,000 troops to United
Nations peacekeeping missions and have participated
in such missions in the Middle East, the Pacific
region and Africa. We have lost 60 of our soldiers in
peacekeeping missions.

We take our international obligations most seriously
and have a solemn pact to support global peacekeeping
efforts. Our peacekeeping efforts cost us around
$10 million annually - a large contribution for a small
State. We have not shied away from this obligation for a
single day or night over the 40 years of our engagement.

Several members have asked why peacekeeping
missions take so long; what we can do better and
differently in order to reduce the duration and cost
of such missions; and what we can do in the area of
peacekeeping so that missions can deliver speedier
and more enduring results. These are absolutely the
right questions to ask. Conflicts have become more
complex. No two conflicts are the same. Conflicts
are increasing in number, and where they emerge,
they internationationalize very quickly. Conflicts
internationalize must faster than trade does. The
lightening pace of the internationalization of conflicts
serves to underscore the importance and centrality of
the United Nations to the resolution of conflicts. We are
reminded of that every day.

In a more integrated world, the United Nations,
together with its Security Council, remains the
uniquely placed Organization to resolve conflicts and
build and sustain peace. Fiji welcomes and supports
the reforms that the Secretary-General has initiated. Of
all the existing multilateral international institutions,
without a doubt, it is the United Nations that possesses
the centralized capability to design peacekeeping
interventions and secure political support, mandates
and financial commitment to sustain peacekeeping
efforts, long enough for politics and development to
take over.

When the United Nations does peacekeeping well,
we save lives, promote development and demonstrate
progress across the relevant Sustainable Development
Goals. When we do peacekeeping poorly, too many lives
are lost, human development regresses, communities
are worse off and politics and development fail their
communities. When peacekeepers fall short of the high
standards expected of them, they fail both the people and
communities that they have been mandated to protect.
They weaken the chances of success of missions.

Fiji is making consistent efforts to improve
performance and standards. We will continue to
do that. In peacekeeping, it is also necessary to be
measured in our expectations. The United Nations is
dealing with conflicts in some of the poorest regions
of the world. It takes time for institutions, resources,
capacity and politics to kick in to achieve sustainable
human development outcomes, even in the best of our
countries, and secure peace. At best, the goal ofUnited
Nations peacekeeping is to create spaces for politics to
work - where leaders, men and women representing
communities involved in conflict, can take measured
risks. It takes time for markets and institutions that
protect civilians to kick in. A good peacekeeping
mission at its core is about broadening such spaces
in and among communities. It involves hundreds or
thousands of peacekeepers interacting with men,
women and children who need their protection.

As a small but significant troop-contributing
country, we have an obligation to do much more to lift
performance and discharge duties and obligations to
the highest standards expected by the Council. Such
standards are our standards. When performance falls
short, missions will fail to broaden spaces or create the
opportunities for peace that are so critical. Crucially,
peacekeeping is about soft skills - the ability to
understand cultures and values, see how women and
children become exceptionally disadvantaged in
conflict and read signs of individual and group stress.
Fiji pays significant attention to strengthening the soft
skills of its peacekeepers. We recognize that, when
communities have a positive rapport with peacekeepers,
it contributes immensely to improving dialogue and
reconciliation. That openness may help institutions and
politics work better and sooner. A good peacekeeping
mission can help reduce the timelines for institutions,
markets and politics by years and decades. However, it
is unreasonable to expect communities to work through
their politics and resolve deeply embedded conflicts
within the span of a few years. Applying excessive
pressure to shorten the duration of missions may in fact
achieve the opposite effect. We must be realistic about
time frames.

Fiji supports the Secretary-General's efforts to
reform and strengthen the security and peacebuilding
architecture. We heard from Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix earlier today that such efforts have gained
significant momentum, which we welcome. In his 2018
briefing, the Secretary-General asked for a revitalization
of United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
The Security Council paid considerable attention last
week to the role of mediation. They are not different
phases of a conflict cycle; they are interrelated and
overlap with development, humanitarian assistance and
peacebuilding. For the United Nations to improve its
coherence, the reform of the United Nations development
system needs to complement peacekeeping reforms and
assist in providing access to resources, capacity and
opportunities for communities involved in conflict.

When peacekeeping works well, it creates spaces
for women to contribute to peacebuilding; boys
and girls to be educated safely; markets to work and
for political action to be taken. Time and money are
important, as is the high-quality design ofpeacekeeping
interventions. Ifmissions are over-designed, agility and
flexibility will be undermined. If missions are under-
designed, they will fail. Getting that art right requires
capabilities and resources within the Secretariat. The
Secretary-General's efforts need to be fully supported.
Without doubt, the United Nations must have access to
global cutting-edge knowledge, data, and analytics on
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and conflict prevention.
Its importance cannot be overstated. The United
Nations is on the right track.

We cannot under-emphasize the tools with which
our peacekeepers work in difficult circumstances. They
protect United Nations and international staff involved
in development and humanitarian work. They keep
armed groups away from the communities they protect.
They protect themselves. They protect humanitarian
missions and allow food, medicine and warmth to reach
communities, families, women and girls. They are
aware that, when humanitarian support is compromised
or hijacked and when the human rights of those who
they protect are violated, the chances for peace are
gradually destroyed. We have witnessed countries slide
back into conflict. Good peacekeeping must morph into
development in the shortest time possible. However,
if it is done too soon, the chance for a fresh conflict
will increase.

The Secretary-General has asked that peacekeeping
missions not create silos. When United Nations
institutions inadvertently create development,
humanitarian and peacekeeping silos, it is more
likely that we will fail across the board. The Resident
Coordinator and United Nations development system
reforms must complement, reinforce and strengthen
peacekeeping reforms. The United Nations also
needs to become more ambitious in determining how
international development assistance for fragile and
conflict-affected countries can better help finance well
integrated peacekeeping and development missions.
Innovation and creativity are needed.

Fiji is working with all of the permanent
members of the Security Council to strengthen its
peacekeeping capabilities, preparedness and skills. I
take this opportunity to thank the United Kingdom,
Russia, China, the United States and France for their
considerable support to Fiji. We are very grateful.
Fiji is also thankful to Australia, New Zealand, India,
Indonesia and our other partners for assisting us in
strengthening our peacekeeping capabilities. We
welcome this opportunity to restate our support to

strengthening peacekeeping missions. F Prime

 

Minister has given his personal assurance to the
Secretary-General that Fiji will commit to improving
its peacekeeping capabilities. We are making sustained
and solid progress in that regard.

The meeting rose at 1.50 pm.
