Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (Spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General to the Sudan and South Sudan, the
Special Envoy of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) and the representative of
the Organization for Community Empowerment for
Progress in South Sudan for their valuable briefings.

I would like to address four aspects of the topic
we are discussing today: the political developments,
the humanitarian situation, the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan
(UNMISS) and the security situation.

First, with regard to the political developments,
the Security Council is meeting today after the signing
of the revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, and after
tireless efforts by members of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and international partners
to revitalize the Agreement for the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan. We express our appreciation
to the signatories of the Agreement and hope that the
non-signatories will join the peace process soon. We
also express our appreciation for the constructive
participation of the Government of South Sudan in the
peace process.

We would also like to welcome the role of the
Republic of the Sudan in supporting the negotiations.
In that regard, we refer to the resolution of the Council
of Ministers of the League of Arab States adopted at its
hundred and fiftieth session, at which the significant
role of the Sudan was appreciated in hosting and
facilitating the peace negotiations in South Sudan.

We would like as well to express our appreciation
for the significant role of IGAD members in pursuing
and promoting peace. We look forward to the result
of the revitalized Agreement in resolving the conflict
in South Sudan so as to turn a new page based on
reconciliation, justice, reconstruction and development.

Secondly, with regard to the humanitarian situation,
the continued displacement of 1.8 million inhabitants of
South Sudan and 2.5 million refugees in neighbouring
countries is a great source of concern for all of us. In
addition, large segments of the population suffer from
food insecurity. In that regard, we recall resolution
2417 (2018), on hunger and conflict, whose paragraph 7
urges the protection of infrastructure in order to deliver
humanitarian assistance, including nutrition.
Peace will be incomplete without improving the
living conditions of the population. We hope that the
signing of the Peace Agreement will be an opportunity
to prepare areas for the refugees and displaced persons
in South Sudan so as to be an integral part ofthe society.
We express our appreciation for the role of Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
in securing the safety of refugees before their return,
and we emphasize the need to not target humanitarian
workers, while also condemning every impediment to
their noble task.

Thirdly, with regard to the Mission's mandate,
UNMISS should continue its work without obstructions
while respecting the laws and charters that govern its
operation. We welcome the military court's verdict
against the perpetrators of the Terrain Hotel incident.
We look forward to accountability being applied to
all criminals. We also recall the attack suffered by
the Mission while escorting a humanitarian convoy in
Central Equatoria state. We welcome the news of the
arrest of the person responsible for that disgraceful act.

We thank the Mission and express our appreciation
for its work through the implementation of its mandate
in line with resolution 2406 (2018), including simple
matters that the Mission has implemented, such
as presenting gifts to Al-Sabah Hospital and Juba
Teaching Hospital.

Fourthly, with regard to the security situation,
we are concerned by the violations of the Ceasefire
Agreement and the reciprocal accusations, in particular
in Central Equatoria state, despite the progress
achieved in the peace process. We would also like to
applaud the operation of the Ceasefire and Transition
Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism and
the transparency with which it publishes its reports.
We thank His Excellency Mr. Festus Mogae for his
effective and active role in chairing the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission. We look forward to
continued unity among the Security Council, IGAD
and the international community in order to support
and protect the work of the Joint Committee and the
Monitoring Mechanism.

Finally, we thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom for his
efforts as the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
and we wish him every success in his new position as
Representative of the Secretary-General in Somalia.

