Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): My
delegation joins others in thanking the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2008/692). We also thank
Mr. Zannier, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his informative briefing. My
delegation welcomes the participation of His
Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremic', Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and Mr. Skender Hyseni.

Taking into account the prevailing circumstances
and the substantially changed situation in Kosovo, my
delegation welcomes the six-point plan reached
between Serbia and the United Nations, after a series
of dialogues and consultations on the reconfiguration
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). We also welcome the Secretary-
General's intention to conduct further consultations
with the concerned parties with regard to carrying out
the temporary arrangements put forth in his report.

It is our view that any actions with regard to
UNMIK or a changing in the format of the
international presence in Kosovo are possible only if
they are in line with the framework of resolution 1244
(1999) and on the basis ofa decision to be arrived at by
the Security Council.

My delegation welcomes the Secretary-General's
report and commends his effort to adapt UNMIK to a
changed reality and to address the current and
emerging operational requirements in Kosovo. We also
understand the desire of the European Union (EU) to
undertake an enhanced operational role in Kosovo in
the area of rule of law.

We share the Secretary-General's view that the
EU's Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo should be neutral

08-6204]
and impartial and that it should act strictly within the
framework of the mandate entrusted to it by the United
Nations and in conformity with resolution 1244 (1999).

At this critical juncture, we wish to call on
Belgrade and the representatives of all of Kosovo's
communities to actively engage in a good-faith
dialogue with a view to ensuring the rights of all
communities in Kosovo and facilitating the return of
refugees and internally displaced persons.

We firmly believe that a durable and sustainable
solution to the issue of Kosovo can and should be
achieved on the basis of a decision to be worked out
under the leadership of the Security Council, a decision
that would fully comply with the norms of
international law and be acceptable to both Belgrade
and Pristina, thus contributing to peace, security and
stability in the Balkan region and in Europe as a whole.

