Mr. Kolby (Norway): In many of today's conflicts,
targeting civilians has become an integral part of war
tactics. While in the First World War 5 per cent of the
victims were civilian casualties, in today's wars the figure
is close to 90 per cent, and children are among those
most affected by this development. The lack of adherence
to international norms in today's conflicts leaves the
international community and the United Nations with a
special responsibility to mobilize against the increase in
civilian casualties. Today's discussion on the protection

 

of civilians in armed conflict is a positive reflection of the
Security Council's increased attention to the human
dimensions of security issues.

Norway greatly appreciates the opportunity to
participate in this debate. In this connection, I would like to
pay tribute to Canada, the current President of the Council,
for focusing on this important subject.

The well-being of individuals and their communities
should be a frame of reference in the Council's efforts to
prevent and resolve conflict. Recent multifunctional
mandates from the Council and various consolidated
appeals clearly illustrate that the issue of human security is
global in character and universal in scope. We need to
develop this further by defining adequate internal follow-up
mechanisms. We should also continue efforts to develop
better-targeted and effective sanctions.

The international community is collaborating on a
number of issues related to the well-being and security of
individuals. Among these are initiatives in the area of small
arms, anti-personnel landmines and the protection of
vulnerable groups. For example, to combat the proliferation
of small arms through local, national and regional projects
in conflict-prone developing countries, Norway has
launched a United Nations trust fund. In the area of
anti-personnel landmines, the international community will
soon mark the entry into force of a legally binding
instrument that prohibits the use, stockpiling, transfer and
production of anti-personnel landmines, with emphasis
shifting from advocacy to implementation.

Children are often the most vulnerable victims in times
of war. The United Nations Charter clearly states the
determination of Member States "to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war". This year we will
commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. We should take this
opportunity to adopt further measures to protect children,
who are the least responsible yet most vulnerable in conflict
situations. Agreement on an additional protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, by which the age
limit for participation in armed conflict would be raised
from 15 to 18, would be a step in the right direction. In
addition to the provision of food and medicine for mere
survival, children in conflict situations need access to
educational activities. This can provide children with some
sense of normality and hope in the midst of despair as well
as being a way of preventing the recruitment of children
and bringing about the demobilization of child soldiers. We
call for a rights-based approach to children affected by war.

The principle of unimpeded access of humanitarian
personnel to those in need is being disregarded as never
before, and we are facing a rising number of attacks on
humanitarian personnel. Firm measures must be taken by
the international community against parties who
deliberately attack such people. To this end, Norway has
contributed $100,000 to the recently established Trust
Fund for the security of United Nations personnel for
training and enhanced security management. In this
connection, we welcome the entry into force of the 1994
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel.

We are deeply concerned with the spread of internal
conflicts that has contributed to an undermining of respect
for the core of humanitarian law and human rights
standards in situations of internal conflict and civil war.
There is thus a need for strengthened international
cooperation with a view to enhancing the legal protection
of vulnerable groups in internal conflict, to improve
international monitoring and to promote an active role of
the international community in protecting human rights
and fundamental humanitarian standards in such
situations. In order to enforce standards set in
international law, we have to put an end to impunity from
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. The
Yugoslavia Tribunal and the Rwanda Tribunal, as well as
efforts to establish an International Criminal Court, are
important steps in enhancing accountability to
international standards.
It is critical to focus on the improved protection of
civilians in armed conflict through a comprehensive and
coordinated approach by Member States and the
international organizations and agencies. Norway is
contributing its utmost to the efforts that are being made.
We look forward to the report requested of the Secretary-
General, which will identify areas in which the Security
Council can contribute more to improved physical and
legal protection of civilians in armed conflict.

