Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her briefing
today on the thirteenth report of the Prosecutor of
the ICC to the Security Council in accordance with
resolution 1970 (2011).

Egypt welcomes the Court's efforts to ensure
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi's return to the Court. The
Court is obliged to deal with Libya through the Libyan
authorities directly concerned, not through individuals
or entities who do not represent the Libyan State. In
that regard, therefore, we agree that all the necessary
assistance should be given to the Government of Libya
in order to ensure that it can meet its commitments to
the ICC. With regard to Abdullah Al-Senussi, we are
waiting for the study by the Office of the Prosecutor
of the ICC regarding the report drafted by the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya in cooperation with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights on the trial in Libya, in order to
determine whether there are new facts in the case that
could put in question the evidence on which the Pre-Trial
Chamber based its decision that the Al-Senussi case
was inadmissible before the Court.

While we understand that the security situation
in Libya presents challenges that hinder the Court's
conduct of investigations and he tcollection of evidence
on Libyan territory, we are pleased with the cooperation
that the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC has had
from the office of Libya's Prosecutor-General.

With regard to information received by Libya's
Prosecutor-General and the relevant Libyan authorities,
Egypt affirms that the Office of the Prosecutor of the
ICC should ensure that it comes from reliable sources
and that investigations do not focus only on crimes
alleged to have been committed by a particular party
or faction. The Court should investigate all crimes in
Libya that come under its mandate, including those
committed by terrorist organizations with the support
of various States that supply them with money and
weapons to enable them to commit such crimes. We
believe that the international community should help
Libya to ensure that it can develop a comprehensive
strategy for dealing with atrocities committed there and
to provide the Libyan authorities with help in meeting
their commitments to ensuring justice for the victims
and accountability for terrorists. That also includes
providing the Libyan Government with weapons and
implementing the relevant Security Council resolutions,
particularly resolution 2214 (2015).

Lastly, we commend the efforts of Ms. Bensouda
and her Office to ensure justice and fight impunity,
and we intend to continue to cooperate with her in
that regard.

