Mr. Cooney (Ireland): Ireland would like to
thank High Commissioner Lubbers for his briefing on
his recent visit to West Africa. We commend him for
his efforts and his achievements so soon after taking
office.

Like some of those who have spoken before me, I
cannot ignore the fact that today is International
Women's Day. It is a sad reality that while war and
violence are rarely caused by women, women are
frequently the principal victims. In this context, I
would like to associate Ireland with the remarks made
earlier by Mr. Lubbers in regard to refugee women.

My Government shares the deep concern of the
international community at the situation of refugees
and displaced persons in the border regions of Guinea.
We are glad to hear Mr. Lubbers' report of a slight
improvement in the situation. We underline our support
for the efforts of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in the region.
As the United States said earlier, relief workers on the
ground are doing heroic work in dangerous conditions.
We call on all sides to guarantee access to all
humanitarian relief workers and to ensure their safety.
Like others, I will transmit Mr. Lubbers' appeal for
further material support to my capital.

All countries in the region and the wider
international community have a responsibility to bring
about a resolution along the borders of the Mano River
countries that will allow refugees and displaced
persons to return home. The Security Council has been
active in establishing the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), in supporting the
Government of Sierra Leone, in only yesterday
adopting a resolution aimed at removing support for
the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) and in
demanding that all States in the region take action to
prevent armed individuals and groups from using their
territory to prepare and commit attacks on
neighbouring countries and from any action that might
contribute to further destabilization of the situation on
the borders between Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.

I would like here too to express my Government's
solidarity with the Government of Guinea and for the
admirable solidarity of the people of Guinea for the
refugees from neighbouring countries. We have
listened to Mr. Lubbers' request regarding the
strengthening and deployment of UNAMSIL. We have
also taken note of his suggestion to establish a safe
route between Forecariah and Kambia. It is obvious
from what has been said, both in this room today and
outside it by non-governmental organizations involved
in the region, that there are differing views on this
matter. The Council will have to address these
arguments, particularly when it comes to examining the
UNAMSIL mandate.

As mentioned by Mauritius a moment ago, it
would be helpful for our future discussions if, when
responding to the debate, Mr. Lubbers would also
address the arguments put forward by a number of non-
governmental organizations, including Me'decins sans
Frontieres in a press release yesterday, in favour of
moving refugees and internally displaced persons to
locations in Guinea away from the border.

