Mr. Pedersen: Since my briefing two weeks ago (see S/PV.8715), I cannot report any progress in ending the current violence in north-west Syria or in reconvening the political process. Yesterday, the Secretary-General called for an immediate ceasefire in north-west Syria and for international humanitarian law to be upheld. I repeat that call today. However, I regret to report to the Council that hostilities, including heavy strikes from both the air and the ground, continue. As the Secretary- General has stressed and as Mr. Lowcock will shortly brief Council members in more detail, we are alarmed by the rapid deterioration of the humanitarian situation in north-west Syria and the tragic suffering of civilians. The ongoing offensive has displaced nearly 900,000 civilians since | December 2019, often multiple times. Hundreds have been killed during the same period. The hostilities are now approaching densely populated areas, such as Idlib city and the Bab Al-Hawa border crossing, which has among the highest concentration of displaced civilians in north-west Syria and serves as a humanitarian lifeline. People are on the move in freezing temperatures in search of safety, which has become increasingly difficult. More than four ofevery five of the newly displaced civilians are women or children, who face specific vulnerabilities and threats to their security. Young children are dying from the cold. The potential for further mass displacement and even more catastrophic human suffering is apparent as an increasing number of people are hemmed into an ever-shrinking space. Syrian Government forces and their allies have now regained control of the entire eastern side of the M5 highway and several territories west of the highway, including western rural Aleppo. Residential areas of Aleppo that previously had been subject to attacks from the de-escalation area appear no longer to be in firing range. The Turkish Ministry of Defence has announced that further reinforcements were deployed inside Syrian territory in the Idlib de-escalation zone. Those forces have reportedly deployed close to the front lines in armoured vehicles and tanks. We have witnessed repeated violent confrontations between Turkish and Syrian Government forces. For its part, the Russian Federation is actively engaged in support of the Syrian Government's military operations. Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and other proscribed terrorist groups remain a major presence inside Idlib. Resolutions 2253 (2015) and 2254 (2015) call for Member States to prevent and suppress terrorist acts committed by such groups and to eradicate the safe havens that they have established. However, military operations of all parties, including actions against and by designated terrorist groups, must respect the rules and obligations of international humanitarian law, which include the protection of civilians and civilian objects. The principle of proportionality must be respected. I stressed that in high-level contacts with senior Russian and Turkish officials at the Munich Security Conference last weekend, as well as with senior Iranian officials in Tehran. As sponsors of the Idlib de-escalation arrangements, Turkey and Russia can and must play a key role in finding a way to de-escalate the situation now. Russian and Turkish delegations have met intensively in recent days in Ankara, Munich and Moscow, and there have also been presidential contacts. However, no understanding has yet emerged. To the contrary, public statements from different quarters, Syrian and international, suggest an imminent danger of further escalation. As I stated in my latest briefing, I believe that through serious international cooperation, building on and enhancing previous agreements and in the spirit of Security Council resolutions and respect for international law and Syria's sovereignty, it would be possible to find a solution for Idlib that addresses the serious ongoing threat posed by internationally proscribed terrorist groups without causing unacceptable humanitarian suffering. For that to be possible, the combined resources of the international community need to come together. There are worrying developments elsewhere on the ground as well. The situation in southern Syria remains of concern. Northern rural Aleppo has seen renewed hostilities, in particular in and around Afrin, Tell Rifaat, Nubul and Al-Zahraa, with reports of civilian casualties. The resurgence of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant is very worrying, with frequent attacks registered in the north-east, the desert region and around Homs and other areas. According to a statement issued last week by the Syrian military, Syrian Government air defences responded to enemy missiles coming from the occupied Syrian Golan. In the north-east, there are unresolved tensions and the presence of multiple actors. A United States- led coalition spokesperson stated that a United States patrol came under small-arms fire from local militia members and killed a combatant. Syrian State media says the person was a Syrian civilian. That episode stands as a stark reminder of the need for a sustainable arrangement for the north-east that is inclusive of all actors and respects and ultimately restores Syria's sovereignty, unity, independence and _ territorial integrity, in line with resolution 2254 (2015). The devastating scale of humanitarian suffering is primarily caused by violent conflict. More broadly, the Syrian economy continues to face serious challenges as a result of a variety of actors, developments and measures. All of these developments across the country remind us that Syria's sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence remain seriously compromised by the continuing conflict, and that we are a long way from finding a way to ensure that the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people for peace, security and a better future are realized. That, in turn, is a reminder that there is no military solution to the conflict and that a political process is required to move towards a political solution.I had hoped that the launch of the Constitutional Committee on the basis of the composition and the terms of reference and core rules of procedure formally agreed with the Syrian Government and the Syrian opposition could open the door to building some trust and confidence and to a wider positive dynamic for such a process. So far, that has not been the case, but as I continue to press all with influence to work for immediate calm I also remain fully engaged in efforts to try to unlock progress on the political track. I have continued to engage the Syrian parties to narrow differences on the agenda for a third session of the Constitutional Committee, based on the strict observance of the agreed terms of reference and rules of procedure - something that Foreign Minister Al-Moualem and I confirmed was vital when we met in Damascus late last month. I have continued to communicate with the co-Chairs nominated by the Government of Syria and the Syrian Negotiations Commission, who have been submitting and reacting to proposals from the other on a possible agenda. The co-Chair nominated by the opposition was in Geneva for further consultations, and Deputy Special Envoy Matar met with the Government-nominated co-Chair in Damascus last week. Differences remain, but I hope that we will soon be in a position to reconvene the Constitutional Committee in Geneva. My team hosted the working group on the release of detainees/abductees, the handover of bodies and the identification of missing person in Geneva as part of a rotation between locations chosen by its members - Iran, Russia, Turkey and the United Nations. The International Committee of the Red Cross also participates as an observer. That file is immensely important on humanitarian grounds. Progress would also be essential to building trust and confidence. The discussions were constructive, particularly on processes related to the core issue of missing persons. However, efforts on that file have not yet produced meaningful progress in scale or pace with regard to releasing detainees and clarifying the fate of tens of thousands of Syrians unaccounted for. I reiterate my plea for unilateral releases, particularly of women and children. I also urge the parties to improve access to information for families about their detained or missing relatives. Ultimately, a lasting political settlement, in line with resolution 2254 (2015), needs a broader process. It will need to build trust and confidence, and one way of doing so is through a step-by-step process. Given the current level of violence on the ground, the human suffering and heightened international tensions with regard to Syria, one immediate priority is to reverse a set of dynamics that could further undermine trust, entrench divisions and render any political process even more difficult. But beyond that, we must explore a way forward based on reciprocal and mutually reinforcing actions undertaken by Syrians and _ international partners. I intend to continue to pursue this discussion with the Syrian Government and the Syrian opposition and all international stakeholders, and I believe that the profound instability and suffering that the Syrians are experiencing today remind us that such a political approach is the only sustainable way forward. Much more needs to be done to advance such a process, in furtherance of resolution 2254 (2015), but today my primary concern is for the Syrian civilians caught in the fighting, who continue to relay the urgency of their situation and their desperate need for safety. They feel that they are not being heard. I appeal once again for full respect for international humanitarian law and for an immediate ceasefire in Idlib and ultimately, nationwide. I urge key international players to maintain and intensify their links with their contacts in order to restore calm. I urge all members of the Council to put their weight firmly behind the search for a political way forward. As the Secretary-General reminded us yesterday, only in this way can we truly serve the interests of the Syrian people.
