I thank European Union (EU) High Representative Borrell for his remarks and for joining us today. As the world grapples with the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis, increased cooperation between the United Nations and the EU takes on a heightened importance to ensure effective joint approaches to the current pandemic and other crises we face. Whether it is coordination between the United Nations and the EU in Europe, the Middle East, Africa or Asia, the United States is deeply appreciative of the EU's efforts to promote peace, security and human rights in its own neighbourhood and around the world. The United States welcomes expanded cooperation between the United Nations and the EU, and we are hopeful that the strong, invaluable transatlantic relationship between the United States and the EU provides a useful model to follow. The strength of the relationship between the United States and the EU is demonstrated by our cooperation on Ukraine. Ukraine is at an important point in its history, striving to strengthen its democratic institutions, enact needed reforms and deepen its Euro-Atlantic integration, while defending itself against Russian aggression and malign cyberactivity. United States-EU cooperation is critical to countering a Russian disinformation campaign designed to normalize Moscow's continued occupation of Ukraine's Crimean peninsula and aggression in eastern Ukraine. The Trump Administration appreciates the EU's cooperation on joint sanctions actions against Russia. We share the EU's conviction that we must continue to impose costs on Russia until Ukraine has regained full control of all its territory. United Nations Member States must remain firmly committed to Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity. The United States looks forward to continued cooperation with the EU on holding the Iranian regime to account for the full range of its malign activities. We are committed to maintaining restrictions on Iran's ability to buy and sell conventional weapons and to seeking to establish a new sanctions regime to take effect following the expiration of the existing arms restrictions this October. We strongly urge the Council's support. Cooperation between the United States and the EU on Syria is essential to finding a political solution, in line with resolution 2254 (2015). The EU is a critical ally in maintaining the position that there should be no reconstruction assistance flowing to the Al-Assad regime or diplomatic normalization with the regime until the violence ends and there is irreversible progress on resolution 2254 (2015). We appreciate the EU's efforts to closely coordinate our policies and synchronize further steps commensurate with the political process. We are also grateful to the EU for its humanitarian assistance and support for stabilization programmes in north-east Syria. We must work together to ensure that humanitarian aid reaches those who need it the most through the most efficient and effective channels. The Council must renew resolution 2504 (2020) at the earliest possible date, in the light of both the humanitarian and the COVID-19 crises. We note the EU's continued leadership in providing for the most vulnerable, and we welcome the EU hosting a fourth pledging conference on Syria on 30 June. The United States appreciates the significant contributions of the EU to the Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS, which has been extraordinarily successful in maintaining the hard-fought gains against the Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) in Iraq and Syria. We look forward to continued cooperation to ensure the enduring defeat of ISIS. We are also grateful for the EU's close cooperation in Iraq. Much like the Coalition to Defeat ISIS, the EU Advisory Mission provides vital training to Iraqi security institutions. In Libya, a United Nations-facilitated political solution is the only path to long-term stability. External actors must stop fuelling the conflict. All United Nations Member States must comply with the arms embargo, including by ceasing all support for Libyan factions and withdrawing all mercenary personnel. Bringing stability to Libya will require a sustained effort by the United Nations and steadfast support from the United States and the EU. We value the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI and its contributions to implementing the arms embargo. The United States commends the EU for its support of efforts to apply diplomatic and economic pressure to the North Korean regime to bring about the final, fully verified denuclearization of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. It is important that the international community send a strong, unified message that North Korea should halt provocations, return to negotiations with the United States and abide by its obligations under Security Council resolutions. In Africa, the EU has played a key role in counter-terrorism, conflict prevention, security assistance and peacebuilding. We are especially grateful for the significant financial support the EU provides for peace and security initiatives in Africa. Through its African Peace Facility, the EU has provided significant support for African-led security initiatives, including sending troop stipends for the African Union Mission in Somalia and reimbursements to the United Nations peacekeeping mission in Mali for its support of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel. The EU and its member States play an active role in building capacity in the Sahel and in supporting important initiatives to strengthen international coordination. We welcome the EU Emergency Trust Fund for Africa, which provided over $5 billion in development and humanitarian assistance to 26 African countries to address the sources of instability, forced displacement and irregular migration. As Venezuela faces increasingly dire conditions, the illegitimate Maduro regime is destroying the country's economy, obstructing humanitarian assistance and repressing democratic actors, including journalists and medical professionals attempting to provide accurate information on COVID-19. United States-EU coordination in support of democracy there is more vital than ever. We welcome the EU and Spain co-hosting a donor conference on 26 May to bridge the humanitarian gap for Venezuelan refugees and migrants across the region. Our efforts have sought to increase international and public support for a peaceful, political resolution and financial pressure against the illegitimate Maduro regime. More recently, they have focused on increasing momentum around a framework offering an equitable path to a transitional Government and free and fair presidential elections. Maduro has already stated that the 2020 parliamentary elections are not a priority during the COVID-19 crisis, but we must prevent all efforts by him to stonewall this legitimate democratic process. Due to these many examples, and many more, the United States affirms unequivocally the EU's importance as a partner in the maintenance of peace and security around the world. We look forward to furthering our collaboration in the months and years to come.
