Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): Once again,
I would like to thank you, Madam President, as we
have had a very fruitful day devoted to the issue of the
Mano River region. I would like to express my strong
conviction that we have dealt with very important
matters regarding stability and security in the Mano
River region. We spoke at length about Sierra Leone
this morning, and this afternoon we extended our
discussion to the entire region. I would like to take up
two or three matters that have been raised and that we
feel are important.

The first is the question of refugees. We believe
that the refugee issue cannot be separated from the
question of stability in the subregion. Of course, there
is a very large number of refugees in the subregion as
well as outside it. It is therefore important that the
Council continue to devote particular attention to this
matter. Since we are talking about refugees, I would
also like to mention the matter of repatriation and, in
particular, to refer to the conditions for the
reintegration of refugees into their regions of origin.
Not only would that encourage the return of refugees to
their countries, it would, above all, ensure that they
would be properly settled and that they would not
return to the host country. We have seen a great deal of
coming and going between Liberia and Guinea and
between Sierra Leone and Guinea.

Very often, when refugees return home they are
very often struck from the records of organizations that
looked after them. When they return to the host
countries, the problem fails again to the host country.
Speaking of host countries, I am very grateful to my
brother who spoke earlier about the support to be given
to host countries, and about the special consultations
with respect to Guinea. This issue was raised several
years ago, and I would like to revisit it. I am very
happy that the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) is interested in this issue, for it is
clear that countries that have agreed to host refugees on
their territory and have borne the burden of hundreds
of thousands of refugees also have the right to receive
support from the international community to enable
them to deal with the impact of those refugees on their
territory.

The second point I wish to address is a new
element, but a very important one. It is true that rebel
attacks in the subregion have always been condemned
both by the United Nations and by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). But a
new element has appeared with regard to the atypical
case of Liberia, one that ECOWAS itself has taken up.
That element is the need for a dialogue to be organized
within Liberia so that this country too can achieve
national reconciliation and hold free elections next
year. We believe that the timeline for those elections is
very important. We said this over lunch, but I would
like to return to it now. We do not think that peace can
return to the Mano River basin unless the internal
situation in Liberia is resolved. Whatever we can say
around this table about finding a solution to Sierra
Leone, about the fact that the Revolutionary United
Front has become a political party, or about national
reconciliation and all the other elements for
consolidation having been fulfilled, the internal
situation in Liberia continues to exist. I do not think
General Diarra will disagree with me, as we discussed
this at Durban, when I say that ECOWAS is intent on
that dialogue taking place. That is why ECOWAS plans
to organize a dialogue between the Government and the
various movements. I hope the Council will support the
efforts by of ECOWAS and the African Union: this is
something that the Union also addressed at Durban.

Lastly, I would like to talk about the need to
resume contacts among the three States. I believe
initiatives are under way in that regard. What Morocco
is doing in the region does not run counter to what
ECOWAS is doing. It is a complementary effort. The
Rabat meeting among the three heads of State was
certainly the only such meeting possible at the time. I
know that ECOWAS made a great effort to bring about
reconciliation among the three States, but I do not
think that at that time the conditions were right to bring
the three heads of State to the table. I think that
ECOWAS should welcome this Moroccan mediation.
We should encourage it because the results of the Rabat
meeting, and perhaps of a Rabat II, could then be taken
up by ECOWAS so that we can speak the same
language throughout our subregion.

In any case, I believe that talks are continuing;
we are certain that in the coming weeks or months we
may have a meeting ofthe three heads of State in order
to continue what was begun at Rabat.

