Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express our sincere gratitude and
appreciation to Mr. Yamamoto, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and to welcome His
Excellency Mr. Rabbani, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Afghanistan, and thank him for his valuable briefing.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2017/696) on
the strategic review of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), conducted to
evaluate the Mission's operations, activities and
effectiveness, shows the important role that the United
Nations plays in Afghanistan.
In the light of the unprecedented increase this
year in security incidents and terrorist attacks by the
Taliban, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and other
terrorist organizations, it appears that the international
and national efforts have not been enough to eliminate
these organizations. What is needed is an integrated
strategy on the political, security, economic and social
fronts that is owned by the Afghan Government and
supported by its neighbours and international partners,
led by the United Nations. Based on the traditional ties
that connect Egypt and Afghanistan and the mutual
influence and the close links between the security and
political conditions in Central Asia and the Middle East,
we reaffirm our support to the Afghan Government, its
war on terrorism and its efforts to extend its control
and sovereignty throughout its territory. We welcome
the arrangements and preparations for conducting the
elections scheduled for the middle of next year. We
also support international and regional efforts aimed at
supporting the country's socioeconomic development,
including the resettlement and rehabilitation of
internally displaced persons and refugees.

The drug trade continues to be the main source
of funding for the arms trade in Afghanistan, and is
therefore the most dangerous source of support for
extremist groups and terrorist organizations, whether
through money or weapons. The intertwined interests
and ties between organized criminal networks and
terrorists embody the challenges facing Afghanistan
and indeed the entire region of Central Asia. It is
therefore important to intensify and coordinate
the international and regional efforts with those of
the Afghan Government with a view to combating
drug trafficking in the context of the fight against
terrorism. In that regard, we would like to highlight
the potentially valuable role to be played by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the relevant
regional organizations.

The recommendations in the strategic review of
UNAMA, as well as the statements by Mr. Rabbani
and Mr. Yamamoto, reflect the importance of
coming up with a new vision in the search for a
comprehensive peace. Those recommendations and
approaches show the urgent need to build and sustain
peace, with the United Nations working together with
Afghanistan in the upcoming period. It is therefore
important to combine the fundamental elements of
the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan - political, economic, social and
institutional - with implementation geared towards
a comprehensive approach to overcome the challenges
that currently exist in Afghanistan, especially given
the problem of the country's reliance on grants from
the international community, which constitute over
60 per cent of the Government's budget. We believe
that the main composition of UNAMA over the next
period must be based on resources and skills that
are primarily directed towards capacity-building in
Afghan institutions to improve the State's ability to
undertake its responsibilities, maintain security, create
job opportunities, revitalize the national economy and
offer basic services to the Afghan people. That objective
requires close coordination and cooperation among
UNAMA, the various United Nations components that
are present and the development sector in Afghanistan.

In line with what I have said here, through its
Agency of Partnership for Development to offering,
Egypt is committedto providing advanced specialized
training courses to Afghan security and police
personnel. In addition, Egypt has sent Arabic language
experts to the University of Kabul and has accorded
particular focus to the areas ofjustice, culture, health
care and nursing, agriculture and irrigation and the
banking sector. Egypt continues to offer humanitarian
assistance to the Afghan people. We call upon the
international community to stand behind Afghanistan
and understand that the country's stability is the key
to stability in Southern and Central Asia. That is the
message that Egypt took great care to emphasize during
its participation last week in the meetings of senior
officials of the Heart of Asia Process, which were
held on the sidelines of the General Assembly high-
level segment.

We believe that UNAMA can play a pivotal role
in continuing to mobilize the international community
and help it focus on the priorities of establishing
and sustaining peace and eliminating the causes of
instability. Instability cannot become Afghanistan's
inevitable destiny.

