Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow me
to join previous speakers in congratulating you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for this month. Let me also extend our
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report on the situation in Afghanistan
and for the untiring commitment and determination
demonstrated by him and his colleagues to consolidate
peace, stability and development in the country. I also
wish to congratulate Mr. Tom Koenigs, the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, thank him for
his briefing and assure him of our continued support
and cooperation in helping the people and the
Government of Afghanistan to realize their long-
awaited aspirations for peace, stability and
development.

We have noted with delight that over the past few
months the political transition envisaged under the
Bonn Agreement has been completed through the
election and inauguration of the Afghan National
Assembly, and that a new phase in the history of
Afghanistan has started with the Afghanistan Compact,
launched at the London Conference in January this
year. Indeed, the completion of the Bonn process, as
indicated in the report of the Secretary-General, has
resulted in significant political accomplishments and
promising improvements in the economic and social
fields. These include, in particular, continued progress
in public administration and the national education
system, as well as achievements in the financial and
fiscal fields. The report of the Secretary-General
depicts a promising future for Afghanistan, saying that,
in a little over four years, Afghanistan has made
significant progress towards becoming a democratic
State with accountable institutions and towards
reconstructing the basic infrastructure that can support
the economic and social development of the country.

In this context, the Government of Afghanistan
has taken the lead in developing the framework that
will guide the social and economic development
processes essential for consolidating the gains of the
Bonn process. It has developed a report on the
Millennium Development Goals and adapted the
Millennium Development Goals to the Afghan context,
while including a ninth goal on enhancing security.
Indeed, the Afghanistan Compact, together with the
Interim Afghanistan National Development Strategy,
provide an important opportunity to ensure that the
Government of Afghanistan and the international
community work together on a common plan towards
shared objectives in the fields of security, governance
and development.

Despite those remarkable accomplishments, much
remains to be done, and many issues that present
challenges to the short- and longer-term security and
stability of Afghanistan are yet to be addressed
adequately and resolved. We concur with the
Secretary-General that many achievements of the past
four years remain fragile and that the capacity of the
foundations of the State should be strengthened so as to
deliver to the Afghans the basic services they require
in order to improve their daily lot.

Sadly, insecurity and the pervasive drug economy
remain foremost among the challenges facing
Afghanistan. We share the concern of the Secretary-
General about the deterioration of the security situation
in Afghanistan, especially through the increased
employment of more sophisticated and lethal tactics,
attacks against soft targets, suicide bombings,
kidnappings and attacks against the education system.
We strongly condemn all of those terrorist acts, which
target the security and development of Afghanistan and
the larger region.

It is alarming that, despite the ever-increasing
presence of foreign forces in the country, anti-
Government elements appear to have expanded their
theatre of operations and violence into traditionally
calmer areas of the west, north and north-east of the
country. Undoubtedly, expediting the full expansion of
the central Government's authority to the whole of the
country and handing over the responsibility for the
country's security to the national army and police are
essential steps towards mitigating the threat of
insecurity in Afghanistan.

The unabated operation of the narcotics industry
poses a major threat to the achievement of peace and
stability in Afghanistan and adversely affects the
political and economic reconstruction of the country. It
also endangers the security and stability of the region,
especially that of the neighbouring countries. As noted
in the report of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and in the report of the Secretary-General,
Afghanistan produces 87 per cent of the world's
opium. This pervasive and thriving economy has
provided fertile ground for criminal networks,
corruption, insecurity and terrorism in Afghanistan and
beyond.

We support the sincere steps that the Afghan
Government has taken thus far to contain the threat of
narcotic drugs. Nevertheless, we believe that much
more needs to be done. The magnitude of the drug
trade and the immense wealth that it generates, as well
as the multifaceted threat that it poses, suggest that
combating it will require more concerted and resolute
efforts on the part of the Government of Afghanistan
and a more responsible approach by the international
community, particularly by those with a broad-based
military presence in Afghanistan.

Moreover, while certain efforts by the
Government of Afghanistan have resulted in the
reduction of opium cultivation in some regions
traditionally known for producing opium, unfortunately
opium production has increased throughout the whole
country and particularly in the regions bordering Iran.

Notwithstanding our extensive and costly
campaign against that menace, we have, unfortunately,
witnessed over the past year an increase in drug
trafficking emanating from Afghanistan. The Islamic
Republic of Iran, located on the smuggling route from
Afghanistan to Europe in the north and west and to the
Persian Gulf and beyond in the south has endured
much more than its share in fighting a costly and
deadly war against heavily armed drug traffickers in
the course of the past 25 years, losing more than 3,400
law enforcement personnel and sustaining huge
material losses. We have cooperated with the
international community in fighting opium cultivation
in Afghanistan and have helped to promote and
implement crop-substitution projects in different parts
of the country. For my country, which stands at the
forefront of the worldwide war against drugs,
international support, especially the cooperation of
Afghanistan and other neighbouring countries, is
essential.

By pledging $560 million for the reconstruction
of Afghanistan at the Tokyo Conference - the highest
pledge in terms of the per capita income of the donor
countries - the Islamic Republic of Iran is earnestly
endeavouring to contribute to Afghanistan's
reconstruction and development process. In fulfilment
of its pledge, Iran has been engaged in various
infrastructural, educational and technical activities in
Afghanistan, including road construction, manpower
training, electricity projects, the building of schools
and vocational centres, the provision of humanitarian
services and many other projects. In general, Iran's
contribution to the reconstruction of Afghanistan has
so far amounted to more than $210 million.
Furthermore, Iran has incurred huge costs during the
past three decades by hosting almost 3 million Afghan
refugees. We hope that the new conditions in
Afghanistan will facilitate the voluntary repatriation of
Afghan refugees to their home country in a more
timely and promising manner. Furthermore, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, in line with its long-established
policy of supporting the Afghan people and
Government, attended the recent London Conference
and the conferences in Kabul and Doha at a very high
level.

The international community, with the United
Nations at the forefront, should continue its support for
the Government and the people of Afghanistan in a
coordinated manner as they implement the Afghanistan
Compact. We are of the view that the leadership role of
the Afghan Government and its ownership of the
political, security and economic fields in their entirety,
should be given the highest priority.

In addition, the continuation of the United
Nations central role in Afghanistan is indispensable if
the country is to gain from the new Compact and to
build upon the accomplishments of the Bonn process.
As mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General,
UNAMA has completed its task with respect to the
Bonn Agreement, but its role does not end there. We
therefore support the Secretary-General's proposal to
extend the mandate of UNAMA as outlined in the
report.

Before concluding, I wish to reiterate that my
Government will continue with its unwavering resolve
to help the Afghan Government and people in their
endeavour for peace, stability and development.

