Mr. Danon (Israel): Today is not an ordinary day
in the State of Israel. Once a year in Israel, all traffic
stops and all daily activity comes to a halt as the people
of Israel pause for a nationwide moment of silence, a
similar to the one we observed here in the Chamber
a few hours ago. Schoolchildren stand at attention,
drivers get out of their cars, and people walking down
the street bow their heads to remember those who have
fallen in defence of the nation and those who were
murdered because they wanted to live as a free people
in our homeland.

Today, the State of Israel commemorates Yom
Hazikaron, the memorial day for fallen soldiers and
victims of terrorism.Today, as we meet to discuss
terrorism in this Chamber, Israel honours the 23,447
individuals who have lost their lives to war and terror.
Sadly, this year alone, 127 names have been added to
this list of the fallen. May their memory be blessed.

For the Israeli people, the threat of terrorism is as
old as Israel itself. Since the State was founded 68 years
ago, not a day has gone by without the threat of terror.
There is no one in Israel who does not know the pain of
a family member or a friend whose life was destroyed
by the cruel hand of terror. My own father was severely
wounded during a terror attack while protecting the
Jordan Valley as a reserve soldier and passed away after
a long struggle. So I know the pain of terrorism first-
hand.

In the past two decades alone, Israelis have faced
tens of thousands of terror attacks in the form of
missiles and rockets, stabbings and suicide bombings.
During that period, 1,600 Israelis have been killed in
acts of terror out of a population of only 6 million.
Our enemies continue to use any means to murder
innocent Israelis. Just three weeks ago as we met here
in the Council Chamber discussing the Middle East, a
Hamas terrorist blew himself up on a crowded bus in
downtown Jerusalem.

Certain Member States, including some on the
Council, are trying to keep those victims of terror out
of today's discussion. When it comes to Israeli victims,
there is always some excuse for terror. So let me set
the record straight. Terrorism against Israel is not about
our actions. It is about our very existence. It is about
the values we represent. Terror attacks against my
people started before 1967, before Israel became a State
in 1948. Before this institution was even established,
we had to face terrorism. I remind those who think
that it is a conflict about territory that Israel withdrew
completely from Gaza and southern Lebanon more than
10 years ago, yet to this day Hamas continues to build
a terror base in Gaza, and Hizbullah has transformed
the villages of southern Lebanon into armed outposts
of terror.

The terror tactics have not changed because the
ideology ofterror has not changed. It is this evil ideology
that drives terrorism in Israel, my country, in the region
and around the world. Militant Islamic groups like the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, Hizbullah, Hamas,
Boko Haram and others distort justice in the name of
religion to justify the murder of innocent people. They
teach a philosophy of violence and hatred and they
preach an ideology that glorifies death. The only way
to defeat those terrorists is to counter them with moral
clarity and political unity.

Unfortunately, that unity is broken when it comes to
my country, Israel. Some Member States not only fail to
condemn acts of terror against Israelis, but they justify
the murder of innocent men, women and children in the
name of a violent, radical ideology. Let me be clear.
This is not human nature and they are not freedom
fighters - they are terrorists. Shooting youngsters in
a concert hall, targeting a busy airport and blowing up
a bus full of people are not acts of freedom - they are
acts of terror.

Those violent radical groups use modern means to
achieve their barbaric goals. Terror groups now have
advanced modern weapons and recruit on social media.
We might ask ourselves how small bands of fanatics
in remote places became sophisticated terror networks.
Like any group seeking to expand its operations, they
look for investors and backers. And they found them.
Global terror is promoted, financed and supplied
by State sponsors, and the biggest shareholder in
the terrorist enterprise is Iran. Iran funds death and
destruction across the region and beyond. It bankrolls
fear, instability and chaos around the globe, It is long
past time for the Council to eliminate Tehran's trust
fund for terror and end the supply line fuelling violence
in the Middle East and around the world.

Israel, like France and Belgium and too many
others, is not being attacked because of what we do,
but because of what we represent. Israel is an outpost
of freedom, liberty and democracy. We are on the
front lines and will continue to be on the front lines
against those who reject those principles. In order to
effectively counter terrorism, we must stand united as
an international community against that global threat
to our way of life.

