Ms. Rice (United States of America): I want to
begin by thanking Special Representative Mahiga for
his comprehensive and very informative briefing, and
for his active leadership on behalf of Somalia. I also
want to salute the Foreign Minister of Kenya and the
Permanent Representative of Somalia for their very
powerful presentations, which, as I think Council
members could see, had an impact on all of us as we
listened.

The United States shares the Secretary-General's
view of the exceedingly dangerous situation in
Somalia. Long-term security and stability in Somalia
depend on a stable and effective Government. We
continue to support the Djibouti peace process, and we
call upon the Transitional Federal Government (TFG)
to focus on completion of the transitional tasks in the
spirit of inclusivity envisioned in the peace process.
We also urge the TFG to work out its differences, in the
interest of the people of Somalia.

Supporting the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) is key both to stabilizing Mogadishu and
to advancing the Somali peace process. We welcome
and we commend Uganda's and Burundi's increased
troop contributions to AMISOM, which now has a
force of nearly 7,000. We salute their sacrifices, and we
thank the forces and their Governments for their
sustained commitment and support. We call on troop-
contributing countries to increase their support to
AMISOM. so that it can reach its mandated strength.
Since AMISOM's deployment, in 2007, the United
States has obligated more than $185 million to provide
logistic support, equipment and pre-deployment
training to its forces. We again encourage other nations
to step forward with additional bilateral contributions.
The United States recognizes the calls to increase
AMISOM. troop levels beyond the current mandated
strength and the various proposals to expand United

Nations assessed funding for AMISOM. We are
currently reviewing those proposals and will give them
thorough consideration. We look forward to receiving
more details from the Secretariat, the African Union
(AU) and AMISOM.

The United States condemns the increased
fighting in Somalia. We also denounce the several
recent Al-Shabaab attacks, including the 24 August
attack at the Hotel Muna, the 30 August attack on the
presidential palace in Mogadishu and the 9 September
attack on the AMISOM. position at the airport, which
left TFG ministers, AMISOM. peacekeepers and
innocent civilians dead. Such incidents demonstrate the
need for continued support to AMISOM. to counter
groups such as Al-Shabaab and others that work to
destabilize the TFG and inflict further chaos on the
Somali people.

We remain deeply concerned as well about piracy
off the coast of Somalia. Long-term security and
stability in Somalia are necessary, as has been
underscored, to address the root causes of piracy, and
we anticipate an active discussion of the linkages
between security and development during the next
meeting of the International Contact Group on Somalia
later this month.

At the same time, we must respond to the
immediate challenges that piracy poses. The United
Nations recently published a report (S/2010/394) on
options for better prosecuting and imprisoning pirates.
The United States remains committed to working
together to address piracy off the Somali coast,
including on issues of prosecution and incarceration.

The United States is deeply concerned as well
about the victims of incidents of sexual violence in
camps for internally displaced persons (IDPs).
Deliberately targeting vulnerable populations
undermines stability and exacerbates an already dire
humanitarian situation. The United States also strongly
condemns the use of children to pursue violent
agendas. We call on all parties to immediately release
all children within their ranks, to halt child recruitment
and to provide for the proper reintegration into civilian
life of former child soldiers. Let me say again what I
have said before: the only tolerable number of child
soldiers is zero; the only tolerable amount of sexual
violence is zero.

Today's briefing also underscores the
extraordinary strains on the humanitarian situation in

Somalia. The United Nations Food Security and
Nutrition Analysis Unit reports that approximately
2 million people will need humanitarian aid between
July and December of this year and that thousands
continue to be uprooted and displaced every month.
The Famine Early Warning System of the United States
Agency for International Development (USAID)
estimates that approximately a quarter of the Somali
population remains food-insecure. and malnutrition
rates remain at crisis levels. Lack of security and
stability continues to worsen this already troubling
situation.

The United States remains deeply committed to
responding to the ongoing humanitarian crisis in
Somalia. We condemn Al-Shabaab's obstruction of aid
delivery to more than a million Somalis. We also
strongly condemn targeted attacks on humanitarian aid
workers, kidnappings and extortion by Al-Shabaab and
other violent extremists, which further hamper the
provision of life-saving humanitarian aid.

In closing, let me reiterate that the United States
remains committed to seeing peace and stability take
hold in Somalia for the sake of the Somali people and
the region. We continue to support the Djibouti peace
process and Somalia's Transitional Federal
Government and its efforts to bring security and
stability to a country that has already endured far too
much.

