Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): I, too, wish
to express the appreciation of my delegation to
Mr. Kenzo Oshima for the useful information contained
in the report that he has just given us. I would also like
to congratulate the Norwegian presidency on having
organized this discussion on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict.

In so doing, the Council has demonstrated once
again its desire to assume to a greater degree its
responsibilities in the area of the maintenance of
international peace and security. Here, I would like to
point out the particular interest that my delegation
attaches to this discussion, because, as the Council
knows, my country belongs to a subregion that
continues to be the theatre of several conflicts whose
effects on civilians are terrifying.

The new nature of conflicts at the intra-State
level has caused a new form of violence whose primary
victims are civilian populations. This situation, which
is an insult to, inter alia, human dignity, denies all
respect for the elementary principles of international
humanitarian law.

In the Millennium Declaration, adopted in
September 2000, the Member States of the
Organization pledged to expand and strengthen the
protection of civilians in urgent, complex situations.
Several Council resolutions and presidential statements
have stressed the gravity of the question and revealed
the need to find a solution to it.

Therefore, my delegation supports steps under
way for the implementation of the 54 recommendations
of the Secretary-General with regard to the protection
of civilians. As the Council knows, these
recommendations cover three major areas: strategy, the
aide-memoire and close cooperation between the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO).

We are following with interest the elaboration of
the road map, and we welcome the financial support
provided by the Government of Norway. We hope that
the final result of this work will be made available in
November 2002, as announced by Mr. Oshima on 21
November 2001.

The aide-memoire before the Council today is the
product of a long work process that takes into account
the principal objectives, gives us guidance on issues to
examine and provides a checklist of questions relating
to the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We
should like to recognize those who initiated this
document and those who contributed to its elaboration.
In our view, the checklist seeks to ensure that questions
relating to the protection of civilians are taken into
account in the process of peacekeeping operations.
Accordingly, we believe that it is a reference tool for
the Council.

We welcome the establishment of a multisectoral
team composed of representatives of DPKO and
OCHA. This will facilitate the taking into account of
questions relating to the protection of civilians in the
conception, planning and implementation of
peacekeeping operations.

We think that the strategy document now being
elaborated by OCHA takes into account all the aspects
of the question. Moreover, my delegation would like to
encourage and stress the importance of coordinating
activities within the United Nations system, on the one
hand, and between it, the other actors involved in the
protection of civilians and Member States, on the other.

Finally, my delegation believes that the best way
to protect civilians today lies in the prevention of
conflicts and the establishment of an effective and
consistent peace-building programme.

