Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I want to thank you, Sir,
for convening this meeting to discuss the report
(S/2014/67) of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
of its seventh session. I would like to thank His
Excellency Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, Permanent
Representative of Brazil, for his committed leadership
of the PBC, and indeed for a very lucid briefing
this morning. I also want to thank His Excellency
Mr. Vladimir Drobnjak, Permanent Representative
of Croatia and former Chair of the PBC for his
statement on the seventh session of the Commission.
Nigeria commends the chairs of the country-specific
configurations and the Peacebuilding Support Office
for promoting the work of the Commission. We owe a
great debt to Rwanda for chairing the PBC work stream
to improve relations between the Security Council and
the Commission.

The annual debate on the report on the work
of the PBC, I believe, provides an opportunity not
only to review the work of the PBC and its various
configurations, but also to reflect on how best to
support the efforts of post-conflict countries to avoid
a relapse into conflict. In fact, it is instructive that a
recent World Bank report entitled "Conflict Relapse
and the Sustainability of Post-Conflict Peace" indicates
that 90 per cent of conflicts that have occurred in
the past decade took place in countries that had
previously experienced civil war. According to that
report, the problem with civil war is not the challenge
of preventing new conflicts from arising, but that of
permanently ending those that have already started.
For that reason, we must find sustainable and enduring
solutions that address the roots of conflicts and not just
their symptoms.

Nigeria would like to comment on a few ofthe issues
highlighted in the 2014 report of the PBC, including
the working methods of the PBC, relations between the
PBC and the principal organs of the United Nations,
resource mobilization, the importance of forging
coherence to coordinate the activities of stakeholders,
and the role of the membership.

We welcome the PBC's efforts in pursuing
improvements to facilitate engagement with and
ownership of the Commission's objectives by Member
States, the United Nations system and international
partners. We take note of the outcomes of the various
working-level informal consultations held between
February and November 2013. In particular, we
applaud the compilation of a compendium covering
aspects related to PBC's country-specific engagement
and serves as a useful reference for chairs of country
configurations and external partners.

Equally significant was the decision of the
Organizational Committee to convene an annual
session of the PBC in order to facilitate closer
interaction and engagement among stakeholders in
New York and capitals of member States. We are
pleased to note that this decision has already been put
into effect with the first annual PBC session, which
took place on 23 June. That session, which we consider
to have been a great success, addressed the challenges
to post-conflict peacebuilding and took note of lessons
learned so far in enhancing the work of the PBC. The
convening of the annual session, in our View, represents
a significant improvement in the working methods of
the PBC, insofar as it allows for extensive discussions
of important issues pertaining to the development of
policy guidelines for the PBC.

Despite those achievements, stakeholders broadly
agree that the working methods of the Commission can
be further improved. In that regard, we believe that,
where appropriate, some of the rules of procedure of
the PBC that have been in operation since its inception
should be re-examined and reviewed for improvement
vis-a-Vis the objectives of the Commission. Indeed, that
should be a key priority at the 2015 review.

Improved performance by the PBC will, in part,
depend on its relations with the principal organs of the
United Nations, in particular the Council. We recall
in that regard that the Council, in its resolution 2086
(2013), expressed its desire to utilize the advisory,
advocacy and resource mobilization roles of the
Commission in peacebuilding activities and to harness
those roles to advance a more coherent approach with
respect to multidimensional peacekeeping mandates
in countries on its agenda. To attain those objectives,
the advisory role of the Commission to the Security
Council should be enhanced, its expertise should be
utilized on all issues within the competence of the PBC,
and the Commission should be central to the support
for post-conflict countries.

In our times, the PBC seems to be operating in
a crowded setting. That calls for improvement in
coordination and coherence and for the clear delineation
of responsibilities between key stakeholders in the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture to prevent
duplication of efforts and maximize outcomes. In more
specific terms, predictable and sustainable financing
are essential for recovery activities in the countries on
the agenda of the PBC. That requires a larger financial
contribution to the Peacebuilding Fund and support for
the efforts of the chairs of the country configurations
for countries on the PBC agenda.

We have learned over the years that national
ownership and inclusivity are core principles of post-
conflict peacebuilding. All stakeholders, national
and international development partners alike, that
are actively engaged in peacebuilding should be
guided by those principles as they help post-conflict
countries in their recovery efforts. More important,
expressions of support must move beyond rhetoric
and mere proclamations to specific action, which
must be results-oriented. In that connection, through
its Technical Aid Corps, Nigeria offers to place its
expertise in a framework for South-South cooperation
to support the countries on the PBC agenda in their
civilian capacity-building requirements. We call on
Member States capable of offering assistance to forge
similar partnerships with the countries concerned as a
way of complementing their efforts to build national
capacities.

Nigeria is firmly committed to the peacebuilding
efforts of the United Nations. We have stood on the
frontline of global peacekeeping and peacebuilding
effortsandhavebeenamemberofthePBCOrganizational
Committee since its inception. Indeed, Nigeria is a
member of all the country-specific configurations
of the PBC. We shall remain fully engaged in the
discussions related to the scope and content of the 2015
review of the peacebuilding architecture. We welcome
the ongoing process of deliberations and consultations
on this matter and look forward to the second review
of the PBC, which can effectively put that fledgling
intergovernmental entity on a firmer footing to propel
it to its full potential.

