Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium): I deliver
this statement on behalf of the three co-penholders,
namely, Belgium, Germany and Kuwait, which
have called for this meeting, following last week's
consultations, to follow up on the concerning military
escalation in the north-western de-escalation zone in
Syria. We would like to thank both Under-Secretaries-
General, Mr. Mark Lowcock and Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, for keeping us up to date on the different
aspects of this crisis.

We would like to start by expressing our deep
concern about the escalation of violence in north-
west Syria over the past few weeks, including aerial
bombardment, heavy shelling and the reported use of
barrel bombs. That has led to the loss of life of many
innocent civilians, including health workers, and has
forced more than 180 000 people to leave their homes.
We are particularly concerned about the attacks on
civilian infrastructure, as we have just heard, including
on 18 health facilities caring for 170,000 people, and at
least 17 schools, which are now unable to provide their
services, thereby impacting 480,000 students.

We acknowledge that there is a considerable
presence of members of United Nations-designated
terrorist organizations in Idlib. We clearly condemn
the violent attacks they have carried out. But the fight
against terrorism can in no way justify indiscriminate
attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure.
Counter-terrorism operations do not override the
responsibility of parties to protect civilians, nor should
they impede impartial humanitarian action. The use of
barrel bombs, in any place but especially in populated
areas, is completely unacceptable, as it demonstrates
complete disregard for human life and represents a
strategy of collective punishment.

We, the co-penholders, remind all parties of their
obligations under international humanitarian law, based
on the Geneva Convention and its Protocols, including
the humanitarian principles to protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure. Accountability must be ensured
for those who have committed violations of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
We stand firm in our commitment to fight impunity.

We also recall resolutions 2286 (2016) and 2427
(2018), which condemn attacks on hospitals and schools,
respectively. We are particularly alarmed and shocked
by reports of attacks on civilian infrastructure, such
as medical facilities whose location has been notified
under the de-confliction mechanism. That seriously
undermines the very purpose of such notification
as a tool to increase the security and acceptance of
humanitarian actors in the field.

The Russian-Turkish memorandum of understanding
signedinSeptember2018was significantinde-escalating
the situation in north-west Syria. We reiterate our call
for the continuous and full implementation of the
ceasefire arrangements of the memorandum. We recall
that 3 million people, including 1 million children,
live in that area. A wide-scale offensive would lead to
a humanitarian catastrophe for Syria and the region.
We, as the Council, must not let this happen. A lasting
ceasefire in Idlib is paramount. We urge all parties to
avoid further escalation and to use their influence to
that end.

Humanitarian access must be provided in an
unconditional, safe, timely, unhindered and sustained
manner. We would like to salute the heroic work of
humanitarian workers in these particularly difficult
circumstances. The United Nations and its partners
continue to deliver life-saving humanitarian assistance
based on humanitarian principles, including through
cross-border assistance in accordance with resolution
2449 (2018), which is a lifeline to millions of people in
the north-western part of Syria.

Finally, as we, the co-penholders, continue to
follow the situation in the north-west of Syria closely,
we reiterate our support for Special Envoy Pedersen
in his efforts to reach a political solution in Syria on
the basis of resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
communique of 2012 (S/2012/522, annex).

