Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the Special
Coordinator for his very sobering briefing.

Echoing Ambassador Haley's concern, I
condemn - without qualification and in the strongest
terms - yesterday's mortar and rocket attacks from
Gaza into Israel. Indiscriminate attacks against
civilians are unacceptable and they are unjustifiable.
Those who risk killing or injuring children are heinous.
The attacks cannot be ignored by the Security Council.
The United Kingdom fully supports Israel's right to
self-defence and the right to defend its citizens from
such acts of terror.

The recent spike in rocket attacks from Gaza is a
stark reminder that the risk of a renewed conflict is
very much present, and I think the Special Coordinator

brought that out very clearly in his briefing today.
The latest attacks follow the deaths of more than 100
Palestinian in recent weeks of protests, and the Council
has addressed that previously. Civilians live in fear
and in despair. Further escalation of violence risks
a devastating effect on efforts to restore the peace
process and can bring about only renewed suffering
to the region. As Council members, we should act to
ensure that does not come to fruition.

The situation in Gaza in undeniably dangerous.
It is sad and it is complex. The perpetual cycle of
violence needs to end and serves no one's interests.
The actions of Hamas and the Palestinian Islamic
Jihad represent a real and concerning threat to Israeli
security. Ultimately, the ongoing decisions of Hamas
and the Palestinian Islamic Jihad to embrace violence
and reject the Quartet principles lie at the heart of the
Gaza situation.

We should use this Council meeting today to
demand that Hamas and other terrorist groups cease
all violent and provocative actions, and cease any and
all actions that put civilian lives at risk. At the same
time, we do not ignore the significant contribution that
restrictions on movement and access imposed on Gaza
have on the dire humanitarian situation that we witness.

The United Kingdom continues its support for the
full return of the Palestinian Authority to Gaza, and we
encourage further progress on reconciliation. An end
to this Violence requires a tangible path for changing
Gaza, and what the Special Coordinator had to say about
the plan was very interesting. We believe that it is the
responsibility of the international community to work
together to find a way to alleviate the humanitarian
suffering in Gaza. We welcome the proposals that
Mr. Mladenov made, which include commitments
to advance urgent infrastructure and economic
development projects, improve access and movement
and support the Egyptian-led reconciliation process.

We stand ready as the United Kingdom to do
everything that we can to support those efforts. The
people of Gaza are in urgent and desperate need.
Yesterday, my Government committed to providing a
new package of over $2 million of life-saving support.
The funding will support work by the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the Red Crescent
Society in keeping hospitals open and functioning at
a time when the health-care system in Gaza is under
huge strain.
Ultimately, peace will come only through fresh
negotiations between the parties, supported by the
international community. Every day makes it more
critical that both Israelis and Palestinians return to direct
negotiations and urgently prioritize steps to resolve the
situation in Gaza. That is the only way that we will be
able to achieve the two-State solution and a safe and
secure Israel living alongside a viable and sovereign
Palestinian State. Those who seek to undermine that,
including through unjustified acts of Violence, deserve
the rightful condemnation of the Council, as well as of
the whole world.

