Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful for the support for our initiative to convene today's meeting on an issue that is highly relevant to European security, and we thank the briefers for their assessments. We welcome to today's meeting the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, Mr. Kyslytsya. As far as we understand, we will soon be meeting here in New York more frequently, and we look forward to constructive cooperation with him. Yesterday marked exactly five years since the adoption of resolution 2202 (2015), approving a set of measures for the implementation of the Minsk agreements. The document has therefore become a mandatory component of international law. Unfortunately, few remember that. Thus, during a Security Council meeting on cooperation with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) that took place on 6 February (see S/PV.8715), it came to light that members of the Council with significant influence on the settlement process in Ukraine, including the parties to the Normandy Format, prefer not to recall what has been explicitly set out both in the resolution and the package of measures. They have attempted to conceal their forgetfulness by resorting to the mantra, so to speak, that the Russian Federation is failing to comply with its obligations. We deeply regret the fact that for five years, our Western partners, which at the time supported the anti-constitutional Maidan coup d'etat, with its rabid Russophobia and nationalism, did not deign to absorb the fact that the parties to the Minsk agreements are not Russia and Ukraine but, rather, Ukraine and the Republic of Donbas. What is even more alarming is the fact that Kyiv has of late egregiously ratcheted up its rhetoric, which casts doubt on the Minsk agreements. For example, our initiative to convene today's Security Council meeting has been called by the Ukrainian Foreign Ministry a ploy on the part of Russian diplomacy aimed at generating a parallel political reality. Let us recall that just a year ago, on 12 February, during a similar Security Council meeting (see S/PV.8461), the permanent representative of Ukraine, Mr. Yelchenko, expressed his gratitude to the presidency of the Security Council for the opportunity to participate in a meeting on "an issue of the utmost concern to us". Many eminent Ukrainian politicians have also joined the campaign to sabotage the Minsk agreements. They are blatantly contradicting the political will that was announced by President Zelenskyy in Paris towards a settlement. Will alone indeed is insufficient; what is necessary are concrete measures. Only in recent days we have heard from Mr. Kryvonos, Deputy Secretary of the National Security and Defence Council, that the Ukrainian forces "need to stand ready to use force to liberate the territory of Donbas". The Defence Minister, Mr. Zagorodniuk, objected to disengagement along the entire line of contact because, allegedly, "this runs counter to the very essence of the Minsk agreements". Yet this is actually the very essence of the first paragraph of the Minsk package of measures. The representative of Ukraine to the subgroup on political issues of the Trilateral Contact Group, Mr. Resnikov, said that Minsk agreements are at the very minimum subject to partial revision. Just yesterday, the Minister of Internal Affairs of Ukraine, Mr. Avakov, said, "We are considering a step-by-step approach; on one day we will take up one area, and the next day, another one". At the same time, the Ukrainian security forces persist in their attempts to take up the positions of militiamen in the so-called grey zones, where there should be no military personnel at all. We proposed today's meeting specifically because for millions of residents in eastern Ukraine, whom Kyiv and its partners in this Chamber prefer not to remember,the Minsk agreements are neither a ploy nor a parallel reality but the sole real hope for peace. Only after their implementation will Ukraine have an opportunity to rebuild the eroded trust of the people of Donbas, whom the Ukrainian authorities have demoted in an instant to second-class citizens, labelling them separatists and aliens in their own land. We cannot but be troubled by the attempts to deliberately or unwittingly supplant the Minsk basis for a settlement with other formats, for example, the Normandy format, which, let us recall, was created specifically to support the implementation of the Minsk agreements. Therefore, we deem it important to reiterate that the efforts made under this format will be effective only if they are rooted in unconditional implementation of the package of measures and agreements reached under the Normandy format. This specific approach was endorsed in the agreed conclusions of the quartet summit held in Paris on 9 December. It is the implementation of this approach by all parties, primarily Ukraine, that will become for us a decisive factor for us in assessing the viability of a new meeting in the Normandy format. So far as we can see, hostilities are ongoing, including today in the area near Luhansk. There is no progress on the issues of disengagement of forces and equipment, interaction on demining, permanent introduction of the Steinmeyer formula in the Ukrainian legislation; there is no willingness to agree on the disengagement of forces in new areas, and no readiness for direct dialogue with the self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People's Republic. Before our meeting, we circulated the text of the package of measures as an official document of the Security Council so that all those here present could have an opportunity to refresh their memory as to the fact that not only is Russia not mentioned there, but also that the 13 points contained therein set out a clear sequence for implementation: ceasefire, amnesty, constitutional reform, with the provision of special status to Donbas and the right to linguistic self-determination, then the holding of elections and only after that the restoration of Government control throughout the conflict zone. Unfortunately, of the 13 points to date perhaps only two have been implemented, that is, those on the proceedings of the Contact Group in Minsk and the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission. Many of those present have themselves spoken of the devastating plight of the residents of Donbas yet have refused to acknowledge the responsibility of Kyiv, which, in waging war against its own population, has imposed a transport, food and economic blockade against Donbas. Every day for the past five years, people have died as a result of the shelling. Are they shooting themselves? Were they the ones who started the war and marched on Kyiv? A scenario whereby in Kyiv they propose first allowing Ukrainian soldiers into Donbas, which former civilian militias have been protecting for all these years, risking their lives every day, and then giving the Ukrainian armed forces control over the border is absolutely unacceptable to eastern Ukraine. That position must be respected, since no settlement is possible without taking the views of the residents of Donetsk and Luhansk into account. I believe that it is time to finally understand that elections in Donbas can take place only in a climate of public trust in the electoral process. That requires specific conditions in which Kyiv cannot oppress politically those who enjoy genuine popular support - those whom all Ukrainian politicians call separatists and whose punishment they call for and those whom the residents of Donbas, in turn, consider to be their protectors, who uphold their right to life and their identity. We need guarantees of a truly inclusive political process. We know the points that some representatives are about to make. We therefore wish to warn Council members in advance that every time they say that Russia is failing to comply with the Minsk agreements, they should remember that they are deliberately misleading their own people and the international community. Every time that they refuse to acknowledge Kyiv's responsibility and urge Kyiv to comply with its obligations towards its own people and instead wait for someone else to step in and do it, they prolong the suffering of the residents of Donbas, who, unlike them, know the truth and defend it at the cost of their own blood. The longer they play along with Kyiv, the less the opportunity for a mutually respectful dialogue between Ukrainian citizens on both sides of the demarcation line. Yet it is precisely dialogue between belligerent parties that we all call for in all other conflicts, be it in Syria, Yemen or Libya. Only Donbas is denied that right.We therefore hope to hear our colleagues' commitment to the Council's unanimous adoption of resolution 2202 (2015) and presidential statement S/PRST/2018/12 of 6 June 2018 in support of the package of measures for the implementation of the Minsk agreements. That document is part of international law and should be implemented unconditionally.
