Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me first to congratulate you, Sir, and Mexico on your
work in the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. I also wish to recognize the work of your
delegation in chairing the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. Colombia, a party to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocols, appreciates your initiative in convening this
debate. We also recognize the efforts undertaken by the
Security Council to strengthen the capacity of States in
the protection of children from violence generated by
illegal armed groups.

My country has solidly structured institutions and
pursues significant efforts to move forward decisively
in the realization of the rights of all citizens. The
policies implemented by the Government of President
Alvaro Uribe Ve'lez have significantly improved
security conditions in Colombia and enhanced the
protection of all persons, including children. These
policies, firmly anchored in strengthening the rule of
law and democratic institutions, enjoy the solid
backing of Colombian society.

In this context, we seek to apply the full weight
of the law against violations of the rights of children
committed by groups identified in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/ 181), as organizations that
have been included on the annexed lists for at least five
years. We regard this designation as part of the
international community's required denunciation and
censure of acts of deliberate and criminal violence
against children.

By voluntarily accepting the implementation of
the monitoring and reporting mechanism, as provided
for in resolution 1612 (2005), the Government of
Colombia also expects to receive the support of the
United Nations in consolidating institutional capacities
for the protection of children. The recognition granted
by the Secretary-General in his latest report to the
work undertaken by the Government of my country
through the Intersectoral Commission for the
prevention of recruitment and use of children by illegal
armed groups highlights the relevance of this strategy.
This is a comprehensive policy that includes
10-40838
protection, recovery and reintegration of children
separated from those groups.

The Commission has conducted its work in 114
municipalities nationwide and six locations in the
capital that are considered to be of high social and
economic vulnerability. Through the Commission,
safety nets are defined and reinforced in order to
reduce the risk of use of children by illegal armed
groups at the local, provincial and national levels.
Among the strategies put in place, the Commission has
encouraged the prevention of violence and established
procedures to identify cases or risks of threat. It has
also created participatory mechanisms for children to
make their voice heard directly in local Governments
so that their points of view may be included in public
policy.

In that respect, I would like to highlight the
awareness project developed by the Office of the High
Commissioner for Reintegration. Through its
implementation, demobilized persons have contributed
to the training of 6,200 students in recruitment
prevention. With the same objective, the Office of the
Ombudsman has promoted the "No more children and
adolescents recruited" campaign, with the support of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the Norwegian Refugee Council and the
Mayor and Township People's Spokesperson of
Soacha, a town near the capital.

Together with the Department of National
Planning and strategic partners, the Commission is
preparing a document aimed at strengthening the
policy to prevent the recruitment and use of children,
to be submitted for consideration by the national
Government for implementation by all entities
involved. Furthermore, the Colombian Family Welfare
Institute continues to provide children separated from
illegal armed groups comprehensive physical and
psychological care to facilitate their full reintegration
into society. The Institute also carries out many
activities in support of prevention programmes. In the
case of Colombia, the Secretary-General's initiative to
ensure that adequate resources for the rehabilitation
and reintegration of children separated from illegal
armed groups are provided to national Governments
has had an additional positive effect. We urge Council
members to lend their support to this initiative.

For its part, the Attorney General's Office
continues to conduct investigations in pursuit of those
3
responsible for recruiting children. As of May 15 2010,
the Unit for Human Rights and International
Humanitarian Law of the Attorney's Office had
advanced 239 investigations concerning the
recruitment of 775 children. Twelve sentences have
been issued affecting 30 perpetrators.

The Colombian Government, in implementing its
policy of zero tolerance for human rights violations
regardless of who commits them, has not hesitated to
punish those associated with the State who may have
committed individual acts affecting those rights.
Specific measures have been taken to prevention,
investigate, prosecute and punish such practices.

My delegation wishes to emphasize the
distinction made by the Secretary-General in his
reports to the Security Council on the issue of children
and armed conflict between situations that are on the
agenda of the Council and those that are not. The
existence of annexes I and II to the Secretary-General's
report adequately reflects this distinction. It is of vital
importance that, in applying the monitoring and
reporting mechanism, it be borne in mind that each
situation is unique and that there is therefore no single
formula that can be applied to all of the situations that
exist in various countries and regions. Likewise, these
decisions must be made in strict compliance with
existing legal provisions. In particular, any targeted
measures must conform to Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations.

Colombia reiterates its willingness and
commitment to guarantee the effective protection of
children and the promotion of their rights. We do so in
the understanding that this task requires a
comprehensive approach and coordinated institutional
management. My country recognizes the positive
contribution that the United Nations can make towards
that end.

