Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): We
welcome you to New York to chair this session of the
Security Council on children and armed conflict. My
delegation is grateful to the delegation of Peru for
organizing this important debate. It gives us another
opportunity to deliberate on progress made in the
protection of children in armed conflict since our last
debate in July this year.

We pay special tribute to the Special
Representative of the Secretary General on Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Coomaraswamy, and the
Director of UNICEF, Ms. Ann Veneman, for their
professional, dedicated efforts in saving and protecting
children from abuse. We also welcome the passionate
statement by Mr. Gabriel Oling Olang on behalf of
Save the Children. We received with appreciation the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2006/826) and the
additional report by the Office of Internal Oversight
Services (OIOS), both of which are comprehensive,
analytical and excellent in quality.

Since the adoption of Security Council resolution
1612 (2005), which established a Security Council
working group and a monitoring and reporting
mechanism, remarkable progress has been made. We
owe the French delegation, especially Ambassador de
la Sabliere, our gratitude for having worked tirelessly
in guiding and leading the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. As of now, the Working Group has
examined four country specific reports and made
recommendations on two of them. At the same time,
the monitoring and reporting mechanism is now
operational in several countries.

However, while we are proud of what has been
accomplished in setting standards and implementation
mechanisms for resolution 1612 (2005), the same
cannot be said about the actual situation on the ground
in most areas where violations against children have
been documented and continue to be committed on a
daily basis. The report of the Secretary-General has
cited many incidents where children are still being
recruited as child soldiers, abducted, sexually abused,
killed, maimed and denied humanitarian access. Of
more concern and worry are the new phenomena
mentioned in the report about children being recruited
as mercenaries or used in suicide bombings. An equally
disturbing trend is the migration within regions of
recruitment and use of child soldiers. This will require
a regional approach in strategies for conflict resolution
and peacebuilding, in general, and in respecting child
combatants and ex-combatants in particular.

Tanzania reiterates its grave concern for the
continued violations of children's rights by both State
and non-State actors. We are grateful to UNICEF, other
United Nations entities and NGOs, which are working
diligently to assist Governments concerned in the
rehabilitation of children affected by armed conflict
and in the implementation of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism set out by resolution 1612 (2005).
We also commend the Governments of Uganda, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Sri Lanka,
which are increasingly willing to work with United
Nations country teams in developing action plans.

We welcome and encourage the military wing of
the rebel group Forces nouvelles and four militia
groups in Cote d'Ivoire for the signing of a regional
action plan to end the recruitment of children and to
implement the plan. We urge other countries and armed
groups mentioned in the report of the Secretary-
General to make similar commitments.

In our region of the Great Lakes, the problem of
recruiting and using child soldiers has persisted for a
long time but has, of late, subsided with the signing
and implementation of peace agreements. The
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of child
soldiers is a major challenge that requires a
comprehensive strategy, resources and political
commitment to address it. That is one of the issues to
be addressed in the forthcoming summit in Nairobi
next month of the countries of the Great Lakes region.

Tanzania fully supports the recommendations
contained in the reports of the Secretary-General and
the OIOS. However, we would like to emphasize three
issues: first, we agree to the suggestion that the
Council expand its focus and allow equal attention to
both situations of armed conflict and situations of
concern, so that a monitoring and reporting mechanism
can apply to all situations regardless of whether they
fall under annex I or II of resolution 1612 (2005). In
that regard, we welcome the fact that the Secretary-
General has included all situations of concern in his
report.

Secondly, we recognize the difficulties
encountered in the monitoring and reporting
mechanism, ranging from policy coherence to
problems of collecting data owing to terrain, security
situation and inadequate manpower. However, while
we continue to work around those challenges, we must
in the meantime take action against individuals who
have been identified as perpetrators and for whom
arrest warrants have been issued. In addition to the
"naming and shaming" list, threats of sanctions will
definitely have a deterrent effect on those violating
children's rights.

Thirdly - and this is related to my second
point- we urge that more resources be allocated to
ensure that the monitoring and reporting mechanism is
effective and that disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes are successful. The
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, UNICEF, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and other United Nations agencies charged
with protecting and helping children, as well as NGOs
with similar mandates, must coordinate their efforts.
Those organizations must harmonize their policies and
plans of action in order to have the maximum impact in
their work in the field. They must be given adequate
resources, both financial and human, to carry out their
mandates. We call upon the international community,
including the Security Council, to step up efforts to
that end.

Finally, we look forward to further progress on
the ground and in New York in advancing the cause of
children. We hope that Governments that have
committed themselves to action plans will implement
them and that those that have not yet committed
themselves in that regard will do so. We welcome the
energetic approach shown by the visits of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and that of her
Special Adviser, and we have every confidence that the
Security Council Working Group will continue to study
their reports and to make credible recommendations.

