Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
Allow me first to thank you sincerely, Mr. President, for
convening this open, formal meeting, which falls under
the heading of efforts to improve transparency in the
Security Council. I truly appreciate your efforts in this
regard.

Promoting peace and security and their relationship
with humanitarian affairs is of the greatest importance for
both the Security Council and the membership of the
United Nations at large. Humanitarian assistance is an
integral part of activities organized during or after
conflicts and involves several tragic elements, to say the
least. These were pointed out very clearly by Mr. Vieira
de Mello, and I would like to thank him for his briefing.

The Security Council convened a meeting last
November under the presidency of Ambassador Burleigh
to debate a similar subject. At that meeting, dealing with
the protection of humanitarian workers, we received a
briefing by Mrs. Ogata. Mr. Vieira de Mello reiterated the
importance of that subject today.

Humanitarian assistance cannot reach those in need
unless we ensure the safety of the workers who provide
it. With the increasing complexity of conflicts, there is an
increasing need to protect humanitarian workers. We have
very disturbing statistics in this regard. Since 1992, 139
United Nations civilian personnel have been killed and
about 143 taken hostage. The Red Cross alone lost 23
staff members in the Great Lakes region in 1996 and
1997. I am not even taking up today the aircraft downed
in Angola. Many have lost their lives, and the numbers
increase with the passage of time. There is therefore a
need to think seriously about how to protect humanitarian
workers.

We have a contradiction: on the one hand, the
numbers of conflicts and victims are increasing; on the
other hand, no steps are being taken to protect
humanitarian workers. Mr. Vieira de Mello spoke of the
signing of a convention in the middle of this month. We
share his feelings of concern over the fact that only a few
States have so far become signatories. However,
intentions are one thing and facts another. Protection is
required on the ground, where the conflict and fighting
take place and where bodies are being mutilated and
where much assistance - whether medical or food
assistance - is required and being provided.

 
My question to Mr. Vieira de Mello is therefore this:
what are the concrete steps being considered and
implemented by the Secretariat? We heard him say that
when security for humanitarian workers cannot be obtained,
the option is simply to leave the area of conflict, and we
agree with him. But if they leave, how can the
humanitarian assistance be provided? This is a very
important question. My delegation considers that if
humanitarian workers left an area of conflict, we would
surely not blame them, because their safety was not being
ensured. We can imagine such a case, but we truly hope
that this will not take place.

Perhaps a second question I could put to Mr. Vieira de
Mello is this: with the increasing number of conflicts, what
are the new obstacles now preventing the provision of
humanitarian assistance to those in need? Naturally, we
fully realize that the first obstacle may be financial. In this
same context, we would also ask what the current gap is
between voluntary contributions, on the one hand, and the
real needs, on the other?

