Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): I wish to thank the
United Kingdom, this month's President of the Security
Council, for convening today's open debate on one of
the most important instruments in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Mediation, as a tool for the pacific settlement
of disputes, will be effective only if mediators and
the mediation process are objective, inclusive and,
most important, impartial. Over the past 10 years,
the Secretary-General has taken important steps to
enhance the abilities of the United Nations system in
deploying various tools to prevent and resolve conflicts
and sustain peace. The establishment of the Mediation
Support Unit, in 2007, and the Standby Team of Senior
Mediation Advisers, in 2008, are two such important
steps in the right direction.

While the institutional architecture is crucial, it is
equally important that the mediation efforts of the United
Nations be driven with the objective of addressing the
root causes of conflicts and that mediators be equipped
with the right information. There have been instances
where United Nations mediators, skilled with conflict-
prevention techniques, used the same toolbox to address
political disputes. Therefore, the United Nations must
enhance its own diagnostic capabilities to ensure that
the right tools are used for the right situations.

As a number of speakers highlighted today, the
success of any mediation depends, to a large part, on
the inclusiveness of the mediation team and mediation
process. The United Nations can appoint more women
mediators who have local knowledge and understand the
nuances of political and social relationships in a given
situation and enable them to exert leverage. At the same
time, inclusiveness must also be achieved here at United
Nations Headquarters. Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations envisages a system where the Council
and the General Assembly work jointly, as One United
Nations, to resolve conflicts. The Maldives would like
to see that oneness demonstrated more profoundly in
designing and implementing mediation efforts.

Impartiality, or the lack of it, plays a decisive role
in guaranteeing the success or failure of any mediation
effort. United Nations officials deployed as mediators
are expected to be impartial and objective. However,
gaps exist between such expectations and the reality on
the ground, and, as a result, various perceptions emerge
that do not always help the mediation process. There is
therefore a need to ensure that both the Department of
Political Affairs here in New York and the mediation
team in the field achieve maximum objectivity
and impartiality in managing and implementing
mediation efforts.

The ultimate objective of any mediation effort
must go beyond the cessation of hostilities or mere
short-term prevention. It is the absence of a legitimate
order, more than anything else, that gives space for
different kinds of disputes to evolve into conflicts.
Mediation efforts, whether they are aimed at preventing
or managing an actual conflict or a dispute of any kind
in an intra-State situation, should seek to increase the
capacity of the State in the target country to first govern
and then establish a governing order that is rooted in
the principles of the rule of law and good governance.
My Government hopes that the Standby Team of Senior
Mediation Advisers here at the Headquarters and the
teams that are active in the field take such an approach
to mediation.

