Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): First, my
delegation welcomes the participation of President
Boris Tadic of Serbia in the Council's deliberations.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2006/45) and Mr. Soren Jessen-Petersen, the
Secretary-General's Special Representative for
Kosovo, for his briefing and his excellent stewardship
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK).

Ghana welcomes the achievements of UNMIK
over the past five years, most of which were
highlighted in the Secretary-General's report to the
Security Council of 23 May 2005 (S/2005/335). Since
then, considerable progress has been made, despite
occasional setbacks. However, these are to be
expected, given the volatile situation in Kosovo in the
light of the apparently unresolved question of its future
status.

In particular, we are encouraged that the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government have taken
root at the national, municipal and local levels. We
hope that the minority groups, especially the Kosovo
Serbs, will continue to be encouraged to involve
themselves more actively in the political and
reconciliation process. In that regard, UNMIK's
tireless efforts to engage the factions with one another
and with the authorities in Belgrade are equally
commendable.

Given the religious undertones of the conflict, we
appreciate the efforts that are being made to repair and
protect the Serb religious and cultural heritage. In view
of the mistrust between the groups, much more
attention should be focused on decentralization, the
rule of law and improving the internal security
architecture as confidence-building measures.

The recent smooth transition of power to a new
administration headed by President Fatmir Sejdiu
following the death of his predecessor, Mr. Ibrahim
Rugova, and by the new Prime Minister, Mr. Bajram
Kosumi, whose presence here we welcome, is also
indicative of a new consensus for peace in Kosovo.
Everything must be done to sustain the momentum.

We are concerned that progress by Kosovo's
Provisional Institutions and by the Kosovo Albanian
leadership on standards implementation and on other
major political processes has been too slow, as stated in
the Secretary-General's report. In that regard, Ghana
believes that the standards agreed for the achievement
of a sustainable, multi-ethnic society can guarantee
lasting peace, security and stability in Kosovo. We
therefore take this opportunity to reiterate our support
for the standards-before-status policy, which, in our
view, establishes the preconditions for determining the
extremely sensitive nature of the future of Kosovo.

We should be careful not to unduly prolong the
current impasse, so as to discourage the factions from
hardening their stance on the issue. In the meantime,
efforts should be intensified to identify, and deal with,
those who are behind the recent unprovoked attacks on
innocent people. Impunity should not be tolerated in
the new multi-ethnic Kosovo that we all envision.

In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that only a
negotiated settlement in which the rights and interests
of all of Kosovo's minorities are guaranteed will
provide the best tonic for peaceful co-existence in
Kosovo, and for peace and stability in the Balkans as a
whole.

