Mr. Seixas da Costa (Portugal): Portugal
supports fully the statement delivered by Ambassador
Pierre Schori of Sweden on behalf of the European
Union.

East Timor has been a success story for the
United Nations, but our collective task is yet to be
completed. It is imperative that the Council and the
international community do not fail in providing the
necessary means the United Nations needs to perform
its duty in East Timor. In fact, the coming months will
be crucial for the successful transition of East Timor to
independence. Portugal is fully committed to
participating in that process. We also consider that it is
of vital importance that the Security Council maintains
its strongest interest and engagement in the birth of this
new Member State of the United Nations.

Portugal appreciates the work that the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) has been undertaking in implementing its
very complex and comprehensive mandate. In that
connection, I would like to express my gratitude for the
comprehensive briefing provided to the Council earlier
by Assistant Secretary-General Annabi. We also
commend the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, for the progress
already achieved in areas as diverse as ensuring
security, establishing a civil administration and
restoring basic services to the population.

We also welcome the latest developments in the
preparations for the election of members of the
Constituent Assembly, including the efforts made in the
area of civic and voter education, as well as in
fostering the conditions for the participation of women
in the political process. We see this election as the first
major step on the way to political independence. Its
success in the long run will depend as much on the
capacity of the internal political forces to make
democracy and good governance the driving force
behind their actions, as on the support the international
community will be able to provide to the East Timorese
Government structures.

Portugal agrees with the approach taken in the
report of the Secretary-General regarding the planning
for the future presence of the United Nations in East
Timor. We note the establishment in Dili of a working
group for post-UNTAET planning. Indeed, a detailed
evaluation of the needs of East Timor after
independence is urgently required. We believe that the
focus of this exercise must be kept on the conditions on
the ground, where the input of the Timorese is best
taken into account. Needless to say, any plans and
strategies that are defined without the involvement and
the Views of the Timorese would be impossible to
implement successfully.

In that regard, I am pleased that the Council was
able to hear today two key Timorese representatives,
Mr. Xanana Gusmao and Mr. Ramos-Horta. Let me
thank you, Mr. President, for making that possible. I
think the Council recognized their presence as a
valuable contribution to a better understanding and
assessment of the real situation on the ground, with all
the authority that comes from their legitimate,
historical responsibilities.

We also noted with keen interest the remarks of
the Secretary-General on the security situation in East
Timor, in particular those highlighting the continued
risks and uncertainties. Portugal concurs with the
Secretary-General's assertion that it would be prudent
to maintain the military component of UNTAET in its
present form until the East Timorese Government has
established itself. Further, we believe strongly that any
subsequent change must be made only on the basis of a
detailed assessment of the security situation on the
ground. In that context, we must keep in mind that the
mandate the Security Council gave to UNTAET was to
prepare East Timor for independence. The election of a
Constituent Assembly is only one step in that process.
It is not an end in itself and it is not the end goal of the
United Nations presence in East Timor.

Let me also stress the importance of a swift and
comprehensive solution to the situation of the East
Timorese refugees in West Timor, as well as to the
situation of the continued militia activity in that area.
We fully share the Views expressed by the European
Union on that question and on the need to ensure that
all those responsible for violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law be brought to justice.

The substantial engagement and support of the
international community will still be needed in East
Timor after independence. It is fundamental to ensure
the continuity of UNTAET's work in all areas. The
Secretary-General has rightly stated in his recent report
entitled "No exit without strategy", referring to East
Timor, that
"In order to ensure that independence is
successful and Viable, a follow-on peacekeeping
mission will be required to support the new
State." (S/2001/394, para. 42)

We look forward to the recommendations of the
Secretary-General on what this follow-on mission may
look like and what the needs will be to support it. The
recommendations should include a realistic assessment
of the capacity of any implementing partner to carry
out tasks that the Security Council has entrusted to
UNTAET.

To conclude, I would like to say that East Timor
is a unique case - unique because of the
circumstances that brought about the United Nations
presence in the territory and unique because of the
complex and multidimensional, yet clear and
achievable, mandate this Council has given to
UNTAET. Our collective goal is to ensure that East
Timor becomes a viable, independent and democratic
State. We cannot waver in this endeavour.

