The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms its
continued commitment to the full and effective
implementation of United Nations Security
Council resolution 1244 (l999). The Council
notes the transformation of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia into Serbia and Montenegro and, in
this context, reaffirms that resolution 1244 (1999)
remains fully valid in all its aspects. Resolution
1244 (l999) continues to be the basis of the
international community's policy on Kosovo.

"The Security Council further reaffirms its
commitment to the objective of a multi-ethnic and
democratic Kosovo and calls upon all
communities to work towards this goal and
actively participate in the public institutions as
well as the decision-making process, and
integrate into society. It condemns all attempts to
establish and maintain structures and institutions
as well as initiatives that are inconsistent with
resolution 1244 (l999) and the Constitutional
Framework. The Council calls for the authority of
the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to be respected
throughout Kosovo, and welcomes the
establishment of UNMIK's authority in the
northern part of Mitrovica. It encourages the
establishment of direct dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade on issues of practical importance to
both sides.

"The Security Council condemns the
violence Within the Kosovo Albanian community,
as well as the violence against the Kosovo Serb
community. It urges local institutions and leaders
to exert influence on the climate for the rule of
law by condemning all violence and actively
supporting the efforts of the police and the
judiciary. It underlines the responsibility of the
majority to make the minority communities feel
that Kosovo is their home too, and that the laws
apply equally to everyone. The minority
community representatives must join and work
within the institutions to benefit from them. The
Council stresses that all communities must make
renewed efforts to inject momentum into
improving inter-ethnic dialogue and promoting
the reconciliation process, not least through full
cooperation with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia.

"The Security Council welcomes the report
of the Secretary-General on the activities of
UNMIK and recent developments in Kosovo
(S/2003/ll3) and the briefing of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on the
status of implementation of the benchmarks for
Kosovo. The Council reiterates its full support for
the 'Standards before Status' policy with
postulated targets in the eight key areas:
functioning of the democratic institutions, the
rule of law, freedom of movement, the return of
refugees and IDPs, economy, property rights,
dialogue with Belgrade, and the Kosovo
Protection Corps. The Council welcomes the
presentation of a detailed plan for its
implementation that will provide the appropriate
baseline against which progress can be measured,
as discussed with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General during the Council's
mission in December 2002. The fulfilment of
these targets is essential to commencing a
political process designed to determine Kosovo's
future, in accordance with resolution 1244
(1999). The Council strongly rejects unilateral
initiatives which may jeopardize stability and the
normalization process not only in Kosovo but
also in the entire region. It urges all political
leaders in Kosovo and in the region to shoulder
responsibility for democratization, peace and
stability in the region by rejecting all initiatives
contravening resolution 1244 (1999). The Council
rejects any attempts to exploit the question of the
future of Kosovo for other political ends.

"The Security Council welcomes progress
made in 2002, as outlined in the Secretary-
General's report. It supports the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General's
continued efforts, including in such priority areas
as revitalizing the economy through investment,
combating crime and illegal trafficking, and
building a multi-ethnic society, while ensuring
conditions for the sustainable return of refugees
and IDPs.

"The Security Council welcomes the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General's
intention to transfer remaining competencies to
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
(PISG) by the end of the year, except those
reserved for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General under resolution 1244 (1999).
It calls on the Kosovo PISG as well as all
Kosovars to take on their responsibilities and
genuinely cooperate for this transfer to be
successful.

"The Security Council reiterates its full
support for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and urges Kosovo's leaders
once again to work in close cooperation with
UNMIK and the international Security Presence
(KFOR) for a better future for Kosovo and
stability in the region."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2003/l.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.
