Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French):Attheoutset,letmethankSpecialRepresentative
Chambas for his very comprehensive insights. Belgium
commends the Special Representative's daily work on
prevention, mediation, lasting peace and the promotion
of the rule of law in West Africa and the Sahel.

The precarious security situation continues to
be a cause for our concern. In particular, I note the
intensification of intercommunal violence in several
countries of the region, such as Nigeria, Burkina Faso
and Mali, as well as unabating terrorist attacks. This
deterioration has a direct impact on the humanitarian
situation, causing the suffering of hundreds of
thousands of innocent people.

The persistence of conflicts between herders and
farmers deserves special attention, as these tensions
are currently a major factor of insecurity in the
subregion and beyond. I would like to congratulate the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) for broadly raising awareness on the
subject. It is now a matter of implementing the various
good practices that have been identified, particularly in
collaboration with the Economic Community of West
African States.

Belgium applauds the courage and sacrifice of
the security forces in their fight against terrorists
throughout the region. Nevertheless, my country
believes that the conflict cannot be resolved by
ignoring human rights; doing so will mean that the
successes of the security forces will be fleeting and
will jeopardize reconciliation and the ending of long-
lasting crises. Furthermore, as the Secretary-General
emphasizes in his report (S/2019/549), a response to the
challenges facing West Africa cannot involve security
alone. A holistic approach is needed to address violent
extremism, while also highlighting good governance,
the fight against impunity and sustainable and
inclusive development.

UNOWAS plays a leading role in studying the
impact of climate change on security, as part of a
conflict-prevention approach. This work is crucial,
and I encourage the Special Representative to continue
this effort.

In conclusion, I would also like to underline the key
role played by regional and subregional organizations.
I welcome their close coordination with UNOWAS
and encourage them to maintain this coordination in
the future.

