Mr. Annabi: It is with a deep sense of humility
that I take the floor today because, however much we
try to learn and know about the situation in East Timor,
we will never know as much as our colleagues from
East Timor. That is why I am particularly please that
Xanana Gusmao and Jose Ramos-Horta have joined us
this morning and that they will have the opportunity to
brief the Council themselves on how they see the
situation in East Timor.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General of 2 May, submitted
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1338 (2001) of
31 January. By that resolution, the Council decided to
extend the mandate of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) until 31
January next year. The Council requested the
Secretary-General to report to it by 30 April 2001 on
the implementation of the mandate, including military
and political assessments of the situation on the ground
and their implications for the size, structure and
deployment of UNTAET.

The report covers developments in the political
transition and, since its publication, there have been a
number of developments which I would like to recall
briefly.

Under the provisions of the UNTAET regulation
on the election of the Constituent Assembly, the
Secretary-General has appointed the Commissioners of
the Independent Electoral Commission and five
political parties to date have applied for registration to
participate in the election. As of today, UNTAET'S
Civil Registration Unit has registered some 390,000
East Timorese for the elections. There have been some
technical difficulties, as members of the Council may
be aware, but additional equipment has arrived and
UNTAET is working very hard to complete the
registration exercise by the 20 June deadline so as to
enable the ballot to occur on 30 August, as anticipated.

On the economic side, the major developments in
the rehabilitation of the economy and infrastructure are
covered in the report. Therefore, I will not repeat them.
I should simply say that, as regards the exploitation of
oil and gas resources in the Timor Sea, very useful
talks were held with the Government of Australia at the
beginning of this month. These talks were held in a
constructive spirit. The next round is scheduled to take
place in Dili later this month, at which time work will
begin on the drafting of the text of a treaty.

I wish to say a word about refugees. The visits
undertaken by UNTAET's Chief of Staff to four
refugee camps in West Timor from 9 to 11 April were
the main development covered in the report, but I
regret to have to inform the Council that, since then,
there has been no tangible progress in resolving the
situation of the refugees. Discussions between
UNTAET and the Indonesian authorities continue and
the Indonesian authorities have informed UNTAET that
they plan to undertake a one-day registration of the
refugees in West Timor in June. As members will
recall, this registration had been scheduled for this
month, but it has now been postponed to next month.

At the last Security Council meeting on East
Timor on 5 April, I undertook to revert to the question
of the abduction of East Timorese women to West
Timor. As members of the Council will appreciate, in
the absence of a permanent international presence in
West Timor following the brutal murders of three
workers from the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the
continuing presence of militia, obtaining concrete
information has proven very difficult. Indonesian
human rights and non-governmental organizations
monitoring the camps have attempted to gather
information on these cases, but their access to the
camps is limited and, where contact is made, many of
the women are reluctant to speak. Most cases remain
unknown until a woman returns to East Timor and
makes a complaint. Of the 25 abduction and rape cases
currently under investigation by UNTAET's Serious
Crimes Unit, one woman remains in West Timor.
UNTAET is seeking to pursue this matter during the
course of its bilateral negotiations on outstanding
issues with the Indonesian Government. These
negotiations actually resumed this week.

The Secretary-General refers in his report to
President Wahid's decree of 24 April, establishing an
ad hoc tribunal to deal with gross violations of human
rights in East Timor, that will enable the first
Indonesian trials to start. However, the decree limits
the tribunal's jurisdiction to acts committed after the
ballot of 30 August 1999, thus excluding earlier
atrocities from prosecution. Mr. Vieira de Mello has
urged the Indonesian authorities to reissue the decree
without temporal restrictions.

On 4 May a Jakarta court handed down sentences
ranging from 10 to 20 months to six men, in connection
with the killings on 6 September 2000 of three UNHCR
staff members in West Timor. The international
community received this outcome with shock and
disbelief. Clearly, given the gravity of those crimes,
this cannot be the last word. We have since been
informed that the Indonesian prosecutor has appealed
the judgement.

As the Council requested, the report addresses the
issue of security. The overall security situation is
currently good, but the report also identifies risks, both
internal and external, especially in View of the
heightened and sensitive political season ahead, which
will conclude with the formation of the first
Government of an independent East Timor. Given the
uncertain outlook on security, the Secretary-General
concludes in his report that it would be prudent to
maintain the military component of UNTAET
essentially in its present form until the East Timorese
Government has established itself. The Secretary-
General will of course keep this matter under review
and will propose any adjustments warranted by the
situation.

With regard to the post-independence presence of
the United Nations, planning is under way in Dili,
where a working group has been established. For a
number of weeks, that working group has been working
to prepare appropriate plans. Here at Headquarters, an
integrated mission task force has also begun its work to
support and complement the work of the working
group in Dili and to effect coordination among the
organizations concerned. A team of experts has visited
East Timor to review UNTAET's assets to determine
their future utility and possible disposition. A further
step has been taken with the appointment of a senior
United Nations official to coordinate planning between
United Nations Headquarters and the field. That
official will travel to East Timor next week. The donor
conference to be held in Canberra, Australia, in mid-
June will also provide an opportunity to review this
work prior to the next report to the Security Council,
which is scheduled for the end of July.

To conclude, the Secretary-General is aware of
concerns among Member States regarding the level of
resources committed to this operation. However, he is
also conscious of the comprehensive responsibility the
United Nations has assumed in East Timor. He
therefore favours a prudent approach that seeks to
safeguard the international community's considerable
investment in East Timor's future. His report at the end
of July will a provide further opportunity to review the
situation.

