Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan,
Mr. Kai Eide, for his briefing. We welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, Mr. Rangin Dadfar
Spanta, and thank him for his statement.

We commend the central role that the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
continues to play in coordinating international and
regional action, assistance and support for Afghanistan.
We welcome the presidential and provincial elections
that were held on 20 August. In spite of the
irregularities in the electoral process, the elections
constitute a positive step in the democratization
process in Afghanistan.

We welcome the efforts of the Electoral
Complaints Commission to address complaints, which
is necessary to avoid disillusionment and apprehension
in the Afghan public. We call on all parties and the
Afghan people to refrain from unlawful acts and to
remain calm while awaiting the outcome of the
investigations.

Uganda is concerned about the increased
incidence of violence and insurgency by the Taliban
and other anti-Government elements. We condemn
those attacks, which are aimed at disrupting peace and
security in the country. The primary responsibility for
ensuring peace and stability in Afghanistan lies with
the Government and people of that country. However,
long-term support and commitment from the United
Nations, regional and subregional actors and the wider
international community are essential to building up
the Afghan security forces and enabling them to
assume their role effectively. Furthermore, closer
regional cooperation will provide enhanced
opportunities to deal with common challenges that cut
across national borders, and will also generate
momentum for peace, stability and prosperity in
Afghanistan.

Much remains to be done in addressing the urgent
issues related to the reconstruction of the economy of
the country. The efforts of the Government require
additional support from the international community if
the country is to recover from the devastation of war.
Such critical areas as health care, education, energy
and infrastructure need to be addressed in order to
radically change the situation on the ground and give
greater hope and promise to the population. In doing
so, the Afghan Government should take the primary
responsibility for re-establishing the key institutions of
governance and economic recovery, with the support of
the international partners. That is key to sustainable
national development.

We therefore welcome the increased leadership
and ownership of the development process shown by
the Afghan Government. The success of those
development efforts will depend significantly on the
availability of adequate and predictable resources. We
therefore call on the international community to
enhance its support for the Afghan Government in the
revitalization of the economy and national institution-
building. In that regard, we also call on Member States
to provide UNAMA with additional resources and
specialized personnel to enable it to fulfil its mandate.
We welcome the benchmarks and indicators in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2009/475), which we
expect to facilitate more effective monitoring by the
Council of progress made in the implementation of
UNAMA's mandate and priorities.

In conclusion, Uganda commends the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the staff
of UNAMA for their important contribution to
promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan.

I would also like to join you, Madam, and other
members of the Council in expressing our deep
appreciation and gratitude to Norma Chan for her
exemplary service to the Council. She has been an
indispensable and reliable reference point for us in the
Council, and especially for new members. We wish her
the best in her new programmes and her retirement.

