I would like to congratulate the Niger on its presidency of the Security Council this month and for organizing today's debate. In my capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), I would like to bring to the Security Council's attention some of the Commission's observations and recommendations in the context of different regions on its agenda, including the Lake Chad basin, the Sahel and the Pacific islands. In a number of contexts where the PBC has been engaged, environmental and climate-related challenges were considered as factors that could have a negative impact on peacebuilding and sustaining peace efforts. Addressing these challenges in country-specific or regional contexts can therefore also contribute to these efforts aimed at peacebuilding and sustaining peace. In numerous past interactions, national actors have highlighted that building climate resilience can also be seen as conducive to peacebuilding. Just last week, during a PBC meeting on the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on peacebuilding in the Lake Chad basin, briefers and stakeholders from the region painted a vivid picture of the multidimensional challenges facing the Lake Chad region, particularly regarding security, humanitarian and development issues accompanied by environmental change and degradation, and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. As in previous PBC discussions, during last week's meeting a number of speakers emphasized the importance of helping to mitigate tensions and address disputes between herders and farmers, which in the Lake Chad basin have been exacerbated by environmental degradation. It has become clear that in the Lake Chad basin initiatives that aim to support national and local actors to improve management of cross-border transhumance by building resilience to climate change and environmental degradation and strengthening community engagement remain critical to overall efforts to implement the regional stabilization strategy and require continuous support. The complex challenges in the Lake Chad basin are affecting the lack of access to such fundamental social protections as basic health and education services, particularly for women and girls. Environmental degradation could hinder women's livelihoods and exacerbate their vulnerability, a situation that is now further complicated by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The dangerous challenges facing women and girls in the subregion, where they are overrepresented in the informal sector and are less likely to benefit from COVID-19 recovery programmes, should not be underestimated. For this reason, it is important to ensure women's equal access to education, health care and decent work, strengthen their role in sustainable development and guarantee their full, effective and meaningful participation in the pandemic response as well as in political and decision-making processes. In numerous PBC engagements in support of the Sahel, representatives of affected States have highlighted the need for further assistance to address the combined effects of land degradation, reduced and erratic rainfall and lack of sufficient funding for sound environmental and development policies, all of which complicate national and regional efforts aimed at managing natural resources effectively and ensuring resilient pastoralism. In a recent PBC meeting on the Pacific islands, representatives of the region warned about the impacts of sea-level rise, the increasing frequency and intensity of droughts and storms, ocean acidification and consequent damage to coral reefs and fisheries - all of which have devastating effects on peoples' safety and livelihoods. Many Governments in the Pacific region have requested additional support from the international community in order to address these issues. At a time when the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is exacerbating the region's vulnerability to natural disasters, including by negatively affecting food security through supply- chain disruption, these have become urgent requests. As outlined during the ongoing 2020 review of the peacebuilding architecture and in the report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding and sustaining peace issued last Friday (S/2020/773), we cannot overstress the need for coordinated efforts among humanitarian, development and peacebuilding actors in accordance with their respective responsibilities and mandates. This has always been true and is even more true in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic. In regions such as the Lake Chad basin, a collective and coordinated effort by States Members of the United Nations, international, regional and subregional organizations, international financial institutions, civil society and, where relevant, the private sector is required to fully realize the African Union-Lake Chad Basin Commission strategy for the stabilization, recovery and resilience of the Boko Haram-affected areas. As we seek collectively to build stronger and more resilient societies in the face of environmental challenges and in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, our efforts will be jeopardized without adequate, predictable and sustained financing for peacebuilding and for humanitarian and development efforts. This is the time to stand by the side of the Governments and the people whose lives and livelihoods could be challenged by climate change and environmental degradation. We need to support collective action, guided by ambitious mitigation and adaptation strategies, based on the best available science, and to promote local resilience, in accordance with nationally defined development priorities. We must also bear in mind that the conditions that may lead to peace or conflict are complex by their nature and specific to each situation. Hence, an in-depth, country and region-specific understanding of the various social, economic and cultural variables at play in their unique specificities is required. The analysis of the root causes of a conflict is a comprehensive exercise. We must recognize that each individual armed conflict has its own specific underlying causes and that no one-size-fits-all formula applies when it comes to building and sustaining peace. The PBC will therefore continue to improve its convening, bridging and advisory role to sustain international assistance in support of national peacebuilding priorities.
