Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to join others, Mr. President, in
wishing you every success in your presidency of the
Security Council and thank you for the quarterly
report of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), which you have just
presented. The report shows, if anyone still doubted
it, that Iran continues to refuse to comply with its
international obligations. It continues its prohibited
nuclear and missile activities and its arms transfers,
which are illicit under Council resolutions.

We are particularly concerned by Iran's repeated
violations, especially in the Middle East, of the arms
embargo set out in resolution 1747 (2007). Those
violations contribute to weakening a region that is
already plagued by violence and instability.

During our most recent debate on the subject (see S/PV.6999), held in July, I stressed that the seizure
of a large shipment of Iranian weapons off the coast
of Yemen last February was worrying. The report of
the Panel of Experts on that incident noted that the
quantity and quality of the weapons seized - man-
portable air defence systems, rocket launchers and
explosives - could seriously undermine the political
process under way in Yemen.

The Committee's Panel of Experts, whose work
should be welcomed, also continued its research on
shipments of Iranian weapons to non-State groups in
Gaza. It provided the Committee with an additional
document containing information that was also very
worrying, showing that the weapons used by those
non-State groups against Israel were indeed of Iranian
origin.

Similarly, the Committee has repeatedly looked into
incidents of arms shipments from Iran to Syria, where
Iranian agents help the regime of Bashar Al-Assad in
committing atrocities, as we are all well aware.

Iran is also pursuing its ballistic missile
programme, in violation of resolution 1929 (2010). In
July 2012, it fired Shahab-l and - 3 ballistic missiles
during the Great Prophet VII military exercise. The
Panel of Experts investigated the matter, and its report
confirmed without a doubt that there had been a
violation of paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010). We
call on the Committee, which has all the information
necessary to declare this an infringement, to draw the
necessary conclusions.

Faced with all those provocations, the Committee
has sought to establish a dialogue with Iran by sending
letters, if only to hear its side of the story. Iran has
never responded.

The Committee also has a report by the Experts
that includes a series of operational recommendations
to improve the implementation of the sanctions that we
have agreed on. The Committee must now take concrete
measures to that effect, be it by helping countries to
better target materials that could be used by Iran for its
nuclear programme or by naming the entities involved
in violations.

All of the incidents that I have just mentioned have
taken place within the larger context of Iran's lack of
cooperation with the international community. On
28 August 2013, the Director General of the IAEA
presented a report (GOV/2013/40)on the implementation
of safeguards in Iran. The report once again shows that
Tehran is continuing to choose the path of defiance
rather than dialogue, and confirms the continuation
of the overall direction of Iran's nuclear programme.
The enrichment of uranium to 3.5 per cent and 20 per
cent at the Natanz and Fordow sites continues in an
alarming manner, with an ever-increasing number of
increasingly sophisticated centrifuges. The accelerated
construction of a heavy-water reactor at Arak that will
be capable of producing plutonium also continues, in
violation of Security Council resolutions. The reactor
vessel is now in place, and Iran has a sufficient amount
of heavy water for it to begin operating.

Finally, the dialogue on the possible military
dimensions of Iran's nuclear programme has not made
any progress. November will be the second anniversary
of the report of the Director General of the IAEA on
the subject. Eighteen months after discussions were
launched, no agreement has been reached with Iran.
The work done on the Parchin site, to which IAEA
has been requesting access for 18 months, poses a real
obstacle to the Agency's verification work.

The group of six remains united in its efforts to find
a diplomatic solution to the Iranian proliferation crisis.
We also agree on the strategy to be adopted based on
the balanced proposals that we made to Iran in Almaty.
We will meet again in New York on the sidelines of
the General Assembly on 26 September to continue our
dialogue.

We understand the expectations that have been
generated by the establishment of a new Government in
Tehran. We also have expectations, and we remain open
to constructive dialogue that will allow us to resolve
this serious proliferation crisis. But given such a serious
threat, we cannot be satisfied by the declarations of
intent by the new authorities in Iran. In order to be
sincere, the Iranian declarations must be translated
into action; otherwise, our international pressure on
Iran will be maintained. Respect for the international
regime on the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and the maintenance of international peace
and security are at stake.

