Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): First, I would like to thank
Mr. Lacroix and Mr. Gilmour for their briefings.

The Dominican Republic fully supports the press
communication of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Moussa Faki on 3 June, given
the recent developments and tense situation in the
country. The mandate of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID)
indicates that its priority is its responsibility to protect
the civilian population. Based on that premise and
in line with the most recent report of the Secretary-
General (S/2019/445), which outlines the moderate
impact of incidents in Khartoum on the security
situation in Darfur, it is understood that the mandate is
being implemented.

Regrettably, Darfur remains an area plagued by
injustice, human rights violations, primarily against
children and women, unresolved intercommunal
conflicts, with more than 2 million internally displaced
persons and an area where humanitarian and information
access is routinely restricted. In addition, there are
reports that Government forces and associated militias
have destroyed and burned villages in Jebel Marra.
Unlawful killings, sexual violence, systematic looting
and forced displacement have been documented.

Against that reality, we are on the cusp of
UNAMID's mandate renewal, and there are many and
frequent questions regarding the future of the mission
and when and how it will exit. It is clear that for
some that time has come. But for others like Adam, a
54-year-old displaced person in Sortony, the presence
of UNAMID is a threat to the security forces who
wish to mistreat the people and commit atrocities. In
some areas of Darfur, such as Jebel Marra, UNAMID's
protection is urgent and essential.

That urgency is compounded by recent events in
Khartoum, where the Rapid Support Forces attacked
protest sites and opened fire on protesters, killing
more than 100 people. We are concerned that that same
militia, responsible for the atrocities committed in
Darfur, is part of the Transitional Military Council.

The Sudan is in the midst of a political crisis that
requires that we proceed with caution and not rule
out the possibility of an increase in violence against
civilians in Darfur. A clear sign that the architects of
the violence in the Darfur conflict still retain political
and military power is the issuance by the Transitional
Military Council ofdecree 102, instructing the handover
of UNAMID team sites to the Rapid Support Forces, in
violation of Khartoum's commitments, including the
status of forces agreement between UNAMID and the
Government of the Sudan. In that regard, we welcome
the decision by the United Nations to suspend the
handover of those facilities, which should be made to
the appropriate institutions for peaceful purposes and
for the benefit of the civilian population.
Twelve years after the deployment of UNAMID,
the conflict in Darfur seems to be continuing. Despite
the relative calm achieved, recent events in Khartoum
have accented the political and logistical challenges on
the ground. The death toll, human rights violations,
the displacement of people, food insecurity and
the effects of climate change continue to require a
strong international response that fulfils the mandate
to protect the civilian population, and an effective
commitment by the Government to the well-being of
the Sudanese people.

In that regard, we are concerned, on the one hand,
about the devastating effects of climate change and
environmental degradation as a multiplier of conflict.
In the case of the Sudan, ifthe drought trends continue,
the country will face significant food shortages and
large-scale migration due to the loss of livelihoods,
which would aggravate the already difficult situation
facing the Sudanese people.

Moreover, we are alarmed by the growing trend of
conflict-related sexual violence, many cases of which
go unreported. Of the reported cases, 80 per cent are
rapes, of which 30 per cent are carried out by members of
the Rapid Support Forces militia and the armed forces.
It is imperative to ensure the monitoring, analysis
and reporting of these cases, even after UNAMID's
departure from Darfur, with the deployment of women's
protection advisers on the ground.

We need to rethink the exit strategy and focus on
preserving the mission's capacities to protect civilians
and monitor human rights abuses and then, after a
reasonable time, resume talks on a gradual withdrawal
of UNAMID.

The recent events in Khartoum open up a range
of opportunities for transparent, political, civilian-
led negotiations through open dialogue, with the
participation of all actors, for the restoration of order
and peace for the Sudanese people. Above all, those
negotiations must facilitate a process of accountability
that brings to justice those responsible for acts of
violence against the civilian population and that enables
an independent investigation of such acts.

Ifa peaceful Sudan is to resurface, those responsible
for atrocities must be brought to justice. The dignity,
respect and democratic aspirations of the Sudanese
people must be ensured, but above all, Sudanese
women must be made whole and their participation in
decision-making must be ensured.
