Mr. Li Zhaoxing (China) (interpretation from Chinese): Mr. President, first of all, the Chinese
delegation welcomes you as you join us to guide the
meeting of the Security Council this afternoon. We
believe your vitality and excellent skills and wisdom will
lead us to the smooth conclusion of this afternoon's
meeting. To you and to Ambassador Kovanda, we would
like to express our thanks for the contribution made to the
work of the Security Council by the Czech delegation.

The Chinese delegation also wishes to express its
shock at the recent tragic event in Oklahoma City. We
would like, through Ambassador Albright, to extend our
condolences to the Government and people of the United
States on the loss of life in the explosion.

The report of the Co-Chairmen of the International
Conference on the Former Yugoslavia (ICFY), transmitted
by the Secretary-General to the Security Council, states
that the Mission enjoys freedom of movement and good
cooperation from the Government of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia in implementing its mandate, that the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
continues to fulfil its commitment to closing its border
with Bosnia and Herzegovina, and that there have been no
commercial transshipments across that border. We
welcome this development and believe that it should be
the basis for our consideration of the draft resolution
before us.

We have all along advocated a peaceful settlement
of the conflict in the former Yugoslavia and have been
against the introduction of sanctions or mandatory
measures in this connection, for facts have proved that
sanctions or pressure will in no way help resolve any
issue, but rather will further complicate and perpetuate it.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is an important
factor for restoring peace and stability in the region of the
 

former Yugoslavia. Its Government has facilitated and
supported the Mission in many ways in the discharge of its
duties, and has taken measures to effectively close its
border with Bosnia and Herzegovina. The purpose of the
efforts made by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in
implementing Security Council resolutions 943 (1994) and
970 (1995) is to urge the Bosnian Serbs to accept the peace
plan. The international community should continue to give
encouragement, not discouragement, to the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia for its continued fulfilment of its
commitment to closing its border and making further efforts
to bring peace to Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Regrettably, though the draft resolution before us has
further extended the provisions for easing sanctions set
forth in resolution 970 (1995), it has not only shortened the
period of extension but also attached more restrictive
conditions to it, which is apparently a step backward from
resolutions 943 (1994) and 970 (1995). Furthermore, the
reasonable suggestions we made on the draft resolution
were not accepted.

Due to the aforementioned situation and based on our
principled position on sanctions, we shall have to abstain on
the draft resolution before us.

The long absence of a solution to the question of the
former Yugoslavia has brought tremendous suffering to the
people in the region. It is also jeopardizing peace and
stability in Europe and the world as a whole. We are deeply
concerned over the conflict in the former Yugoslavia, and
strongly urge the parties concerned to restart at an early
date peaceful negotiations for a solution acceptable to all by
taking into account the fundamental interests of the people
there. We also deem it imperative for the countries in the
region to recognize each other and coexist in amity and
good-neighbourliness. This will help bring an early end to
the conflict and war in the region, which will be in
conformity with the long-term interests of the countries in
the region and contribute to the maintenance of peace and
stability in Europe, as well as in the rest of the world.

