Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let me
begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council and by thanking you
for having convened this public meeting on the grave
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories. I
cannot fail to express my appreciation to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of China,
for his able and effective leadership of the Council last
month.

Once again the Council has convened to debate
yet another atrocious crime perpetrated by a regime
that has tried to continue its illegal occupation by
resorting to State terrorism and war crimes against the
people under its brutal control - a people who, in turn,
have been left with no option other than resistance. In
their latest cowardly act of State terrorism, the Israeli
forces cold-bloodedly murdered Sheikh Ahmed Yassin,
an elderly spiritual leader confined to a wheelchair.
The real reason for such a cruel act was the fact that
the Sheikh was an inspiration for the resistance against
occupation. He was neither involved in nor in control
of the resistance - a phenomenon that is caused by the
occupation itself and not by any individual or group.

Israel, and especially the head of the Israeli
regime, who publicly boasted of planning this crime
and having it carried out under his personal command,
has on its record yet another serious violation of the
Fourth Geneva Convention, amounting to another
crime against humanity. But in doing so, he once again
made clear that, in fact, they have never been prepared
to work towards peace in the region, for fear that any
peace would presuppose the restoration of the basic
rights of the Palestinians. It is not possible that, intent
on preparing for and committing this crime, they did
not know what its consequences would be. It is not
possible that they did not know that this would be the
onset of a new cycle of violence of the kind they have
repeatedly, and indeed intentionally, provoked over the
past several years.

In the aftermath of the barbaric terrorist act in
Madrid, and at a time when the international
community needs to pull together with a View
effectively to combating global terrorism, the Israeli
occupation and the criminal acts to support it,
including extrajudicial killings, undermine the rule of
law and cooperation among nations which are
committed to fighting terrorism. There is no doubt that
what Israel did, and has vowed to keep on doing in
future, was a bonanza for terrorists such as those who
perpetrated the Madrid crime, enabling them,
unfortunately, to become further strengthened.

Extrajudicial killings and targeted assassinations,
coupled with other Israeli war crimes and acts of State
terrorism such as the construction of the expansionist
wall, the wanton destruction of homes, infrastructure
and agricultural land, the detention and imprisonment
of thousands of Palestinians, and the imposition of
collective punishment on the entire Palestinian
population can only render the situation in the region
ever more tense and explosive.

The assassination of Sheikh Ahmed Yassin is a
flagrant violation, a flagrant crime, which has created
more instability and may plunge the region into another
round of violence. It was a deliberate attempt to
torpedo any attempt to bring peace to the region.

We strongly condemn this latest Israeli criminal
act, and we believe that there is an absolute need for
the international community to heavily weigh in and
prevent Israel from carrying out its nefarious designs
against the Palestinians, which will further jeopardize
peace and security in the whole region. This Council,
especially, bears the heaviest responsibility and should
act with a view to preventing Israel from continuing to
flout the will of the international community as
reflected in numerous United Nations resolutions.

Therefore, it is very sad that the Council could
not reach an agreement on the text of a presidential
statement condemning the Israeli crime because of only
one delegation preventing the Council from
pronouncing itself on such an important issue relating
to international peace and security in one of the most
important and sensitive regions. We hope that all
members of the Council recognize the need for taking
decisive action in the face of the new tension in the
region and will not choose to allow the further
paralysis of the Council and the erosion of its authority
as a result of its failing to address the grave situation
created in the wake of the assassination of Sheikh
Ahmed Yassin.

