Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): At the outset, Ijoin my
other colleagues in congratulating Mr. Frank-Walter
Steinmeier, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany,
on his assumption of the position of Chairperson-in-
Office ofthe Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) for 2016, and welcome him to the
Security Council. My delegation is grateful for his
briefing, which clearly outlined the priorities of the
OSCE under Germany's chairmanship.

Malaysia welcomes the reaffirmation by the
Chairperson-in-Office to continue the close cooperation
between the OSCE and the United Nations. Over the
years, the OSCE has proven its relevance and resilience
as the world's largest regional security organization. Its
inclusive and cooperative nature is its key strength in
responding to various security threats and challenges
in the Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian regions. We greatly
value its contribution and commend the holistic
approach of the OSCE to dealing with wide-ranging
security challenges, including conflict prevention,
conflict management, combating terrorism, arms
control and ensuring respect for human rights.

The significant role of the OSCE was thrust into
the limelight with the crisis in Ukraine. The OSCE'S
engagement in Ukraine through its Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine, its participation in the Trilateral
Contact Group, and the observer mission at the Russian
checkpoints Gukovo and Donetsk, deserve the Council's
strong support. We acknowledge the significant progress
made in Ukraine relating to military de-escalation and
the withdrawal of weapons. However, we remain deeply
concerned that the agreed ceasefire remains fragile and
that the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission still does
not have access to the entire conflict zone, particularly
the rebel-held areas.

We strongly urge all relevant parties to abide by
the obligations laid down by the package of measures
for the implementation of the Minsk agreements last
year, which was endorsed by the Council in resolution
2202 (2015). We wish to see the full cooperation of
all parties with the OSCE to enable it to carry out its
mandate. Malaysia also calls on the parties to intensify
efforts to implement outstanding provisions of the
package of measures, including releasing all hostages,
withdrawing foreign troops and weapons, allowing
humanitarian access, and organizing local elections in
the conflict areas.

I wish to take this opportunity to commend
the role played by the OSCE in the aftermath of the
downing of flight MH-17 in eastern Ukraine, including
in facilitating the recovery and investigation efforts
despite the challenging security situation on the ground.

With respect to the various frozen conflicts,
including in Central Asia, the Southern Caucasus
and Moldova, we hope that the focus on dialogue,
confidence-building measures and mediation by the
German chairmanship will provide new impetus
towards resolving the conflicts, in line with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, various United Nations resolutions, as well as
the Helsinki Final Act. We reiterate the need for the
conflicting parties to respect the principles ofterritorial
integrity and sovereignty, and the inadmissibility of the
use of force for the acquisition of territory, and to focus
on the de-escalation of conflict and peaceful settlement
of disputes.

Malaysia recognizes and fully supports the
stabilizing role played by the OSCE in the Western
Balkans, including its missions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in Kosovo. The OSCE has been vital in
building institutions and promoting reconciliation in the
region, and has brought about great strides in political,
judiciary, electoral, economic and social reforms in
post-conflict societies. I wish to also highlight and
welcome the conference organized by the OSCE earlier
this month in Vienna to identify strategies to counter
intolerance against Muslims in the OSCE regions. We
commend the priority accorded by the OSCE to address
discrimination, racism and xenophobia, particularly
in view of the rising sentiment of Islamophobia in the
OSCE regions.

In conclusion, Malaysia reiterates its support for the
OSCE and the priorities set out by the Chairperson-in-
Office to renew dialogue, rebuild trust, and restore
security in the region. We wish Germany success
for its chairmanship, and we reaffirm our continued
commitment to cooperate closely with the OSCE in
maintaining peace and security in the region, under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.

