Lieutenant General Tesfamariam: The first
question I will address concerns the major challenge that
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
is facing. We face major challenges in addition to the
presence of internally displaced persons (IDPs), which
is not common in United Nations peacekeeping history.
We have a shortage of resources. As I tried to indicate,
we have what I consider a United Nations mindset issue
within the existing manpower, but more than that, the
most critical issue is the continual fighting in South
Sudan since December 2013. Because of that we have
continual displacement and civilians are suffering. It is
a serious challenge for the Mission.

I remember the Council's visit to South Sudan and
its visit to the IDP site in Malakal. The singular message
of the IDPs to the members of the Security Council was
very clear. They requested the Council to help them by
silencing the guns. I consider that very challenging. It
is a challenge to the Mission, to the civilians, to the
mandate and to us. It is really worrying, and it is the
cause behind our IDP sites and protection sites, which
are still increasing in number gradually.

I believe we have the right approach with regard to
the protection of civilians. Given the reality in South
Sudan, our approach is to be more proactive and to try
to reach the civilians and not wait for them to come
seeking assistance or protection. On the other hand, we

have the IDP issue and we have civilians waiting for
protection from physical threats and for humanitarian
assistance. That kind of situation is still a dilemma,
even to the Mission, and has affected our priorities.

Our resources are obviously limited, compared
with the reality on the ground. The 4.6 million people
in need of humanitarian assistance are also in need
of protection. The issues of humanitarian assistance,
life-saving assistance and the protection of civilians
exist at the same time in South Sudan. There is also a
geography issue and an infrastructure issue. In addition,
we have the status of forces agreement issues. The
option we have is to maximize the resources in hand for
the Mission with regard to the status of forces agreement
issue. That issue is causing a serious challenge to the
Mission, including through the violations; restrictions
on our patrols; our spending unnecessary time dealing
with checkpoints; and the detainment of our contingent-
owned equipment, sometimes for close to two months;
and the difficulties of movement on the ground and by
air. [want to be more clear: out of all the major challenges
in South Sudan, the critical challenge is that the guns
are not yet silent, and civilians are paying the price for
that. We are doing our level best at the Mission through
communication and physical deployment, but because
of the lack of respect for the ceasefire agreement, we
face significant challenges. What the civilian IDPs
said in Malakal was that their priority was not positive
peace, their priority was negative peace - to silence
the guns under all circumstances.

The other issue concerns the limitations, in
particular the force-multiplier capabilities. In addition
to the status of forces agreement and the restrictions, I
know from Headquarters that serious efforts have been
made to engage the parties, but still we have a serious
gap in capabilities. We depend too much on infantry.
Aviation capabilities to control the security situation
within our area of responsibility are still seriously
lacking in UNMISS.

Another issue is the training gap. I tried to indicate
that the technical and tactical training was there. I
am happy with the commitment of the forces. I am
happy with the technical and tactical skills. However,
the protection of civilians is about serving and
defending civilians. They should be our focus. I feel
that there is a gap in terms of knowledge, preparation
and skills. Within the forces, we are not yet aware
of the particularity of protecting civilians and what
makes it different from the general knowledge of
peacekeeping on the part of the soldier on the ground
and the commander at the operational level. It is about
civilians, about people and about going into the middle
of the conflict. Obviously, there will be risks. I do not
think that troops are adequately trained to know about
the risks and that there is a solution to those risks. It is
notjust about risk, but paying the price for that risk and
ensuring a solution.

I am happy to hear that it is a dual mission,
defending yourself and defending civilians at the
same time when it comes to the protection of civilians,
because the nature of the conflict is not that predictable.
When it threatens you and threatens civilians, it is not
easy to predict. So it requires, I believe, knowledge,
training and preparation, taking into consideration the
particularities of the protection-of-civilians mandate
and tasks. What is required is a force with a particular
quality of commitment, one that is knowledgeable on
how to be proactive and that more or less understands
what to do in whatever the circumstances might be,
because not everything can be controlled; not everything
can be dealt with by saying, "Do this, do not do that".
Tactical commanders are enablers themselves; so are
are operational commanders. It is also a time-sensitive
engagement. So with respect to the skill and knowledge
of how to be proactive and how to take the initiative,
always keeping in mind that the reason why we are there
is to save civilians, I am not sure if this is fully included
in our training systems, including before deployment.

So there are a few problems in this regard. With
respect to my views on the issue of caveats, let me say
that caveats exist, although some troop-contributing
countries say that they do not have them. This shows
that there are differences. A force is there for one
mandate, one task, one vision, one area of operations.
Division within a uniformed force is not good; it affects
performance. In my understanding, addressing the
concerns expressed is the solution, because we need
a force that is not divided. This is in addition to the
impact of operations.

Finally, in UNMISS, until recently we had the
original mandate, and now we have a revised mandate.
It is a shift that takes into consideration the realities on
the ground and existing challenges. We have realigned
ourselves with the support of Headquarters; that is why
I am happy with the support and attention we receive,
as well as its frequency. We have realigned ourselves
decisively. We have completed the process ofrealigning
ourselves with the new mandate and the new tasks; the

Mission is trying to do its level best to adapt to the
situation.
