Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would also like to thank Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco
for his briefing. Through him, we would like to express
our appreciation to the Secretary-General and other
United Nations officials for their efforts to promote a
negotiated solution in the situation.
Argentina is following with deep concern the latest
political developments in Ukraine, especially in the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea. Argentina reaffirms
the Security Council's responsibility to ensure that
international peace and security are maintained within
the framework of the principles enshrined in the
Charter ofthe United Nations. In that vein, we recall the
obligation that all States must settle their international
disputes in a peaceful fashion in order not to endanger
international peace and security, in accordance with
the provisions of Article 33 of Chapter VI of the
Charter, respecting the principles contained in Article
2 of Chapter I and recognizing the significant role that

relevant regional organizations can play as provided for
in Chapter VIII of the Charter.

We echo the call of the Secretary-General on all
those involved to refrain from actions or statements that
may escalate tensions and initiate constructive dialogue
through peaceful means to find a way out of the current
crisis. All political players and their international
partners should heighten their efforts in order to find
solutions through inclusive dialogue in which all social
and political sectors of the various regions participate.
We believe that it is indispensable for authorities who
are responsible for leading in the transitional period
to enjoy the support and participation of all political
forces. We emphasize that it is the primary and
unavoidable responsibility and obligation of the State
to protect its population including all its ethnic and
linguistic minorities. It is therefore essential that any
action that can contribute to polarization, the rhetoric
of confrontation and the heightening of tensions should
be avoided.

Argentina is convinced of the need to work for a
united Ukraine, honouring the principles of international
law and with full and unconditional respect for human
rights, which is the only way in which the Ukrainian
people can find a democratic way out of the crisis
presently affecting their country. The international
community must focus its efforts on supporting such
a process in order to cooperate and achieve political
agreements that will put an end to the current crisis that
Ukraine is facing.

