Mr. Bermudez Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
First, I wish to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Central Africa and Head of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA), Mr. Francois Lounceny Fall, for his briefing
on the activities of the Office and his assessment of key
trends in the areas of the politics and the security of
the subregion.

Uruguay recognizes the important work carried
out by UNOCA in the area of good offices, preventive
diplomacy and mediation, as well as the support it
gives to United Nations initiatives and regional and
subregional initiatives related to peace and security.
As the report (S/2017/995) mentions, on 28 November,
the tensions caused by disputes related to the electoral
processes continued to affect the subregion of Central
Africa, although they were mitigated in some cases by
attempts to promote dialogue between the Governments
and the opposition groups. Similarly, the persistence
of social and economic difficulties continues to affect
negatively the lives of millions of people. In that
respect, we celebrate the various efforts carried out
by the countries of the subregion to reduce tensions
in a peaceful manner, through inclusive and authentic
dialogue processes. In addition, we encourage all
interested parties to cooperate with one another with
transparency and in good faith in order to resolve the
various political, social and economic issues.

One area that would allow for greater progress
in these processes is the increased participation of
women in decision-making, which still is still quite
lacking in the subregion. On that point, although we
have borne witness to positive developments in recent
months, such as the mobilization and the creation of
a regional platform on the issue of women and peace
and security, and the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), the object ofwhich is to ensure the participation
of women in decision-making processes, it continues
to be an ongoing challenge in Central Africa. Uruguay
understands that more effective participation by women
in post-conflict transitions is essential to ensure
lasting peace.

I would like to focus on two aspects that are of
great importance to Uruguay and that reflect clearly
the difficult living conditions that affect a large number
of civilians in many countries of the subregion: the
humanitarian situation and the situation of human rights.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, according to
information provided by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, violence and insecurity
caused by Boko Haram have devastated families and
communities in the Lake Chad basin region, where
2.4 million people are displaced and over 7 million
need food assistance. Throughout the region, there are
more than 10 million people in need of humanitarian
aid, which makes it one of the largest humanitarian
crises in the world. In that respect, we commend the
collective efforts of the international community, and
in particular of the countries of the Central African
subregion, to tackle the threat of terrorist groups like
Boko Haram and the Lord's Resistance Army. Those
efforts have made it possible to mitigate, at least in part,
the great damage caused to the civilian population.

On the situation of human rights, Uruguay is
concerned the reference in the report to ongoing
human rights violations in many countries of the
subregion, where excessive use of force, detentions
and the arbitrary arrests of political opponents, civil
society activists and media professionals reflect a
trend towards the consistent contraction of the political
space. In addition, the climate of impunity that prevails
in some countries remains a cause of concern for
Uruguay and represents, among other things, a serious
impediment to the creation of an enabling environment
for the conduct of peaceful electoral processes and an
unimpeded transition towards a democratic regime.

In conclusion, I wish to express the support of
Uruguay to the Special Representative and to all
UNOCA personnel in their efforts to promote peace
and security in Central Africa.

