Mr. Matuszewski (Poland): Despite the considerable
progress that has been made since the return of
democratic rule to Haiti, the situation in that country
continues to be difficult and highly precarious. The
apparent inability of the Haitian State institutions to
overcome the continuing constitutional crisis causes us
concern. We join other members of the Council in
appealing to the political forces in Haiti to resume
meaningful dialogue with a view to improving the
situation.

While it must be emphasized that the ultimate
responsibility for the future of their country rests with the
Haitians themselves, the need for the international
community to assist them in securing further progress
towards peace, democracy and prosperity is evident. The
Secretary-General in his report has identified the areas
where this assistance is particularly important and
outlined its operational framework. The law enforcement
system and the judiciary figure prominently on the
Secretary-General's list, and rightly so.

As stated by the Secretary-General, the most recent
examination of the development of the Haitian National

 

Police has brought mixed results. With progress revealed in
some key areas, shortcomings - at times significant -
continue to abound. Consequently, to consolidate the
achievements recorded so far, the establishment of a follow-
on Mission aimed at helping the Haitian National Police to
reach the standards required of a fully professional police
force is warranted. The draft resolution appropriately
addresses the situation by setting up a United Nations
Civilian Police Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH) with a one-
year mandate to continue to assist the Government of Haiti
by supporting and contributing to the professionalization of
the Haitian National Police.

While considering the new United Nations Mission in
Haiti, the Security Council took note of the letter dated 29
October 1997 from the President of Haiti, Mr. Rene Preval,
and the request it contained for further assistance in the
training of the Haitian police. It is important to note that
the President of Haiti emphasizes in his letter that there is
no further need to contemplate the presence of United
Nations military forces in his country. This in itself speaks
volumes about the difference the predecessors of
MIPONUH made in the life of Haiti. Mr. Preval's letter is
also welcome as a declaration that the Haitian authorities
are ready to assume full responsibility for maintaining
security in their country.

The delegation of Poland wishes to thank the sponsors
for the draft resolution they have submitted to the Council.
For the reasons I have just stated, the delegation of Poland
will vote in favour of it.

Finally, I would like to pay tribute to the members of
the United Nations Transition Mission in Haiti (UNTMIH)
and its predecessors, the United Nations Support Mission in
Haiti (UNSMIH) and the United Nations Mission in Haiti
(UNMIH), for their contribution to peace, security and
stability in Haiti and in the whole region. I would also like
to express gratitude to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti, Mr. Enrique ter Horst, for the
leadership he has provided in achieving the unquestionable
success of the United Nations endeavours in Haiti. We
believe that the Governments of the United States and
Canada, whose generous contributions made it possible to
give the United Nations peacekeeping operations in Haiti
the necessary strength, deserve our sincere appreciation.
