Mr. Hill (Australia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for this initiative to hold a debate on security sector
reform. I will speak on the basis of the written text that
is being distributed on behalf of Australia.

In terms of peace and security, development and
human rights, the security sector of any individual
State plays an important role - for the better or for the
worse. It is logical, therefore, that bilateral friends,
regional partners and the United Nations all have an
interest in the security sector of any State with which
they might be engaged.

Not surprisingly, the United Nations has focused
in particular on States in conflict or coming out of
conflict and on the way in which an appropriately
structured, led and motivated security sector can
contribute to peace and security. It is heartening that
the United Nations, through the Peacebuilding
Commission and in other ways, is placing new
emphasis on sustainable peace and is recognizing how
important the security sector is in that regard.

I want to say today that, just as the line between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding is imprecise, so is the
point at which a State is at risk of internal conflict or
instability. It is therefore equally logical that attention
should be given to States at risk, recognizing that an
inappropriate security sector is in itself a threat to
internal stability.

This is not always an easy area for the United
Nations. I believe that that was the point that the
representative of Egypt was making a little while ago.
Sometimes, it is easier for a bilateral friend to help, but
the lessons learned and the best practices identified
from United Nations experiences are equally useful. It
is important that those experiences be documented and
communicated.

Whether before conflict or not, it is equally
important that the goal be to help the State concerned
build an appropriate security sector, not to impose a
solution. National ownership is important to long-term
sustainability. But, whether through the Secretary-
General's good-offices role or through the support of
regional partners, the identification of risks and
constructive efforts to assist can reduce the chance that
the State will slip into conflict.

The value of early identification and response is
what I want to emphasize. I will cite two examples
from Australia's relatively recent experience. Some
years ago, the Government of Papua New Guinea, after
some worrying experiences, decided that its armed
forces were too large to sustain, that there were
logjams in promotions and recruitment, and that
equipment and support were inadequate to maintain
morale. They approached Australia for help. A
programme aimed at restructuring the Papua New
Guinea Defence Force was jointly agreed between
Australia and Papua New Guinea. Australia has
contributed significantly to that programme, both
financially and in other ways. Implementation has been
challenging but remains important, and we continue to
be engaged.

Secondly, some years ago, the Government of
Solomon Islands approached Australia, saying that its
police force was unable, for a number of reasons, to
provide law and order, and asking for help, which was
provided by Australia, New Zealand and other States of
the Pacific region. The Government of Solomon
Islands adopted legislation to allow a regional police
force to provide executive policing functions
cooperatively with the Solomon Islands police. Again,
that has not been an easy task, but here too we remain
engaged.

The last lesson that I wanted to stress, in addition
to identifying best practices, ensuring national

ownership and recognizing the value of early
identification and response, is that the offer of help
must be ongoing. There must be a sense of partnership
and long-term commitment. Obviously, the
contributions that friends offer should evolve as the
recipient State itself evolves. However, remaining
supportive over time, through both the highs and the
lows, is critically important.

