Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank Mr. Shearer, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and President
Mogae, Chair of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, for their comprehensive briefings.

As the serious overall situation in South Sudan
continues unabated, our message also remains
unchanged. The violations of the ceasefire and
restrictions on humanitarian access must stop and the
Government of South Sudan must cooperate fully with
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).

First Vice-President Taban Deng Gai committed to
action on each of those areas at the General Assembly
last week (see A/72/PV.19), and the Government must
demonstrate concrete results in that regard. The Council
should remain united in sending a strong message to the
Government and the opposition.

The human costs of the ongoing conflict are
enormous. Nearly a third of the South Sudanese, many
of them women and children, are internally displaced
or have become refugees. Half of the population is food
insecure. The international community's continued
efforts are needed to fully fund the humanitarian
response plan. On 19 September, Japan announced that
it would provide $3 million in emergency grant aid to the
World Food Programme and the Food and Agricultural
Organization to help address food insecurity in South
Sudan. But unhindered access and protection for
humanitarian personnel are essential.

The only solution to these challenges is through the
political process, and Japan continues to underline the
importance of ensuring a genuinely inclusive political
process that encompasses a national dialogue. We
strongly support the efforts led by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development to organize the high-level
revitalization forum. Like others, we welcome the
African Union Peace and Security Council's strong
communique of20 September, which sends the message
that while this process represents a unique window of
opportunity, it is also the parties' last chance to achieve
true peace and stability.

We commend the robust posture of UNMISS under
the leadership of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Shearer. The deployment of the
Regional Protection Force is also a positive development
and we look forward to its completion as soon as
possible, with full cooperation among the Government,
the troop-contributing countries and UNMISS. The
situation in South Sudan remains extremely difficult,
but the revitalization efforts and UNMISS's work offer
a way forward. Japan will continue to support the
people of South Sudan in their quest for lasting peace
and security.

