Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): First of all, let me join
other speakers in thanking Under-Secretary-General
Holmes for his briefing.

Civilians have always been victims of warfare,
throughout the history of humankind. Today, the
picture remains gloomy. Conflicts in Africa, the Middle
East, the Balkans and other zones of war have caused a
considerable number of civilian casualties. We
therefore believe that the protection of civilians in
armed conflict is an urgent matter. We also believe that
existing measures to protect civilians must be
strengthened and that new measures must be sought.

We continue to have high regard for legal
measures in promoting the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. In particular, we attach great
significance to the 1949 Geneva Conventions and the
1977 Additional Protocols.

As far as complying with international
humanitarian law is concerned, my delegation
underlines that armed State actors and armed non-State
actors have equal responsibility in the protection of
civilians and in adherence to the law. Compliance with
humanitarian and human rights law by armed State
actors can in general be easily monitored through

various existing modalities. Challenges appear when it
comes to non-State armed groups. My delegation
recognizes the limits of State-centric international
instruments in addressing the issue of protection vis-a-
vis those groups. Accordingly, my delegation stresses
the need for alternative measures to hold non-State
combatants accountable when they violate human
rights and humanitarian norms. In this regard, we
welcome the role of the International Committee of the
Red Cross and other humanitarian and human rights
agencies in promoting awareness of the instruments
among non-State combatants and in ensuring that they
obey those instruments. We believe that the United
Nations could also contribute to that endeavour.

When conflict is taking place, civilians have also
become displaced. Under such circumstances, they are
generally deprived of their basic rights, including the
right to food. Many die of disease or hunger. In that
regard, we underline the critical importance of
humanitarian assistance and continue to appreciate the
value of humanitarianism in the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. We continue to support the work of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian
agencies. We commend donor countries for their
contributions and the countries receiving refugees for
their generosity.

Indonesia is concerned over frequent incidents
where humanitarian aid convoys are ambushed or
where access to humanitarian assistance is restricted so
that displaced civilians are out of reach. In our View,
this tactic will only prolong the anguish of displaced
civilians; thus, we cannot let it happen.

As regards conflict-induced displacement, my
delegation has devoted particular attention to the needs
of vulnerable groups, especially children and women.
We stress that all parties to a conflict should make
arrangements to meet the protection and assistance
requirements of children and women and to ensure the
unhindered delivery of basic necessary services.

We are also very concerned about the fact that
humanitarian workers who provide the civilians with
humanitarian assistance have increasingly become
targets during armed conflict. This act is extremely
deplorable, knowing that the workers went because
they wanted to help and because they have ambition
and wanted to mitigate human suffering.

Before I conclude, let me say a few words about

the threat to civilians posed by landmines and other

munitions. Civilians, including farmers and school

children, in over sixty countries remain under the

threat of anti-personnel landmines. The affected

countries bear a costly burden and their citizens have

to deal with potential death or injury every time they
take a step.

We therefore welcome United Nations mine
action activities carried out in collaboration with
governments and other international organizations. We
underline the importance of demining, victim
assistance, mine-risk education and destruction of
stockpiled landmines as part of mine action. We also
urge countries that hold information about the sites of
mines and other munitions they deployed during a war
to share that information, especially with the United
Nations, as a basis for further action.

My delegation holds the view that protection of
civilians in armed conflict is multifaceted and thus
requires comprehensive measures, including both legal
and humanitarian measures. The political will of all
parties concerned is essential in the implementation of
those measures.

As a final point, we would like to reiterate that
while protection of civilians in armed conflict should
be strengthened, the best protection is the prevention of
armed conflict itself. It is the role that the Security
Council could play in promoting the prevention of
conflict and in the maintenance of international peace
and security.

