Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking Ms. Bensouda for her detailed
report and briefing. As we have done every time she has
appeared before the Council, we would like to reaffirm
France's full support for the International Criminal
Court (ICC). I would also like to take this opportunity
to stress that the role of the Court is as important
today as it was yesterday, given the difficult context
for multilateralism in general and for human rights and
international humanitarian law in particular. The Court
must be able to act and exercise its prerogatives without
impediment, independently and impartially, within the
framework defined by the Rome Statute. In that regard,
France affirms its support for the implementation of
resolution 1970 (2011), which referred the situation in
Libya to the International Criminal Court. We believed
then, and still believe today, that a lasting peace in
Libya requires justice for the victims, and the ICC
continues to play a key role in that regard.

The current fighting in Libya is undermining the
peace efforts undertaken with the support of the United
Nations generally, and the Council in particular. It is
civilians who are the main victims. It is therefore urgent
to ensure that the parties reach a ceasefire as soon as
possible, with an immediate halt to military operations
and effective de-escalation. Many terrorist and criminal
groups are taking advantage of the situation to try to
regain ground, and they include individuals who are
listed by the Council, which is absolutely unacceptable.
We must not lose sight ofthe need to resume the dialogue.
The parties have made commitments, notably in Paris,
Palermo and at the end of February in Abu Dhabi, on an
initial agreement that provides for the unification of the
country's institutions and the formation of a transitional
Government tasked with restoring basic services for the
people and preparing for elections. It is therefore now
crucial to re-establish that dialogue under the auspices
of the United Nations and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, whom we fully support.

We must maintain the perspective and momentum for
the political settlement, because, as we know, only a
political solution can put an end to this conflict.

Beyond those general observations, we would like
to make three more specific comments. First, the Office
of the Prosecutor's ability to continue its investigations
requires the full cooperation of all stakeholders. In
that regard it is essential for the Court to have the
cooperation of the Libyan authorities, including for
the execution of arrest warrants. It is crucial that all
the States concerned, whether or not they are parties
to the Rome Statute, strengthen their collaboration in
order to provide the necessary support to the Office of
the Prosecutor for as long as it is needed, and in that
regard, France welcomes the effective cooperation
that a number of States and organizations, including
INTERPOL, have given to the Office of the Prosecutor.
I also want to express my delegation's appreciation for
the continued support and cooperation provided by the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya.

Secondly, I want to reiterate how important it is to
ensure that all of the most serious crimes committed
in Libya since 2011 and still being committed today
are investigated and prosecuted, including crimes
committed by Da'esh.

In that regard, and this is my third and final point, we
commend the Prosecutor's focus on human trafficking
and the smuggling ofmigrants, which constitute a direct
threat to peace and stability in Libya. The findings in the
reports mentioned by the Prosecutor are illuminating
and disturbing as to the seriousness and extent of such
crimes. We welcome the rigorous approach taken by the
Office, including its role in advancing investigations
and prosecutions at the national level. We hope that
it will be effective in combating impunity for crimes
committed against migrants.

In conclusion, the violent, fragmented situation
in Libya throws the vicious circle of impunity and
instability into stark relief. If we are to put an end to
it, we must deal with the political, security and social
challenges that Libya is facing. Those challenges
cannot be overcome without the effective assistance of
the Court and the Council's support. France continues
to be ready to act in that respect.

