Mr. Bolton (United States of America): We are
pleased that the Council was able to come together
quickly and unanimously to respond positively to the
Iraqi Government's request for continued support. The
constructive dialogue that produced this text
demonstrates the Security Council's strength and
resolve to work towards a democratic, secure and
prosperous Iraq that is for the lasting and permanent
benefit of the Iraqi people.

The unanimous adoption of the resolution is a
vivid demonstration of broad international support for
a federal, democratic, pluralist and unified Iraq. The
resolution draws heavily from resolution 1546 (2004),
which remains the cornerstone of Security Council
consensus for Iraq. It addresses those elements in
resolution 1546 (2004) that expire at the end of the
political transition process set out in that resolution,
namely the mandate for the Multinational Force and
arrangements for the Development Fund for Iraq and
the International Advisory and Monitoring Board.

Addressing those issues now will facilitate
continued international support for Iraq's security and
will give the newly elected Iraqi Government time to
assume office, address constitutional questions and
consolidate its authority before confronting issues such
as those addressed in the resolution. Should it choose
to do so, the new Iraqi Government could act on those
matters at any time.

Most importantly, the text responds directly to the
request of the Government of Iraq, as set out in the
letter of Prime Minister al-Jaafari to the Security
Council. It is notable that the Iraqi Mission not only
joins us in the Council today, but also that it played a
visible and substantial role in the negotiation of the
resolution.

As stated in the letter from Secretary of State
Rice, substantial progress has already been made in
helping to build and train the Iraqi security forces,
allowing them to take on increasing security
responsibilities. That said, there is still much work to
be done on that front. The Multinational Force will
continue to pursue that important task, as well as all
other aspects of its mandate, as it works with the Iraqi
Government to maintain security and stability in Iraq.

The Iraqi people continue to demonstrate the
courage that we have seen throughout the transition
process. They went to the polls in extraordinary
numbers last month and approved a new constitution.
In so doing, they offered inspiration to other countries
new to democracy and to other parts of the Arab world.

Iraq is quickly approaching another major
milestone in its transition. There will be a new election
on 15 December. It is important that this be a
transparent, participatory and inclusive process for all
Iraqi communities. We welcome the efforts of the
Iraqis, the United Nations and other members of the
international community that enable all Iraqis to
participate in the political process.

We urge the international community, especially
the Arab world, to come forward and support the Iraqi
people. That support comes in many forms -
participation in the Coalition, contribution to Iraq's
humanitarian and reconstruction activities, increased
diplomatic engagement and compliance with relevant
resolutions. Support is critical at this time. Such
support helps to consolidate Iraq's democratic
progress, consistent with resolution 1546 (2004), and
demonstrates solidarity with the Iraqi people in the
face of terror.

