Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to express my gratitude to France for its
initiative and for having submitted the draft resolution
that was adopted today, which Egypt (resolution 2462 (2019)). The issue of preventing and combating the
financing ofterrorism is of great importance in general,
and for Egypt in particular.

Effectively combating the financing of terrorism
requires that we comprehensively combat all terrorist
groups without distinction, especially in the light of the
overarching ideology uniting all those terrorist groups,
whatever they may be called, and their belonging to the
same extremist Takfiri ideology inciting terrorism. In
order to combat the financing of terrorism in line with
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 2368 (2017), it is necessary
to firmly and resolutely confront States and terrorist
groups that use certain non-governmental organizations,
community institutions and relief organizations fronts
for raising funds to finance terrorism.

Moreover, it is necessary to strengthen international
mechanisms to combat terrorism financing and cut off
its sources by monitoring and tracking the financial
transfers of terrorist groups and elements. It is also
necessary to address the relationship between such
groups and transnational organized crime networks,
while strengthening international cooperation with
a view to collecting digital evidence related to such
crimes in order to assist in the prosecution process.

Furthermore, it is necessary to strengthen
coordination at the national, regional and international
levels in order to implement effective and innovative
measures to support the rapid advances in technology,
which is also being used by terrorist groups to finance
their activities. In the light of the increasing use of
cryptocurrencies by terrorist groups in their financial
transfers, we call on the United Nations and its various
agencies, in particular the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism and the United Nations Counter-
Terrorism Centre, to redouble and intensify their efforts
in assisting States to build their capacities in combating
and preventing the financing of terrorism through clear
projects that will have a practical impact.

At the national level, I would like to refer to the
most important counter-terrorism measures that Egypt
has taken in the area of preventing and combating
terrorism financing.

Egypt has ratified the majority of the relevant
international and regional conventions on this issue,
having also established the Egyptian anti-money-
laundering and combating the financing of terrorism
unit several years ago. Egypt has also developed special
mechanisms to implement relevant Security Council
resolutions, as well as those issued by international
technical organizations such as the Financial Action
Task Force (FATF), the Egmont Group and other
financial intelligence units.

As a result of Egypt's efforts in that regard,
there were positive outcomes from a questionnaire
that was submitted to the FATF regarding Egypt's
efforts in the fight against terrorism financing. The
report of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate also commended the effective role played
by the Egyptian anti-money-laundering and combating
financing of terrorism unit both at the domestic and
international levels.

Furthermore, Egyptian financial institutions,
especially those conducting financial transfers, are
bound by identification regulations issued by the
Egyptian anti-money-laundering and combating
financing of terrorism unit, in accordance with
international measures, with a View to combating the
financing of terrorism through the banking sector.
Concerning the measures taken to prevent the misuse
of informal financial services providers, we emphasize
that the system for transferring funds in Egypt is
limited to licensed financial institutions. The Egyptian
anti-money-laundering and combating financing of
terrorism unit is actively working to eliminate any
cases that may involve informal financial transfers
or transactions.

In the context of the new methods being used to
finance terrorism, especially by exploiting modern
technological means, Egypt has taken several preventive
measures. The anti-money-laundering and combating
financing of terrorism unit has alerted the public to
the possible dangers of cryptocurrencies, and there is
close cooperation with law enforcement agencies to
strengthen their capacity to counter those developments
by holdingjoint training courses. The Egyptian unit also
distributed a guiding list indicating the most popular
websites used in the circulation of cryptocurrencies,
which is regularly updated by the unit.

Moreover, the Egyptian unit has issued regulatory
controls to deal with Internet payments and established
rules for the identification of customers with regard to
prepaid cards as well as operating rules for payments
via mobile phone. The unit also obliges relevant
institutions to provide these services with reliable
methods of establishing the identity of customers using
those payment services.

As part of the efforts of the Egyptian anti-money-
laundering and combating financing of terrorism unit
to keep abreast of all international developments,
especially those related to the requirements of financial
inclusion and measures adopted towards a digital
society, the unit has prepared a guidebook for banks to
help them assess the risks of money laundering.

Lastly, we once again welcome the adoption of
today's resolution 2462 (2019). We underscore the
importance of implementing that resolution as well
as all other Security Council resolutions relating to
the fight against terrorism. It is essential that the
Security Council hold accountable countries that are
not committed to the full implementation of those
resolutions and continue to violate them.

Not holding those States to account will perpetuate
the financing ofterrorism, the spread of foreign terrorist
fighters and their free movement from conflict zones
to other States and regions, as well as ongoing support
for terrorists, the provision of safe havens for them
and incitement to terrorism through media channels,
sometimes even through filming the perpetrators as
they carry out their terrorist attacks.

I thank you once again, Madam President, and wish
you all success in achieving our goal.

