Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I am pleased to welcome
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul and I would like to thank him for
his statement. I thank Special Representative Staffan de
Mistura for his briefing and for his extraordinary
leadership at the helm of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

I wish to express Brazil's condolences to the
Afghan Government and people for the brutal
assassination of former President Burhanuddin
Rabbani, Chairman of the High Peace Council. His loss
is a loss to the peace process as a whole. Afghans
should not feel discouraged, however. They must find
the strength in themselves and in the support of the
international community to redouble efforts to promote
reconciliation.

Despite the difficulties, the transition process
towards Afghan security responsibility must continue
to advance. But let us not forget that the military and
political timetables must coincide. Until now, military
developments have outpaced progress in national
reconciliation. We expect all sectors of Afghan society
to continue to seek constructive dialogue.
Recent security incidents demonstrate that,
unfortunately, the tide of violence is not receding in
Afghanistan. On the contrary, rates of civilian deaths
and injuries have risen. Brazil reiterates the need for all
concerned to comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law and to abandon the use
of tactics that indiscriminately target civilians.
In our high-level meeting on preventive
diplomacy this past week (see S/PV.6621), many of us
reaffirmed the need to address the link between poverty
and violence. Socio-economic development must be
central to our strategy for peace in Afghanistan. The
peace process will stand a better chance of being
embraced by all Afghans when they are able to realize
that stability brings concrete improvements to their
lives. In that sense, international support must fully
abide by the principles of Afghan leadership and
ownership.

As we approach the end of 2011, it is becoming
clearer that dialogue is the path to a solution for the
conflict in Afghanistan. This path must be strengthened
by all of the means at our disposal. We hope that the
international community will show strong support for
Afghanistan during the Istanbul and the Bonn
conferences. We welcome the focus of the Bonn
Conference on the civilian aspects of the transition,
including mediation, coordination of assistance and
long-term international support to Afghanistan and the
reconciliation process. Brazil will actively participate
in the Conference.

At the same time, the regional dimension of the
Istanbul Conference is particularly important to the
future of Afghanistan. Global solutions to the conflict
will have greater legitimacy and efficacy if
underpinned by the concerns, perspectives and support
of the countries of the region.

Brazil renews its commitment to working
together with the Afghan people and Government
towards a future of peace and prosperity.

