Today the United States voted in favour of Belgium and Germany's draft resolution (S/2020/654) to renew the Security Council's authorization of the cross- border humanitarian lifeline into north-west Syria. In the midst of a global pandemic, that draft resolution would have made it possible for the United Nations and its implementing partners to continue to provide life-saving humanitarian aid through the Bab Al-Hawa and Bab Al-Salam border crossings in north-west Syria, reaching nearly 3 million people over the next year. Although the draft resolution falls short of meeting the needs of the millions of Syrian people who rely on humanitarian assistance, the United States supported it because we will not play a game of dangerous brinkmanship at the behest of Russia and at the expense of Syrian lives. Had it been adopted, the draft resolution would have provided reassurance to the Syrian people, who rely on United Nations cross- border shipments for food, shelter and medicine to ensure that they will not go hungry for the next year, that they will have tents and blankets to protect them against the summer heat or the winter cold, and that they will have immunizations for infants and support for those fighting the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. In short, it would have saved lives. We vote today with the overwhelming majority of Council members to take a principled humanitarian stand in support of the impartial, apolitical and needs-based recommendation of the United Nations to the Council to reauthorize the existing cross-border mechanism - two crossings in the north-west - for 12 months. This is, more importantly, a vote for the Syrian people in Idlib, Azaz, Tel Rifaat and throughout north-western Syria, people who have reason to expect that the Security Council will act in the interests of innocent civilians. Unfortunately, the Council failed the Syrian people today. Through their vetoes today, Russia and China have chosen to ignore the facts on the ground and to disregard the call for collective Council action to respond to the worsening humanitarian crisis in Syria. On numerous occasions over the past several months, the Council has received actionable information from trusted, credible and impartial sources - including the Secretary-General - who have described in great and tragic detail the severity of the humanitarian situation in Syria and the insufficiency of cross-line assistance to meet the needs of the Syrian people. To be clear, there is no alternative to the United Nations cross-border operations through the Bab Al-Hawa and Bab AI-Salam crossing points. In paragraph 38 of his second report mandated under resolution 2504 (2020), dated 14 May 2020 (S/2020/401), Secretary-General Guterres writes on the north-west that it is "simply impossible to replicate with cross-line assistance what is being delivered through the cross-border operation" (S/2020/401, para. 38). The report further notes that this response "must entail a renewal of the cross-border authorization for the use of Bab Al-Salam and Bab Al-Hawa border crossings for an additional 12 months" (ibid.). As Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock noted in his remarks before the Council just last week (see S/2020/635), cross-border assistance into north-west Syria provides a critical lifeline for 2.8 million of the most vulnerable people in all of Syria. The Under-Secretary-General rightly called for cross-border assistance to be scaled up and noted that a failure to renew the resolution would undoubtedly cause suffering and death. There is no justification for Russia's and China's vetoes today, and this action cannot be spun into false choices between humanitarian aid, sovereignty and sanctions. Put simply, rather than voting to save the lives of the Syrian people, Russia and China voted today to save Al-Assad. We should all be saddened, outraged and more determined than ever to hold Russia and China accountable as an accomplice to Al-Assad's reign of death and destruction. The United States fundamentally believes that this draft resolution actually did not go far enough. A temporary reauthorization of the Al-Yarubiyah border crossing in the north-east is warranted, but this was a principled compromise in the light of Russia's politically motivated rejection of any consideration of reopening Al-Yarubiyah. The United States remains committed to helping the voiceless, the hungry, the displaced and the orphaned receive the humanitarian aid that they require to survive. As the largest humanitarian donor in the world, the United States has provided more than $11.3 billion to displaced and conflict-affected Syrians in Syria and the region. During the COVID-19 crisis, the United States has been working tirelessly with partners on the ground to combat the virus. We are proud of our principled stance to help every Syrian in need, regardless of location or affiliation. Just this morning, I had the opportunity to speak with a brave and bright young woman in Idlib, who shared with me the story of her family and articulated the real human costs on the ground of failing to renew access to these border crossings. I promised her that I would carry her with me into this vote in the Council today and that I would carry her voice, her story and her family's story with me. I hope that my Council colleagues remember that this vote is not just a bureaucratic procedure to be filed away but that there are millions of families and lives counting on our action. We have a moral obligation to ensure that our actions here today spare these lives. And to repeat - we have failed them.
