Mr. Hau Do Suan (Myanmar): My delegation
congratulates you, Madam President, on Poland's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
We are confident in your wisdom and able leadership.
I can assure you of our full support and cooperation.
My delegation also thanks Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Gamba and the other briefers for
their briefings today.

Myanmar is committed to ending and preventing
violations and abuses against children. We have taken
important steps, such as establishing domestic preventive
mechanisms and cooperating with international
partners, especially with the United Nations and the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict.

Recently, on July 24, the Union Parliament enacted
the much-anticipated child rights law. The new law is
the most comprehensive child law in Myanmar with
extensive provisions concerning the rights of children
and the prevention of all forms of violence against
children, including the six grave violations.

The Inter-Ministerial Committee for the Prevention
of the Six Grave Violations during Armed Conflict was
established on 7 January 2019. Consultations are now
under way to develop an action plan for the prevention
of killing and maiming of and sexual violence against
children. Since the signing of the joint action plan with
the United Nations in 2012, almost 1,000 minors have
been released and reintegrated into the community.
Most important, verified cases of new recruitment have
dramatically decreased over the years to only a few
dozen at present.

The Government has conducted training

workshops in cooperation with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. As recently as
June 2019, a total ofmore than 14,000 persons, including
more than 7,500 military personnel, were provided with
legal training workshops on the Geneva Conventions
and the six grave violations. Moreover, nationwide
the public awareness campaign to end and prevent the
recruitment and use of children by the Tatmadaw has
been in place since it was launched since 2013.

Myanmar is now in the process of ratifying the
Optional Protocol of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. Moreover, the Myanmar youth policy, adopted in
2017, specifically identifies former child soldiers as one
of the 11 categories of vulnerable youth and children
who require special attention and protection. Myanmar
is also cooperating with the International Labour
Organization to end forced labour and established a
complaint mechanism for reporting the recruitment of
underage persons for military service.

The Government of Myanmar has never condoned
human rights violations, especially crimes against
the most vulnerable people, including women and
children. Perpetrators have been tried and prosecuted
in accordance with the law. Actions have also been
taken against military personnel who were involved in
unlawful recruitment activities and violations.

We believe that achieving lasting peace is
indispensable to ending the suffering of innocent
civilians, particularly women and children in armed
conflict. Bearing that in mind, the Government of
Myanmar has reconvened the 21st-Century Panglong
Union Peace Conference to deliberate and strive for
achieving lasting peace and building a democratic
federal union. During its third session held in July
2018, the Conference adopted the elimination of the six
grave violations against children and the protection of
children's rights as social-sector basic principles.

I would like to express my Government's
appreciations to Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Gamba and her Office for their constructive
engagement. We also thank UNICEF and the United
Nations country team for their important contribution
to the implementation of the joint action plan. We
believe that the protection of children in armed conflict
rests primarily with the Government concerned.

At the same time, the United Nations and the
international community can play a vital role by
providing assistance to Governments in building
their capacity and strengthening their ability to
protect children. It is also important to acknowledge
and encourage positive developments. Only through
constructive engagement and cooperation, will we be
able to achieve our ultimate aim to end the suffering of
children in armed conflict.

I can assure the Council that we shall continue
to work hand in hand with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict and other
international partners to end grave violations against
children and build a better future for our children.

