Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French): The nuclear tests conducted by India on 11 and
13 May and by Pakistan on 28 and 30 May, together with
the tension in South Asia, have aroused profound concern
throughout the world.

France has deplored and condemned these tests,
which run counter to global efforts against nuclear
proliferation and to the very broad international adherence
to the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.

The Foreign Ministers of China, Russia, the United
Kingdom, the United States and France met on 4 June in
Geneva. In a Joint Communique, they made specific
proposals and outlined future action which the Council
will endorse when it adopts today's draft resolution.

Given the situation in South Asia, France feels that
it is a matter of priority to preserve and strengthen the
non-proliferation regime established under the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). France
reaffirms its attachment to the implementation of the
decisions and the resolution adopted by the NPT Review
and Extension Conference in 1995.

We call on India and Pakistan, as well as on the
other States that have not yet done so, to accede to the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty without delay
and without conditions. Our objective remains the
accession of all countries, including India and Pakistan, to
the NPT as it stands and without modification.

We call on India and Pakistan to participate, at the
Conference on Disarmament and on the basis of the
agreed mandate, in negotiations on a treaty banning the
production of fissile material for nuclear weapons. We
take note of the response of those two great countries to
our requests.

We cannot underestimate the regional dimension of
the tension in South Asia. The disputes between the two
countries, particularly on Kashmir, are at the root of
today's problems. It is essential that we actively seek a
solution to these problems through direct bilateral
dialogue, as well as through the establishment of
confidence-building measures. To ensure peace, security
and stability in the region, it is our duty to encourage
India and Pakistan to make that choice.

If we are to attain all these objectives, we feel that
it would be desirable to continue to promote dialogue and
cooperation with India and Pakistan and to avoid coercive

 

measures. But these two countries must also display
restraint and demonstrate, by acting in according with the
Security Council's requests, their willingness to commit
themselves to this path.

It is in this spirit that the French delegation will vote
in favour of the draft resolution.

