I would like to thank France for organizing this timely open debate on children and armed conflict. I also thank Special Representative Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, Executive Director Henrietta Fore and Mariam for their updates on this issue. Today's debate is a vital contribution to the overall efforts to halt and reverse the negative impacts on children caught up in armed conflict. For Indonesia, ensuring children's well-being is a priority to which we are abidingly committed. We, the international community, cannot stand by silently as children's lives are cut short by the blunt force of armed conflict. It is an unfortunate fact that children and conflict are consistently mentioned in the same breath. In 2019, over 25,000 grave violations against children were reported and more than 10,000 children were killed or maimed. While reiterating our continuous support to the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, Indonesia has three points to underscore today. First, child protection has become even more urgent during this pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has further jeopardized children's lives in conflict areas. They are facing higher risks of health issues, violation and exploitation. Through our peacekeepers on the ground, Indonesia maintains its concrete contribution on child protection. Our rapidly deployable battalion in the Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo continues to engage communities within civil- military coordination activities, including by supporting children to understand how to address the pandemic in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We need to ensure that our efforts against the pandemic take the rights and needs of children into account. That includes their access to health care, quality education and the delivery of a timely COVID-19 response. Secondly, it is imperative to stop using children in armed conflict. We should continue to sustain actions to end the recruitment of children as well as address the root causes of conflict. Fifteen years since the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), we are pleased to hear a "success story" of 13,200 children released from armed groups last year, including in Afghanistan, Colombia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Myanmar. However, we cannot be complacent. Our full support towards enhanced engagement by all parties to conflict on child protection should be consistently maintained. Thirdly, the process of reintegrating children should be given greater attention. As member of the Group of Friends of Reintegration, Indonesia believes that the protection of children's rights must start with family or caregivers. Providing children with a safe and nurturing environment in the family is the best way to break the cycle of their involvement in armed conflict. A conducive environment will not only prevent the re-recruitment of former child soldiers, but also prevent children from being exposed to terrorist groups in conflict areas. Therefore, positive engagement and commitment from all stakeholders are critical for the reintegration process. That includes the role of United Nations peace operations, particularly by involving women peacekeepers, who are well- positioned to protect children. Today there are 159 Indonesian women peacekeepers in various missions, who have been trained to engage and protect children. This year also marks 20 years since the adoption of the Optional Protocol to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict. There are many international instruments related to the well-being of children. But, as Henrietta, the Executive Director of UNICEF, clearly alluded to, all those instruments are only as effective as the global will to use them. It is up to us to implement faithfully all protocols, agreements and legislation on children. It is the duty of our generation to give meaning to the Protocol. Our legacy for children is to ensure that their natural constitution is preserved to adulthood. Children are neither soldiers nor victims; they are our future.
