Mr. Ahmed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to tell you, Mr. President, how happy
we are to see your brotherly country preside over the
Security Council for this month. I also would like
to convey our thanks to Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix and Assistant Secretary-General Gilmour for
their briefings.

I further thank the strategic assessment team for its
efforts. The team visited Darfur to assess the situation
on the ground and has presented a highly professional
report (S/2019/445). We have read the report on the
strategic assessment of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID),
which confirms that there is an ongoing improvement
of the security situation in all Darfur states, which
enjoyed security and stability over the past period,
while looking forward to the new era that began in the
Sudan on 11 April.

The strategic assessment team notes in the report
before the Council that the current situation in Darfur
requires a transition from peacekeeping to a new
approach based on economic recovery, development and
stability. We highlight the pivotal role that the United
Nations can play, along with all its institutions and
agencies, including the United Nations country team in
Khartoum, to address the remaining manifestations of
the conflict, which UNAMID is definitely unable to do
with its current components and capacities.

During the past period, there was a focus in
all Darfur states on boosting security and stability
issues through the weapons collection campaign,
strengthening the authority and control of the State to
guarantee the voluntary return of internally displaced
persons and working to ensure the success of the
agricultural season, which we hope will contribute to
improving the security situation and living conditions.

I would like to emphasize that the Sudan looks
forward to continued cooperation with the United
Nations and the members of the Security Council
to achieve and implement the exit of UNAMID, in
accordance with the recommendations outlined in the
strategic assessment report. This report was jointly
adopted by the Peace and Security Council ofthe African
Union yesterday and by the Council in resolution 2429
(2018). The content of the resolution is in line with the
report before us with respect to the specified stages of
UNAMID's withdrawal from Darfur.

It has been reaffirmed that the Sudan is fully
committed to facilitating the work of UNAMID in
Darfur until its withdrawal. In that regard, allow me to
highlight the following points.

First, the Sudan is an independent State with
full sovereignty over its territories. That is a right
guaranteed by the Charter of the United Nations. The
Charter guarantees the Sudan the right to benefit from
the resources available within its borders, in line with
the general interests of the Sudanese people.

Secondly, the Sudan is committed to all the
agreements it has signed with the United Nations
and UNAMID concerning the use and handover of
UNAMID sites to the Sudanese Government, pursuant
to a memorandum of understanding agreed and signed
as usual by both sides, the Sudanese Government and
UNAMID.

Thirdly, I would like to draw the Council's attention
to a decision taken by the Transitional Military Council
yesterday to withdraw all armed forces and other
security forces from the sites that the Government of
the Sudan has received from UNAMID and to suspend
the implementation of decree 102, issued in May. I
repeat: The Transitional Military Council has decided
to withdraw its armed forces and other security forces
from the sites received by the Sudanese Government
from UNAMID and to suspend the implementation of
decree 102, issued in May, requesting the handover of
the sites to the Rapid Support Forces. We will provide
the Council with a copy of the text later.

Based on the aforementioned information and
the outcome of the strategic assessment report, it
is necessary to proceed with the implementation of
the proposals contained in the team's report before
the Council, as adopted by the Secretariat. As those
present know, the deadline suggested and asserted in
the report for UNAMID's drawdown is June 2020 and
its liquidation in December of the same year.

I would like to reaffirm that the categorical position
of the Sudanese Government is to move forward with
the exit of UNAMID according to that time frame,
and we categorically reject any attempt to postpone or
cancel the exit of UNAMID. We reject the option of
UNAMID troops remaining in Darfur, given that there
is no need, justification or reason for their presence
there, in line with the conclusions of a previous
report, issued a year or two ago, on the importance of
withdrawing peacekeeping forces from Darfur in order
to allow for the achievement of development, stability
and investment there. The Council must continue to
look at the situation with an open mind and evaluate
the implications of any attempt to hamper or postpone
the drawdown according to the time frame set out in the
report of the strategic assessment team, which visited
Darfur and saw the situation on the ground.

As I have said before, the position in favour of
proceeding with the withdrawal of UNAMID is in line
with the nature of the situation in Darfur, which requires
a new course of moving forward towards normalizing
life and sustaining peace there, especially following the
great political change. Some Council members said that
the political process is not moving forward. However,
the political transformation that started on 11 April has
paved the way for the participation of armed movements
in the political process. They had refused to participate,
but now they can freely participate in building and
shaping the future of the Sudan. They have the full
right to do so and to be present in the political arena.

I would like to draw the attention of everybody in
general, and the Security Council in particular, to the
importance of taking advantage of this opportunity
before us in the Sudan. Darfur has not been affected
by the political developments in Khartoum. We need
to exploit this opportunity to achieve a comprehensive
peace that reflects the success of UNAMID in Darfur,
as well as its role, which the Council, the African Union
and the Sudanese Government have fully supported.
That would meet the aspirations of our people to sustain
peace and security in Darfur. UNAMID's exit would
mean that the partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union to keep and maintain peace in
Africa was a success. As the three African countries
represented here in the Council will agree, the success
of UNANID's exit strategy would affirm a principle
that we hold clear in Africa: the principle of African
solutions to African problems. We must support and
protect this principle within the Council.

The Sudan welcomes the extensive efforts
undertaken to complete the peace process and we again
welcome the dawn ofpeace and peacebuilding in Darfur.
This means development, which will in turn lead to the
eradication of all manifestations of the conflict. My
country's delegation thanks UNAMID for its efforts
across various fields and the peacekeepers who have
given their lives for security and peace in Darfur. We,
the entire Sudanese people, pay tribute to them and
acknowledge their sacrifices over the years. We also
thank all UNAMID troop- and police-contributing
countries. We reaffirm the Sudan's readiness to
cooperate with all regional and international partners
until the last UNAMID component exits the territories
of my country.

Allow me to add a few observations that I did
not originally plan to make. Some members of the
Council, however, have discussed the Sudan's internal
political affairs and therefore I am obliged to make
some clarifications. I hope Council members will
listen to me with open minds and hearts. It appears that
certain members of the Council continue to think with
the historical mindset that my country and Africa in
general have been liberated from for decades. They are
wrong if they believe that they can use this forum and
this agenda item of the Security Council to discuss an
issue that has nothing to do with the matter at hand. The
procedures of the Security Council reject this, as does
the Charter of the United Nations, which specifies first
and foremost when the Security Council can and cannot
interfere in the internal affairs of a country.

I would like to clearly note that the events that have
been taking place in the Sudan since December 2018
remain, to this very day, an internal affair that neither
the Council nor any of its members has any mandate
or right to discuss. As the Council is well aware, this
is pursuant to the Charter of the United Nations and I
do not need to explain that the mandate of the Security
Council is limited to the Darfur states. I recall and
emphasize that this meeting, pursuant to the Council's
agenda, should focus only on the situation in Darfur in
relation to the UNAMID strategic assessment report.

Allow me also to mention the efforts of the
African Union, the Prime Minister of Ethiopia and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
in mediating and finding common ground between the
Sudanese political parties and their different positions.
This mediation has led to rapprochement that we hope
will lead to a final agreement in the coming days so
that we can achieve, in the near future, a democratic,
civil State that will continue to contribute to building
sustainable peace in Africa and the world. Therefore,
I hope that the Council will not interfere in the efforts
of the African Union and IGAD, as that would have
a negative impact on the ability of the Sudanese
political components to reach an agreement as swiftly
as possible.

Regarding the tragic and regrettable events that
took place on 3 June, we pray for the victims and hope
that those who are injured will make a swift recovery.
However, discussions of these events are inaccurate and
the statistics that have been cited are false. Therefore,
allow me to announce that the Transitional Military
Council has established a military commission to
investigate these events, the findings of which will
be announced tomorrow, Saturday, 15 June. The
Prosecutor General of the Sudan has established a
judicial committee to investigate these events and to
bring the perpetrators to account. They will be justly
prosecuted.

This demonstrates the resolve of the Sudanese
authorities to fight impunity. We are waiting for these
investigations to be completed and their findings to
be announced. Therefore, I hope that members of the
Security Council will not jump to conclusions and
instead wait until the Sudanese authorities - which have
the competence, the capability and the determination to
carry out this task - finalize their investigation and
hold the perpetrators accountable.

I hope that the Council will not interfere in the
political internal affairs of the Sudan. Its members
can rest assured that the noble Sudanese people, with
our deep-rooted civilization and love for our country,
can achieve the objectives of our great revolution. The
Sudanese people can build a promising future in the
service of humankind.

