Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia) (interpretation from French): I have the honour of speaking on behalf of the
African Group.

Since the withdrawal of the United Nations
Operation in Somalia nearly a year ago, the situation in
that country, which remains uncontrollable, continues to
worsen. That constitutes a source of anxiety for the
international community.

In the Nairobi declaration of 24 March 1994, the
factions expressed their intention to work towards national
reconciliation. That has not come about, and disagreement
persists over the formation of a national Government.
Meanwhile, sporadic fighting continues, creating constant
insecurity and exacerbating rivalries between the factions,
which only increases the general frustration at the
inability to restore lasting peace in Somalia. Humanitarian
activities and the delivery of international assistance are
seriously hampered.

Given these conditions, we believe that there is no
alternative but to intensify efforts to lead the Somali
factions towards achieving solidly-based national
reconciliation so that they can dedicate themselves to the
reconstruction of their country.

 

I pay tribute to the Secretary-General, who, through
his representative, the Director of the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia, continues to follow
developments closely. He is working steadily to encourage
the Somali factions to reach agreement, while lending
support to initiatives aimed at achieving the same end.

Regionally, the Organization of African Unity -
especially through the central organ of its Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution - has
consistently been addressing the political and humanitarian
situation in Somalia and encouraging activities that may
contribute to the restoration of lasting peace in the country.

Meeting in Addis Ababa from 26 to 28 February 1996,
the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity urged the Somali leaders to pursue dialogue with a
view to establishing a broad-based national authority for
achieving national reconciliation. The African Ministers
also decided that the tripartite mission, comprising Ethiopia,
Tunisia and the Secretariat of the Organization of African
Unity, would make a further visit to Somalia to maintain
direct contact with the various Somali factions and assess
the situation on the ground.

In addition to those efforts, we believe that the
international community must mobilize in order to express
resolutely its commitment to the Somali people. It should
coordinate its actions so as to give the Somali people some
hope of returning to normal life, and eliminate the feeling
that they have been abandoned to their fate.

To that end, we urge that the following actions be
taken. First, the Security Council should pursue and
reinforce its interest in the question of Somalia, the first
step being to send a mission to explore the prospects for
national reconciliation. Secondly, a common strategy should
be adopted by the United Nations, the Organization of
African Unity, the League of Arab States and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference with a View to
facilitating national reconciliation. Thirdly, a joint mission
should be dispatched, consisting of high-level
representatives of international and regional organizations,
to convey to the leaders and factions the desire of the
international community to help the Somali people
overcome the grave crisis threatening its survival. This has
already been advocated by the League of Arab States.
Fourthly, an attempt should be made, using independent
political figures of international stature, to narrow the gap
between the different positions and attitudes of the factions.
Fifthly, the United Nations Office in Nairobi should be
strengthened in two ways: by appointing to its head either
an Assistant Secretary-General or a Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and by giving it the financial and
human resources to enable it to discharge its task
properly. At a later stage it would be advisable to
consider transferring the Office to Mogadishu if progress
has been made with regard to security guarantees by the
Somali factions.

Some of these activities and initiatives - none of
which precludes any of the others - could be
implemented soon, while others would require more
favourable circumstances. Such activities would prove the
determination of the international community to give
Somalia the support and assistance it needs to emerge
from the tragedy it has endured for years.

I hail the tireless endeavours carried out in Somalia
by the specialized agencies and by other humanitarian
agencies. In the face of the difficulties they face as they
strive to carry out their tasks, they have provided
continuous assistance with a view to meeting essential
food, social and educational needs. The return of large
numbers of refugees has only added to the problems faced
by those who organize these emergency assistance
operations.

In the light of the role played by humanitarian
activities in preventing a return to the tragic plight the
population endured, and in particular in addressing a
deteriorating health situation, malnutrition and the threat
of famine, these must be strengthened through increased
support from the international community. There is hardly
any need to emphasize how essential it is to ensure the
safety and security of these activities, so that the
population can benefit from this assistance under the best
possible conditions. In this connection, the embargo on
the supply of arms to the factions must be scrupulously
applied. Member States must ensure full compliance, defy
would-be traffickers and refrain from any violations.

It is urgent that the Somali factions return to the
negotiating table and enable dialogue to prevail if they are
to break this deadlock, which is only prolonging the
suffering of the people. We believe that only the Somalis
themselves can restore peace and stability to their
country. The political will of faction leaders to effect
national reconciliation without exclusions is the principal
condition for achieving that objective.

