Mr. Mendoza-Garcia (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Costa Rica thanks the French presidency
for convening this open debate on the protection of
civilians in the context of peacekeeping operations.
This initiative is of great importance to my country,
and we urge the Council to pursue this healthy practice,
which enriches the debate and political dialogue of
the Council.

We have analysed the concept note that has been
circulated (S/2016/503, annex) and the report of the
Secretary-General of May 13 (S/2016/447), and we
wish to refer to some of the issues raised therein.

Costa Rica shares with the Secretary-General the
sense that most ofthe deaths, suffering and displacement
of civilians in armed conflict could be prevented if
the parties involved respected the fundamental norms
of international law and human rights law. We are
alarmed by the atrocities committed against civilians,
the disregard for human life, the rape of women and
girls, indiscriminate and deliberate attacks on civilians,
including the bombing of schools and places of worship,
the use of children as human bombs to carry out suicide
bombings and as soldiers, the kidnapping and killing
of humanitarian workers and journalists, and the
destruction of hospitals and ambulances.

That is why we join the voices that advocate
the non-use of schools and universities for military
purposes in armed conflict. In that regard, Costa Rica
categorically condemns terrorism and urges the Security
Council to redouble its efforts to combat these acts of
barbarism, in the framework of international law, to
consider options to use the sanctions committees more
effectively to that end, and to bring those responsible to
justice. Justice is necessary ifpeace is to be sustainable.

Costa Rica reiterates its concern over and strong
condemnation of the repeated instances of sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations troops who
have been entrusted with the protection of civilians,
discredited international efforts and let down those
they were supposed to to protect. In this regard, we
support the zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse and other criminal conduct, and we advocate
in favour of accountability at all levels so as to ensure
that those responsible face the consequences of their
criminal acts. Impunity cannot be accommodated.

Costa Rica recognizes the importance of and is
pleased that the Security Council, in resolution 2272
(2016), has welcomed the Secretary-General's enhanced
programme of action to prevent and combat sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations personnel, and
we call on States to cooperate with its implementation.
In most cases, the United Nations represents the last
glimmer of hope for communities and victims. The
Organization cannot fail in protecting civilians. Cases
of sexual exploitation and abuse perpetrated by its
own officials damage the credibility of peacekeeping
operations, a fundamental pillar of the Organization.
They prevent the implementation of peacekeeping
mandates and warp the local population's perception of
the Organization's fairness with.

The protection of civilians must be a State priority

and points to the need to find Viable political solutions
to conflicts and ensure that there will be no impunity
for crimes committed against civilians, as well as to
work in close coordination with humanitarian and
community organizations in the field, which can be of
great help in the early detection of threats to civilians.
However, the international community must also act to
end the proliferation and international sale of weapons,
explosives and cluster munitions through the signing
and ratification of the Arms Trade Treaty, including
its provision concerning the gender Violence criterion;
the signing and ratification of the 2008 Convention
on Cluster Munitions; the strengthening of the
International Criminal Court through the signing of the
Rome Statute; and above all the signatories' respect for
and adherence to its provisions, as well as the guarantee
that cases referred by the Security Council enjoy the
financial resources needed to ensure the fulfillment of
the Court's duties.

In addition, the waves of international displaced
persons and refugees require the international
community to take concrete action to support these
people in mitigating their vulnerability and finding
protection in their host communities. We must not lose
sight of the fact that a new approach that takes into
account the Sustainable Development Goals and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1) is needed, and that it imposes on us the challenge
not to leave anyone one behind.

