Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): We welcome the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General back
to the Council and thank him for his briefing. We also
thank our Afghan colleague for hers. I am very pleased
to welcome Ms. Samar back to the Council; I knew her
well when I was in Kabul two years after she became
the first civil society briefer on Afghanistan. I think it
is now more important than ever that we hear the very
strong voice of civil society, and we thank her for all
her work on this vital dossier.

The Afghan Ambassador already announced
the joint initiative that Afghanistan and the United
Kingdom have undertaken to launch a group of friends
of women in Afghanistan. We are very proud to be part
of this, as it is a very good joint initiative, ifI may say
so. The group will bring together women ambassadors
and senior United Nations figures to work to highlight
and protect the gains that Afghan women have achieved
over the past 18 years. It is also a very good vehicle to
give meaningful practical expression to resolution 1325
(2000) and to promote the participation of women in
peace efforts and in public life.

As we all know, there are two main themes of
today's debate: peace and elections. We, the United
Kingdom, share the interest of other Council members
in reiterating that a political solution is the only way
to end the conflict. The ongoing efforts of the Afghan
Government and the United States - in particular the
United States Special Representative for Afghanistan
Reconciliation, Zalmay Khalilzad - are making
important progress towards a sustainable peace process.

The United Kingdom fully supports all efforts to
convene a genuine political process to give Afghans the
chance to decide the future of their country. This will,
naturally, require the full support of the region as well
as the international community. I therefore hope we can
stay united in a call for intra-Afghan peace negotiations
without delay and with the full involvement of both
sides to the conflict, and the legitimate Government of
Afghanistan in particular.

I would like to echo what the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General said about calling on Member
States to use their influence to encourage the Taliban
not only to show the leadership and foresight required
to engage in talks, but also to take the practical steps
that are undoubtedly required on the path to peace.

We have talked a little bit about women's
participation. There is a lot ofevidence ofhow important
this is and, as efforts progress, we encourage women's
involvement in all forums, whether they involve local
or State-level negotiations in Kabul.

Turning to the elections, as many other speakers
have highlighted today, these are crucial for future
political stability. We know that the atmosphere is
already charged, three months ahead of election
day, so I would like to call on all political actors to
behave responsibly and constructively for the sake
of Afghanistan's stability. We encourage the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
to redouble its efforts, with the Special Representative
at the helm, to support and advise the election
management bodies.

I would also like to take this opportunity to urge the
Independent Election Commission to continue its work
to deliver timely and credible elections on 28 September.
As the Special Representative highlighted, the timeline
is tight, meaning we need a sustained effort by everyone.
We welcome the commitment to securing elections that
Afghanistan Ambassador was able to set out today, and
we urge the Afghan security forces to do their utmost
to provide the conditions to allow the Afghan people to
exercise their right to vote in safety.

A number of speakers have mentioned civilian
casualties. We share the concern at the high level of
civilian casualties, which underlines the human cost
of the conflict. All parties need to take immediate
measures to avoid the killing of innocent civilians,
including women and children. The United Kingdom
will continue to support the Afghan security forces in
improving their capacity to provide security for the
population and to implement the national policy on
civilian casualty mitigation.

In conclusion, I would just like to reaffirm the
United Kingdom's commitment to supporting the
Government and people of Afghanistan in order to
achieve a peaceful and prosperous future.

