Mr. Baja (Philippines): Mr. President, I would
like to thank you and your delegation for having
organized this important debate on the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC). This meeting is taking
place at a critical juncture for the Security Council and
aims to take stock of the continuing threat of
international terrorism and to find ways to improve the
Council's response to this menace, primarily through
the unique work of the CTC. I thank most sincerely
Ambassador Arias, Chairman of the CTC, for his report
today on the Committee's work and on the innovations
needed to revitalize the CTC.

There is broad agreement that terrorism is one of
the defining threats to international peace and security
in the twenty-first century. The catalytic moment in
everyone's consciousness regarding the seriousness of
that threat occurred on 11 September, even though the
Security Council has been confronting that menace for
many decades, starting from the assassination in 1948
of Count Bernadotte, the United Nations mediator in
Palestine.

The international community is beginning to
understand the full extent of the distinct and formidable
challenge posed by terrorism to international peace. We
all realize that the threat of terrorism necessitates a
creative and determined response that is outside of the
usual box from which we draw ideas. Terrorism
operates on a paradigm that is based on the use of
modern technology, which otherwise provides creature
comforts to many. Terrorist information is acquired and
conveyed through e-mail and the Internet. Terrorist
money is transferred through banking facilities or the
use of the telephone and other convenient modes of
communication. Terrorists themselves travel by
aeroplane and have, tragically, used them as weapons
to attack. Terrorism has a very different feel from
twentieth-century causes of conflicts, because it
proceeds from a radical and ideological framework that
defies the standard political and military calculations
applied to traditional threats to the peace.

In the face of such an enemy, nothing short of a
global war that relies on strong international
partnership and cooperation is required. Terrorism has
no rational leadership with which negotiations for
peace are possible. It is, rather, a different form of
warfare, in whose context the Security Council's
methods should be as creative, inventive and
imaginative as those employed by terrorists, who take
advantage of post-modern amenities in their actions.

While we recognize the need for innovation in the
fight against terrorism, our efforts - even if they are
based on Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter -
must be established on and rooted in the bedrock of
cooperation and synergy among all Member States. The
Security Council must emphasize the fact that the
international community's capacity to overcome the
challenge of terrorism should be energized by States'
finding common interests and purposes rather than by
legalistic ideas of enforcement and mandatory
obligations.

Resolution 1373 (2001) has been the cornerstone
of the Security Council's counter-terrorism measures.
We are now in the tenth quarterly work programme of
the CTC. The past two and a half years have shown the
need to improve the working methods and structure of
the CTC. This transformation will require innovative
changes, which are outlined in the 19 February report
of the CTC and have been ably presented by
Ambassador Arias. We hope that the Council can adopt
a resolution along the thrusts and structural changes
outlined by Ambassador Arias.

The fight against terrorism poses a huge
challenge to the United Nations, particularly the
Security Council. The institutional and legal
instruments that our 1945 forebears have bequeathed us
under the Charter to respond to threats to peace,
breaches of the peace and acts of aggression might not
have foreseen the serious threat which terrorism
presents today to international peace and security.
However, while the Charter would appear limited in
that sense, it is, at the same time, sufficient to provide
the Security Council with appropriate means to meet
that challenge.

As the Security Council deliberates on various
proposals to improve the working methods and
structure of the CTC, we hope that Member countries
will embrace the changes that may seem outside the
usual mould but are required to help States wage an
effective battle against terrorism. In the same vein,
While employing innovation and creativity in carrying
out some degree of transformation of the CTC, the
Council should continue to uphold the important and
timeless principles enshrined in the Charter to ensure
the full cooperation of everyone in the important task
of combating terrorism.

I would like to end by emphasizing one theme.
The global effort against terrorism requires the
Security Council and the rest of the membership of the
United Nations to remain committed partners if success
is to be achieved in eradicating the scourge of
terrorism.

