Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to share some reflections, in my personal
capacity, with members of the Security Council before
concluding my mandate as Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities. These have been two
important years for me, for the Committee and for
Argentina. It has also been a professional privilege for
me and a challenge to preside over it.

According to the sixth and last report of the
Monitoring Team, the Al-Qaida threat has decreased in
certain places, such as Iraq; unfortunately, for
fundamentally political reasons, in other areas it has
stayed at the same level or increased. At the same time,
Al-Qaida appears to be working with more complex
methods, as is the case in North Africa, in Asia and in
the bosom of Western civilizations.

We are aware in this Council, and as participants
in the Council's mission can bear witness, of the
increasingly grave situation in Afghanistan, where the
Taliban insurgence is regaining intensity and growing
in numbers. It is allied with drug trafficking, which
activates a vicious circle of terrorism, violence and
corruption. We personally believe that the sanctions
regime could better be utilized, with a greater number
of requests to include Al-Qaida members on the list or
to adequately reflect the Taliban structure in
Afghanistan. A more marked separation in the
treatment of both lists could contribute to a better focus
on listing and delisting of the Taliban and to more
effective influence on the complex political and
military processes in that country. I would point out
that this is a personal opinion and not that of the
Committee.
06-67222

We believe that if we are going to be effective,
we must act in unison in the fight against terrorism. We
must also fully respect human rights. I believe that to
be a moral imperative, reaffirmed in the Outcome
document of the 2005 Summit and in the United
Nations Global Strategy against Terrorism. Argentina
has presided over the Committee for the past two years
with that balance as it goal. We have made every effort
to be impartial, while accommodating all the positions
of the Committee members, and have always modified
our own position to accommodate consensus.

I would like to emphasize that, in addition to
incorporating into the Consolidated List the names of
new individuals and entities, we have made great
progress in improving the quality of the List by adding
more identifying elements. The Monitoring Team has
continued to do meaningful work in that respect,
especially as regards Afghanistan.

The process of renegotiation and improvement of
the Committee's guidelines has been arduous and
complex. It was just a few days ago that we were able
to reach consensus on the new chapter 6, concerning
listing. I believe that has to be considered important
progress.

Henceforth, States are urged to consult with the
State of residence or nationality of the potential person
or entity to be listed in order to seek out additional
information. Inclusion in the List must be based on a
statement of the case, along with a series of elements
of reasonability or proof. New rules have also been
included in the guidelines to improve transparency and
publicity, such as the use of a cover page and a revision
clause.

Yesterday, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1730 (2006), which originated in a proposal
by some members of the Council to set up a focal point
in the Secretariat where those included in the List can
request and justify delisting. I once again would like to
acknowledge the active participation of all members of
the Committee in those difficult negotiations.

Several countries, including Argentina, would
have liked greater progress as regards an independent
revision mechanism, for example. However, we must
be realistic and understand that this is an evolving
regime in which changes occur to improve the
situation. I believe that the implementation of the
5
revised directives and the new focal point system will
allow us to see an improvement in the way the system
functions with these new rules. It is to be expected that
the sanctions regime will continue to be improved in
the future. The Council and the Committee must be
transparent and open to the necessary adjustments
demanded by the international community in order to
act expeditiously.

Consensus often slows us down, but we must not
waver. The list of issues on hold should therefore be
reduced. Let us not forget that, while the individuals
who are on the List are in a certain way stigmatized
and isolated - and in many cases accused of crimes -
the main problem is that individuals who will, or are
about to, commit terrorist acts are not yet on the List,
and we do not even know who they are. In that regard
States should, and often can, identify those individuals
and entities so that they may be incorporated into the
List.

Visits to various countries and international
organizations were an important aspect of our
presidency. Members of the Committee, the Monitoring
Team and the Secretariat visited Germany, European
institutions in Brussels, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime in Vienna, as well as Chad,
Nigeria, Syria, Japan, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Yemen,
Qatar and Indonesia. In addition, I participated in
regional meetings of heads of intelligence and security
of Middle Eastern and North African countries. I
believe that those meetings are very important and
should be continued in the future, given that
anti-terrorism officials meeting in the field to exchange
specific information and express their perceptions and
concerns provide input for the Committee. Those
meetings, which provide us a first-hand global
perspective, are a key element to success in the fight
against Al-Qaida and the Taliban.

I am also pleased to highlight the signing and
effective functioning of the agreement with Interpol,
which is a key multilateral body in the fight against
crime and terrorism. The positive experience in the
cooperation carried out through the Committee and the
Monitoring Team led to the adoption of resolution
1699 (2006). That resolution will also expand
cooperation to other sanctions committees.
The complex negotiations on the revision of the
directives on listing and delisting did not make it

possible for us to address the issue of the criminal use
of the Internet by Al-Qaida this year with the rigor and
time we would have liked - and which the issue
deserves - in line with the various positions of the
members of the Council. I should like to point out that
there are about 5,000 websites that daily distribute the
propaganda of international terrorism. Those websites
also serve to coordinate networks, recruit new
members and raise funds.

The harnessing of information and modern
technology by the Al-Qaida terrorist organization is
one of the most pressing and sensitive issues for
intelligence and security officials in many countries
affected by terrorism, especially in the Middle East.
We believe that the Committee and the Security
Council must address that issue, which encompasses
various aspects - from expanding the sanctions
regime to making suggested recommendations to
Governments. Moreover, new technologies could also
be used to stop the spread of terrorism and its
propaganda.

We have attempted to maintain an active and
regular dialogue with the full membership of the
United Nations. To that end, we held open meetings
and invited all countries that wanted to come before the
Committee. We believe that non-members of the
Committee that are responsible for implementing
sanctions and that suffer from the terrorism perpetrated
by Al-Qaida and the Taliban should take greater
advantage of such opportunities in the future.

I wish to emphasize before the Council that the
President's efforts and the Committee's proper
functioning would not have had the same results
without the constant support of the Monitoring Team. I
should therefore like to extend my gratitude to
Mr. Richard Barrett and his entire team for their high
degree of professionalism, judgment and steadfast
support. My work, as well as that of Counsellor
Malpede and Secretary Kendall, who also presided
over the Committee, enjoyed the daily support of the
Secretariat team. My delegation believes that the
members of the Organization and the Council should
continue to provide the adequate financial, human and
technical resources to the Monitoring Team and the
Secretariat in order that they may continue to ensure
the efficient functioning of the Committee and the
implementation of the resolutions of the Security
Council.
Sanctions are an important weapon in the fight
against Al-Qaida. The important work of the 1267
Committee will not be sufficient if the political, social
and economic causes from which the Al-Qaida
terrorism also stems are not addressed. Therefore, if
they wish to prevail - and I think we all wish to
prevail- the Security Council and the international
community should redouble their efforts to achieve a
just peace in the Middle East and the social and
economic development of the region, as well as, and in
particular, of Afghanistan.

International terrorism is now one of the greatest
new threats to humanity. If we have reached the
twenty-first century with great progress in several
areas, including science and technology and, in
particular, the economy, that progress has been through
the efforts of everyone. It is difficult to understand how
some individuals manifest their frustrations and try to
achieve their objectives through barbaric means
including by killing civilians, destroying countries and
sowing discord and distrust among States.

The United Nations, our Organization, has played
a very important role over the past 60 years and now
has the task of confronting and preventing international
terrorism. That is why I feel honoured and proud
that - even if for a limited time - I was part of that
effort.

