Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation welcomes the convening of
this meeting and reiterates our gratitude to Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, and his
entire team for their work and for keeping us informed
on a monthly basis about the humanitarian situation in
Syria.

The shifting of the subject of this meeting from
the political to the humanitarian briefing - the former
originally slated for next week - led my delegation
think that some development must have occurred that
would make it possible to address the humanitarian
issue in Syria with optimism and hope. Unfortunately,
that is not the case. Despite the enormous human and
financial resources mobilized and deployed by the
United Nations and its humanitarian partners, the
situation on the ground remains alarming. Since the
beginning of the conflict in Syria, enough has been
said about the humanitarian situation and a number of
reports have been produced that have led to the same
conclusion, which is that the humanitarian situation
remains extremely precarious, mainly due to increased
hostilities in various parts of the country.

The Government of Equatorial Guinea remains
concerned about the recent escalation of violence
in various parts of the country, such as Idlib, where
efforts must be redoubled to maintain the detente
and ensure the demilitarization of the area, as agreed
last September, and protect the civilian population.
Furthermore, the reports of an alleged chemical attack
at the end of November in Aleppo and the routine
targeting of Deir ez-Zor by counter-terrorism operations
require swift and decisive responses from the Council
in order to protect thousands of families who, as the
conflict continues, are losing their loved ones. Once
again, we emphasize the need for the warring parties
to comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law. Nothing justifies the deliberate use
of explosive weapons in populated areas or the use of
chemical substances as a weapon of war. As such, we
voted in favour of resolution 2449 (2018), on United
Nations assistance in Syria, because we believe that
the resolution is essential for cross-border operations.
We hope that its adoption will, in turn, alleviate the
suffering of the Syrian people. We thank Ambassador
Mansour and Ambassador Skoog for facilitating the
drafting, negotiation and adoption of the resolution.

As the Secretary-General clearly describes in his
report (S/2018/1104) and according to data from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
cross-border deliveries of humanitarian aid remain
an indispensable lifeline for hundreds of thousands of
people throughout Syria. Food aid reached an average
of more than 750,000 people each month in the first
nine months of 2018 as a result of the cross-border
activities of the United Nations. There is no doubt
that after many years of ongoing conflict, the Security
Council, whose decisions are binding, should continue
to play a key role in shaping Syria's future. It should do
so by bringing forward any initiatives that may one day,
as someone once said, heal the wounds of the suffering
body of Syria. And that should always be done with full
respect for the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of the country. The Government
of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea will continue to
prioritize a political solution to the conflict and calls
once again for members of the Council to pay more
attention to swiftly establishing and operationalizing
the constitutional committee, in accordance with the
outcomes of Syria's National Dialogue Conference and
resolution 2254 (2015).

