Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like to thank the delegation of Jordan for having convened
this open debate and for having drafted the concept note
(S/2014/30, annex). I should also like to thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, for his briefing.

We will approach this statement not from the point
of view of crisis management but, rather, from that of
the preventive function that this principal organ of the
United Nations is called upon to play pursuant to the
Charter of the United Nations.

My country is convinced that the best approach
in terms of protecting the civilian population and
for an efficient use of resources is the exercise of an
active preventive diplomacy, understood in the terms
expressed in the unique document entitled "An agenda
for peace". That means using the instruments that the
Security Council has at its disposal to take

"action to prevent disputes from arising between
parties, to prevent existing disputes from escalating
into conflicts and to limit the spread of the latter
when they occur" (5/24111, para. 20),

without forgetting that, in all cases, conflict prevention
is a crucial responsibility of Member States.

A prevention strategy includes a commitment to the
strengthening of the rule of law, respect for international
law and for existing treaties, and the recourse to peaceful
means for the settlement of disputes, with democratic
institutions and practices that respect human rights, all
of which, in the final analysis, would make it possible
to establish a climate conducive to achieving greater
levels of development and social justice.

In that context, we underscore that it would be
useful to strengthen early warning systems and the role
that regional and subregional organizations can play in
conflict prevention, in accordance with Chapter VIII
of the Charter. Through their geographical and cultural
proximity, as well as their better understanding of
the causes of the conflicts and the sensitivities of the
various parties, such organizations can make a valuable
contribution to such endeavours. Developing effective
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organization is therefore crucial.

Furthermore, the role of civil society organizations
in identifying early signs of violence and the capacity
of such organizations to provide warning of dangerous
situations to national and international authorities are
crucial. We emphasize in particular the contribution
and role that women must play in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding. We
stress the importance of their equal participation
in such processes and the importance of seeking to
ensure and increase their representation in all levels
of decision-making, in keeping with provision of
resolution 1325 (2000).

The sort of preventive diplomacy proposed would
avoid the fracturing of societies and the recurrence
of conflict. Prevention strategies must include
reconciliation processes in societies emerging from
conflict. That is an issue at the heart of the Jordanian
initiative in holding this debate. It was precisely "Post-
conflict national reconciliation: role of the United
Nations" that my country chose as a theme during its
presidency of the Security Council in January 2004,
under which the presidential statement cited by the
Permanent Representative of Jordan (S/PRST/2004/2)
was adopted.

We view reconciliation as both a goal - something
to be achieved - and a process - a way of achieving
that goal. We see it, therefore, as playing a preventive
role, whereby, recognizing divisions, we can anticipate
and avoid potential conflicts. On the other hand,
with regard to existing conflicts, it would allow for
the rapprochement of opposing parties. The process
of reconciliation is far-reaching, deep, specific and
differentiated and must necessarily be inclusive. Only
in that manner can we address the root causes of the
divisions and prejudices that exist. It also is a process
that will be different for each society and can not be
imposed from the outside, and it is one in which the
role of the United Nations should be one of assistance,
facilitation and support.

Reconciliation is not and should not, be a substitute
for justice or accountability. Indeed, in order to be
effective, reconciliation must be based on truth, justice
and reparation. Recent United Nations instruments,
such as the Updated Set of Principles for the Protection
and Promotion of Human Rights through Action to
Combat Impunity (E/CN.4/2005/102/Add.1) of the
Economic and Social Council or, even more recently,
resolution 68/165 of the General Assembly, entitled
"Right to the truth", recognize the importance of
respecting and upholding those rights in order to end
impunity and promote and protect human rights.

In that context, we recall the reference to transitional
justice made by the Special Rapporteur on the
promotion of truth, justice, reparation and guarantees
of non-recurrence, which is to be understood not as a
special kind of justice, but as a strategy precisely for
realizing the right to justice, truth, reparation and
non-recurrence.

The President of the Republic of Chile recently
recalled before the General Assembly at its present
session that, last September, our country "marked
the fortieth anniversary of the most far-reaching and
lasting upheaval ever to affect our democracy" and "the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the start of the peaceful
recovery of our democracy" (A/68/PV5, p. 25). On that
occasion, President Pifiera Echefiique enumerated a
number of lessons learned. The first is that no conflict,
whether external or internal, ever justifies violence
as a means of political action or the abuse of human
rights. Secondly, democracy, peace and civic friendship
are much more fragile values than we tend to believe,
meaning we should never take them for granted. Thirdly,
there is a very close relationship between the quality
of democracy, economic progress and social justice, as
they nourish one another and are mutually reinforcing.
And fourthly, we must learn from our experiences so as
to avoid repeating mistakes.

To establish the truth about what happened in
my country, investigatory bodies and the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission were established, with the
task ofinvestigating history and determining what had
occurred, making recommendations, and suggesting
modalities for reparations and for prevention. The legal
instrument that established the Commission recognized
that

"... only on the basis of the truth will it be possible
to meet the basic demands of justice and create the
necessary conditions for achieving genuine national
reconciliation Only by knowing the truth can
the dignity of victims be restored in the public
consciousness and bereaved families be allowed
the possibility of honouring them properly ..."

Of equal importance is the need to recognize their
suffering, so that such suffering never recurs.

Allow me, Mr. President, to refer to the 2012
report of the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the
promotion of truth, justice, reparation and guarantees
of non-recurrence, who stated that, since 2000,
prosecutions have been initiated or completed with
regard to 76 per cent of victims of disappearances and
executions in Chile (A/67/368). My country continues
working today, in its process of reconciliation, and
we stand ready to share our experiences with those
members of the international community who deem
them useful.

I conclude by calling on the Security Council to
support the following specific actions: strengthen
preventive diplomacy initiatives and early warning
systems, so that they can send appropriate alarm
signals and react in a timely and effective way; promote
the strengthening of mechanisms for the peaceful
settlement of disputes and systems of human rights
protection, at the international, regional and subregional
levels; strengthen the activities of the subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission, so that the assistance that they provide
to Governments in post-conflict countries incorporates
truth and reconciliation as a main axis oftheir work; and
strengthen the mandates of peacekeeping operations
elements that support post-conflict political processes.

