Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
commends the initiative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela to convene today's open debate. We are
pleased to see you, Madam Minister, presiding over
this meeting here in New York. I thank the Secretary-
General for his briefing.

At present, international affairs are undergoing an
historic, accelerated process of change. Humankind is
facing unprecedented development opportunities and
newly emerging threats and challenges. The Charter
of the United Nations arose from the ravages of the
Second World War. It reflected humankind's profound
retrospection on the two world wars and charted a
grand blueprint whereby the people of the planet could
work together to build a beautiful world.

In today's world, the Charter remains a tower of
strength of great vitality and unmitigated relevance.
The international community must bear history firmly
in mind, steadfastly preserve the fruits of the victorious
anti-fascist world war and firmly defend the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations by
focusing on the following areas.

First, we must work vigorously to make international
relations more democratic and subject them to more
effective rule of law. Important principles enshrined
in the Charter - including respect for national
sovereignty, territorial integrity, peaceful settlement of
disputes and non-interference in the internal affairs of
States - are the cornerstones of modern international
law and international relations. Our only option is to
reinforce them, not weaken them.

It is imperative to adhere to the five principles
of peaceful coexistence in international relations and
respect each country's prerogative to choose its own
development path and social system independently. It is
imperative to uphold the sovereign equality of all States
entitled to participate in the formulation of international
rules and to exercise their rights under the law on an
equal footing. The world's destiny must remain in the
hands of all peoples. International justice and equality
must be upheld. Uniform rules must be applied in
distinguishing between right and wrong, promoting
peace and pursuing development. It is imperative to
abide by international law and universally agreed basic
norms of international relations, and give full play to
the important role of the United Nations in international
affairs, while safeguarding the mandate and authority of
the Security Council in matters involving international
peace and security.

Secondly, we should vigorously promote
international cooperation in all its aspects. We must
do away with all forms of Cold War mentality and
predilections for a zero-sum game, and instead embrace
the new notions of win-win for multi-stakeholders and
winning for all, so as to forge global partnerships at the
international and regional levels, weave cooperation
into all aspects of international interactions in the
political, economic, security and cultural domains,
and build a human community of common destiny,
characterized by everyone pulling together in the
same boat and the convergence of interests on an equal
footing. In nation to nation interactions, States should
respect one and other, treat each other as equals and
work together for the good of all. All parties should,
through consultation and cooperation, address major
international and regional issues in order to properly
deal with regional conflicts, terrorism and other
traditional and non-traditional security threats.

Thirdly, we should vigorously promote inclusion,
mutual learning and common development. We
must respect the diversity of civilizations, uphold
openness and inclusiveness, cross-fertilize through
exchanges and mutual benchmarking, and move
forward by seeking common ground while preserving
our differences. We must safeguard and develop an
open world economy, promote robust, sustainable and
balanced growth, improve global economic governance
and realize universal prosperity throughout the world.
We must help each other to our mutual benefit with a
view to effectively implementing the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1). We must join hands in seeking a way forward in
building a global ecological civilization aimed at the
harmonious coexistence of man and nature in order to
realize the sustainable development of the world and
the overall development of humankind.

As a founding Member of the United Nations and
a permanent member of the Council, China was the
first country to sign the Charter of the United Nations.
Over the decades, China has contributed positively to
defending the purposes and principles of the Charter
and promoting the peace, progress and development of
humankind. While attending the summits marking the
seventieth anniversary of the United Nations, Chinese
President Xi Jinping comprehensively elaborated
the concept of building new international relations
focused on cooperation for a win-win situation. He
proposed forging partnerships based on consultation
and accommodation on an equal footing; building a
security landscape ofjustice and fairness by all and for
all; pursuing prospects for open, innovative, inclusive
and mutually beneficial development; promoting
exchange among civilizations that seeks harmony,
respects diversity and embraces and assimilates
equitable sustenance; constructing an ecosystem that
respects nature and seeks green development; and, by
integrating these five elements, elaborating an overall
agenda and pathway of seeking one human community
of common destiny.

That call by China is in line with and builds on the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, and transcends the purview of the traditional
theory of international relations in an innovative spirit.
More importantly, it is a coherent fusion between the
Chinese dream of peace, development and cooperation
to the benefit of all, on the one hand, and the well-being
of all peoples of the world, on the other. It is in tune
with the trend of the times, in line with the common
interest of all nations, and of great significance to
international peace and security. It is a manifestation of
China's responsibility and commitment as a permanent
member of the Council and a large developing country.

This year is the first of the implementation of the
outcomes of the seventieth anniversary summits of the
United Nations and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. This pivotal opportunity should be
seized by the international community in pursuing the
noble cause of world peace and development. China
stands ready to work with the United Nations and its
membership, continue to safeguard the international
order and international system built around the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, join
hands to forge new international relations characterized
by cooperation to the benefit of all, build a community
of common destiny with unity of purpose, and make
ever greater contributions to the peace, development
and the progress of humankind.

