Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): After various setbacks in the Bosnian peace
process, the leaders of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, Croatia, and Bosnia and Herzegovina have
finally reached a comprehensive Peace Agreement, which
represents a breakthrough in the process of the political
settlement of the Bosnian question and creates important
conditions for the settlement of the crisis in the region of
the former Yugoslavia. The Chinese delegation welcomes
this development. We have all along followed closely the
developments in the region, particularly those in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and believe that the initialling of the
Peace Agreement serves the fundamental interests of all
peoples in the region and contributes to peace and
stability in Europe and the world as a whole.

As a Chinese saying goes, "Peace at home brings
prosperity; peace in the country promises success". The
initialling of the Peace Agreement has reflected the
war-weariness of the people in the region and their
sincere desire for peace and a tranquil life at an early
date. However, we have also noted that the initialling of
the Agreement is just the start of a comprehensive
political settlement of the question of the former
Yugoslavia. It is essential to implement the Agreement in
order to translate the desire for peace into reality. We
therefore hope that the parties concerned will cherish this
hard-won peace opportunity by implementing the
Agreement in earnest so as to end for good the four-year
war, thus restoring peace to the region and enabling all
ethnic groups and countries in the region to live in amity.
We hope that the international community will create
favourable conditions for the implementation of the
Agreement.

The international community, the Security Council
in particular, has all along made unremitting political and
diplomatic efforts to push forward the peace process in
the region of the former Yugoslavia. We are of the view
that any action taken by the Council at this critical turn
for the better in the peace process should contribute to,
rather than undermine, the consolidation of the negotiation
results and the realization of peace and stability at an
early date, so as to enable the people in the region to live

 

and work in peace and contentment. Still less should it
trigger an arms race. We fear that lifting the arms embargo
now might have an adverse impact on peace and stability
in the region.

China has never been in favour of exerting pressure by
means of sanctions in the region of the former Yugoslavia,
and stands for an early lifting of sanctions against the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The tremendous efforts
made the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to promote the
Bosnian peace process should be acknowledged by the
international community. It should be pointed out that it is
extremely inappropriate to link the lifting of sanctions
against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia with the holding
of elections in Bosnia. Such a practice is unheard of. We
believe that this will set a bad precedent and therefore
express our serious reservations, which we request to have
placed on record. We also deem it necessary to consider
addressing the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia's status in
the United Nations after the Peace Agreement is signed by
all parties.

Based on our principled position of supporting the
peaceful settlement of the question of the former
Yugoslavia, and considering the attitude of the parties
concerned and the desire of the non-aligned countries, the
Chinese delegation will vote in favour of the two draft
resolutions before us.

