Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to join the members of the
Security Council who have preceded me in welcoming
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and thanking him for his report
(S/2019/364, annex) on the implementation of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea reiterates its full
respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and we commend
the commitment of the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, within his mandate, to promote the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement. We
recognize the efforts made by all Bosnians over the past
decade to achieve national unity and sustainable peace.
Therefore, we believe it is important to highlight two
points in Mr. Inzko's report that we believe are crucial
in that context.

First, we note with concern that six months after
the general elections of October 2018, it has not
been possible to form a Government. As the report
underlines, those delays - in the formation of the
Federation Government and of the State Council of
Ministers and the appointments of some cantonal
governments - both reflect and can have an impact
on the divisions and tensions that exist between the
different ethnic groups in the country.

Secondly, we would like to encourage a focus
on pre-emptive and peacekeeping initiatives. In that
regard, we encourage the Bosnian people to continue
their efforts towards commitment to the rule of law and
respect for the judiciary and its binding decisions.

We encourage the continued development of efforts
and solutions, especially with regard to the electoral
system in the city of Mostar, where no local elections
have been held since 2008. For those reasons, we call
on the parties to work together to strengthen the rule
of law, continue efforts to contain and eliminate ethnic
divisions, crime, corruption, Violent extremism and
terrorism, and intensify their efforts to implement the
5+2 agenda, which are necessary for the closure of the
Office of the High Representative.

On the other hand, we are greatly encouraged by
the positive achievements and developments during
the reporting period, such as the progress on economic
reform and Bosnia and Herzegovina's continued
engagement in the process of Union European
integration. Those advances are an indication that
only by working together with a view to the future can
stability and prosperity be achieved.

To conclude, we cannot but regret the divisive
rhetorical statements that are jeopardizing all the
achievements and efforts made by the parties towards
reconciliation between the different ethnic groups and
communities. We consider that there is still much to
do, so that we must continue to work towards a vision
of a common future that will help to foster a lasting
national unity.

In that regard, we encourage the parties to put ethnic
divisions behind them, refrain from divisive rhetoric and
focus their efforts on creating favourable conditions for
the achievement of national reconciliation and lasting
peace in the country with a view to creating a united,
prosperous and secure Bosnia and Herzegovina.

