Mr. Jingree (Mauritius): Let me first express my
delegation's joy in seeing you, Madam Minister,
preside over our deliberations today. Your presence is a
testimony to the importance which you and your
country attach to the Security Council and my
delegation wishes to pay tribute to your very able team,
led by the distinguished Ambassador Valdivieso, for
the very positive contribution it has made in the work
of the Council.

We also welcome Mr. Helgesen, Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Norway, in today's meeting.

I wish to join other speakers in thanking the
Secretary-General for his introductory message and for
the very comprehensive report before us. Our thanks go
also to Mr. Kenzo Oshima, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Co-
ordinator, for introducing the report of the Secretary-
General, and to the Director-General of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) for
his presentation.

The question of protection of civilians in armed
conflicts has taken on an altogether new dimension in
the world today and constitutes a serious challenge to
the international community. During conventional
wars, civilians, especially women and children,
enjoyed a certain measure of safety and protection in
the sense that the scene of battle was confined to well
known and defined areas and every effort was made to
avoid civilian casualties, in accordance with
international humanitarian laws. Such wars were
mostly fought between State actors which, in one way
or another, subscribed to international treaties.

In today's armed conflicts, which have become
mostly intra-State conflicts, civilians not only lack any
protection, they are in fact, the first and very often
direct victims of the fighting. In many cases, civilians
are specifically used as targets to attract attention,
while in other cases they are used as human shields to
avoid attacks. Most of these conflicts are led by non-
State actors, rebels and warlords who do not feel bound
by any humanitarian treaty.

The recent terrorist attacks in New York,
Washington, Bali and Kenya, which have aimed
principally at causing the greatest loss of civilian lives,
have shown that new instruments need to be devised to
ensure the protection of civilians in these
circumstances. In this context, we fully support the
recommendations of the Secretary-General relating to
the elaboration of an appropriate roadmap to address
these issues. My delegation believes that priority
should be given to the following areas.

It has been established that the proliferation and
trafficking of small arms and light weapons represent a
major cause which continue to fuel armed conflicts
throughout the world, with their devastating effects on
civilians. Likewise, the incomplete disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes in many
regions, especially in those where there is great
mobility of former combatants and rebels groups,
continue to pose a serious threat, not only to civilians,
but also to overall peace and stability. For example,
numerous anti-personnel landmines in several
countries, many of them in Africa, remain a serious
danger to millions of innocent civilians, especially
women and children.

In all these cases, it is imperative that we take a
comprehensive and regional, if not a global approach
towards addressing these issues. Unless we do so,
conflicts will continue and civilians will continue to be
affected. My delegation, therefore, urges the
international community to devote more resources to
such issues and elaborate concrete measures to address
them.

The presence of armed groups and sometimes
their blending with the civilian population result in
situations where civilians become innocent targets of
raids and reprisals by opposing factions or even by
Government forces. Numerous civilian casualties have
been caused by Israeli forces, for example, in their
attempts to pursue suspected leaders of suicide bomb
attacks in the Middle East. In other places, such as in
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the rebels mingle
among the refugees. It is, therefore, important that
those armed elements are separated from ordinary
civilians. More efforts need to be made in the screening
of refugees to ensure that rebels and other armed
elements are not allowed into refugee camps. Since
most refugee camps are located near the borders, such
elements use those camps as their base both to benefit
from refugee services and to carry out their rebel
activities.

The situation of internally displaced persons
during armed conflicts is also of great concern.
Between 25 million and 30 million internally displaced
persons, half of whom are children, have lost their
homes owing to internal conflicts. Statistics show that
the number of the world's internally displaced is larger
now than it has been at any time in the past five years.
Though the primary responsibility for protecting that
group of civilians rests with Governments, the United
Nations and other international agencies have a shared
responsibility to protect and assist the internally
displaced, in particular, during conflicts.

The problem of access by international aid
workers to affected areas also needs particular
attention. In many conflicts, safe and unhindered
access to vulnerable civilian populations by relief
workers is granted only sporadically, if at all. Access is
often denied, and to make matters worse, aid workers
themselves are attacked, kidnapped or harassed. My
delegation unequivocally condemns such behaviour,
which we consider totally unacceptable. We pay tribute
to the scores of international aid workers, particularly
those of the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC), whose Director-General's presence in the
Chamber today we acknowledge, for their courage and
dedication in bringing relief to affected civilian
populations. It is imperative that armed groups,
irrespective of the cause for which they are fighting,
understand that they have to ensure the safety of
civilians and provide unimpeded access to international
aid workers. We, therefore, support the proposal that
conditions for humanitarian access need to be included
in all framework agreements signed between State and
non-State actors.

Unarmed civilians, including children, are
regularly being killed in cold blood during armed
conflicts involving non-State actors. Such criminal acts
cannot remain unpunished. The perpetrators of those
heinous acts against innocent civilians must be brought
to justice through either national or international
courts. With the entry into force of the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), the perpetrators
need to understand that they are no longer beyond the
law. We are pleased to note that attacks intentionally
directed against personnel involved in humanitarian
assistance or peacekeeping missions have also been
categorized as war crimes by the ICC Rome Statute
and that the Court will be able to bring to justice those
responsible for serious violations of humanitarian law.

Finally, we look forward to contributing
constructively to the presidential statement that the
representative of Colombia will soon make. Such an
important issue should be kept high on the Council's
agenda.

