Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I should like to congratulate China on its accession to
the presidency of the Security Council for this month.

This month has witnessed the review of the Security
Council report on the situation in Abyei following the
strategic review of the previous mandate of the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), as
well as debates over the renewal of the current mandate,
as adopted today in resolution 2205 (2015). I should like
to convey my thanks and appreciation to our neighbour
Ethiopia for its efforts to establish peace and security
through UNISFA.

The resolution adopted today stresses in many
of its provisions the importance of implementing the
Agreement between the Government of the Sudan and
the Sudan People's Liberation Movement on temporary
arrangements for the administration and security of the
Abyei Area. It also stresses that the situation can be
resolved only through dialogue between the two parties.
We therefore express our gratitude for the adoption of
the resolution. The 20 June 2011 Agreement, the 29 June
2011 Agreement between the Government of the Sudan
and the Government of South Sudan on Border Security
and the Joint Political and Security Mechanism, and
the 30 July 2011 Agreement on the Border Monitoring
Support Mission between the Government of Sudan
and the Government of South Sudan, as well as the
27 September 2012 Agreements on Cooperation and
Security Arrangements should all be implemented and
respected. All of these agreements are a single package
that should be applied without selectivity.

As Council members know, the Implementation
Matrix for the agreements signed between the two
parties has been referred to the Security Council and
issued as an official Council document. We reiterate
our commitment to implementing the agreements and
we believe that the best way to resolve the situation in
Abyei should begin with the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism, as applied through the administration of
the Abyei Police Service. Such a mechanism could fill
any gap in the security and administrative level and
settle the situation once and for all in order to achieve
peaceful coexistance between the Misseriya and Ngok
Dinka communities. There is no alternative to dialogue
to resolve the situation in Abyei. We stress that the
resolution adopted today warns against any unilateral
measures to that end.

With regard to the provisions of the resolution
regarding the preparations of the Government of
the Sudan for the elections in Abyei, I stress that
the situation is normal and should not be a source of
concern. The Abyei Protocol and related agreements
are very clear in that respect. Until the situation is
resolved definitively, Abyei is part of the territory of
the Sudan. All other constituencies in the Sudan are
under similar arrangements, which fall within the
purview of our sovereignty and do not conflict with our
commitment to settling the Abyei situation pursuant to
the aforementioned agreements.

The resolution again stresses concern regarding
the situation of Abyei. The draft paragraph relating to
the referendum held by the Ngok Dinka community
was originally much longer, but we believe that it is
better as it is. However, we appreciate the fact that the
Council has rejected all unilateral arrangements. We
recall that when the Sudanese army withdrew from
Abyei, it did so in accordance with our commitment to
the agreements, the road map adopted by the African
Union and Security Council resolution 2046 (2012),
in which the African Union plan was adopted. At that
time, we reaffirmed our commitment to implementing
the agreements concerning Abyei and the border
security arrangements, including the establishment of
a demilitarized border zone, and to activating the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism.

The Security Council understands that any attempt
to impose unilateral and hasty procedures in Abyei or to
manipulate the situation would be disastrous for Abyei
and only further complicate the situation. We therefore
hope that our brothers in South Sudan will address
the situation and contribute to ending the paralysis,
as we are committed to doing as we seek to establish
cooperation and peaceful coexistence in order to help
the two parties resolve the situation in a sustainable and
peaceful way.

In that regard, we recall that the Sudan and
President Omer Hassan Al-Bashir have sought to
address the strife in South Sudan in a way that would
help to restore stability and security there. Indeed, we
are directly affected by the situation in South Sudan
and are therefore eager to achieve stability there.
Before the referendum was held on South Sudan's
self-determination, we understood that if that country
were separated from us it would never move to another
continent but would be our southern neighbour and
connected to us forever and that we would therefore
have to develop cooperative relations between the two
countries and peoples.

During the course of the new UNISFA mandate
adopted today, we are determined to achieve progress
towards establishing security and administrative
mechanisms in Abyei. We hope that a final settlement
will be achieved there so as to restore peace and
security.

