Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Nigeria's initiative to convene today's
meeting on Ebola. Ithank Dr. Margaret Chan, Director-
General of the World Health Organization (WHO), and
Dr. David Nabarro, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General on Ebola, for their briefings. I listened carefully
to the statements made by Ambassador Antonio,
Mr. Thoresson and Dr. Fallah.

The Ebola epidemic broke out in West Africa
in late 2013. It was the most severe outbreak of the
disease, with the broadest geographical scale and the
longest duration, in the 40 years since the virus was
first discovered. The virus has posed not only a serious
threat to the lives, health and security of the inhabitants
of the affected countries, but also challenges to the
economic and social development of those countries.

Since the epidemic began, the United Nations, the
World Health Organization and other agencies have
taken emergency measures and actively coordinated
with the international community in combating the
epidemic together. At present, thanks to the efforts of
all parties concerned, Ebola prevention and control
have made significant progress and the efforts to
combat the Ebola epidemic have achieved conclusive
results. The Ebola epidemic has seriously impacted
the economic and social development of Sierra Leone,
Guinea, Liberia and other West African countries. The
international community should draw lessons from
the epidemic and focus on the post-Ebola recovery
and reconstruction of the affected countries, with an
emphasis on the following points.

First, poverty alleviation and development must be
accelerated so as to lay a solid material foundation for
the prevention of the recurrence of the Ebola epidemic.
The fundamental reason for which the virus was
able to run rampant throughout the region is poverty.
Only eradicating poverty and achieving development
as soon as possible can ensure a solid material basis
for preventing the epidemic from recurring. The
international community should continue to attach
growing importance to the international development
agenda, effectively increase development assistance,
and actively help the affected countries in developing
their economies, creating employment opportunities,
eradicating poverty, improving livelihoods, developing
expertise, improving national governance and building
the capacities of the Governments concerned to ensure
their peoples" prosperity, health and security.

Secondly, a long-term vision must be developed
to help African countries establish and improve their
public health systems. The Ebola epidemic has revealed
the weaknesses of the public health systems of the
African countries concerned. China hopes that the
international community will help African countries
to build more hospitals and laboratories and purchase
advanced instruments and equipment, while actively
supporting their efforts to establish public health
emergency response and management mechanisms,
improve grass-roots prevention and control systems,
enhance the training of medical personnel, and
strengthen prevention awareness within the general
public, while fully upgrading the necessary hardware
and the software.
Thirdly, coordination and synergies must be
strengthened in the face of such non-traditional security
challenges as the Ebola epidemic. No country can
address these on its own. The international community
should foster a sense of the common destiny of
humankind while it works as one and shares the highs
and the lows together. United Nations bodies such as
the Security Council and WHO, as well as international
financial institutions such as the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund, should strengthen
coordination, bring their own own advantages into
full play, and continue to support the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States, the
Mano River Union and other regional organizations in
playing their special roles in preventing and controlling
the epidemic. They should also help the countries of
West Africa to emerge from the shadow of the Ebola
crisis as soon as possible and achieve socioeconomic
recovery.

Africa is China's good friend and brother. We
have gone through thick and thin together. China
sympathizes with the affected African countries over
the impact the epidemic. Ever since the outbreak of the
epidemic, China has been among the first to provide
assistance and has delivered the most large-scale
foreign assistance in the health sector in its own history,
thereby playing a leading and promoting role in the
international response to the epidemic. On numerous
occasions, China has dispatched large chartered planes
to the three West African countries to deliver goods,
with a cumulative value of $120 million, in the four
rounds of assistance to the affected countries and 13
neighbouring countries. China has also dispatched over
1,200 epidemic disease-control experts and medical
workers, and also helped Sierra Leone and Liberia to
build a biosafety laboratory, an Ebola treatment centre
and other important facilities.

As ofJuly, the Chinese medical assistance team had
tested over 5,000 virus samples and treated over 800
patients. China has also helped the affected countries
train over 13,000 medical workers. Recently, Foreign
Minister Wang Yi of China visited Sierra Leone,
Guinea and Liberia to obtain first-hand information on
the results achieved by the three countries in combating
the epidemic and to learn about the needs and
aspirations of the three countries in terms of their post-
Ebola economic and social reconstruction. At the next
stage, in response to the specific needs of the African
countries, China will enhance its assistance to these
countries in terms of health-care systems, cooperation
in production capacity, infrastructure-building and
human resources development so as to help African
countries accelerate their development and enhance
their capacity to address health emergencies. China is
also carefully studying the recovery plan of the three
West African countries and the Mano River Union,
and is actively considering a new round of assistance
measures.

The Chinese Government will also provide the
United Nations Ebola Multi-Partner Trust Fund with
an additional $5 million in cash to support the United
Nations in its ongoing leading and coordinating role
in the recovery process for the affected areas. China
pays close attention to the health and well-being of
the African people, and is ready to join hands with the
international community to make a greater contribution
to peace and development in Africa.

