Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First and foremost, allow me to thank
Mr. Francois Lounceny Fall, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), and his
team for the comprehensive and enlightening briefing
on the activities of UNOCA in Central Africa.

In the light of the important work being undertaken
by UNOCA in the subregion, allow me, on behalf of
my delegation, to support the extension of UNOCA's
mandate to 31 August 2021 so that it can continue to
fulfil its mandate to hone and take a comprehensive
and integrated approach to the areas of capacity
development for conflict prevention and peacebuilding
in the Central African subregion.

Strengthening the cooperation framework signed
in June 2016 between UNOCA and the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS)
secretariat and closely monitoring the tripartite
agreement signed on 23 May 2011 in Khartoum by the
participating parties are essential to ensuring security
along their shared borders, given the porous nature of
those borders, which is a source of tension. That tension
poses major challenges, which are linked in particular
to arms trafficking, piracy, transnational organized
crime, the proliferation of armed groups, mercenary
activity and maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea.

We urge UNOCA to continue to work hard to create
synergies to promote bilateral cooperation among
neighbouring countries to strengthen cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations - in particular
the African Union, the Economic Community of
Central African States, the Central African Economic
and Monetary Community and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission - on matters of peace, security, and
conflict prevention. In that context, we thank the
Government of the Republic of Chad for hosting the
forty-seventh ministerial meeting of the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions
in Central Africa (UNSAC), which took place from 3 to
7 December in N'Djamena. I would like to point out that
some ofthe issues addressed at that meeting concern the
mercenary activity in the Central African subregion.
That phenomenon is currently of great concern to
the region, given the exponential increases in the
uncontrolled circulation of weapons and the conflicts
taking place in the region, which pose a serious threat
to the peace and security of the States of the subregion.
It should be noted that the mercenary activity that we
have witnessed in the past years is being perpetrated
by adventurers and illegal uncontrolled entities whose
objective is always to destabilize Governments and sow
desolation in the countries they seek to invade.

I would like to recall the statement made by the
President of the Security Council dated 10 August
2018 (S/PRST/2018/17), in which the Council recalls
the important work carried out by the Special
Representative and Head of UNOCA over the past three
years as set out in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/52l). It acknowledges, inter alia, that UNOCA
plays an important role in facilitating inclusive dialogue
in Cameroon, Gabon, Equatorial Guinea, the Republic
of the Congo, Sao Tome and Principe and Chad, and
in promoting stability in the region and preventing
and mitigating electoral and post-electoral crises. I
would also like to recall the letter dated 16 July 2015
addressed to the President of the Security Council by
the Secretary-General (S/2015/554), which informs him
of the extension of UNOCA's mandate to enable the
Regional Office to cover the electoral cycle process in
the subregion.

As we are a country of the Central African subregion
that is integrated into its regional and subregional
economic communities, Equatorial Guinea encourages
Governments and all political actors implicated in
the ongoing politico-military crises of our region to
continue on the path of inclusive internal dialogue and
close regional and subregional cooperation, bearing
in mind that if the subregion in particular and Africa
in general succeed in overcoming these challenges,
it would facilitate the achievement of the African
Union's Agenda 2063. It would be difficult to achieve
that without the participation and involvement of
political actors and the different strata of society in an
inclusive dialogue.

In that perspective, and aware that national
cohesion and the peaceful resolution of conflict can be
achieved only through inclusive national dialogue, His
Excellency Mr. Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, President
of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, convened on
18 July our sixth national political dialogue round
table, in which Mr. Fall and his team participated.
That initiative enabled the pardoning of all political
prisoners on 2 October in commemoration of Equatorial
Guinea's fiftieth anniversary of independence, which
helped bring calm and promote harmony throughout
the country.

We countries of the subregion are highly mindful
of the efforts of the Government of Cameroon to
reach a peaceful and dialogue-based solution to the
internal crisis being faced by the Anglophone regions
of that brother country. We call on the international
community to support the Government's efforts and
to provide UNOCA with the means necessary for it
to continue to carry out its constructive role. The fact
that presidential elections were held in Cameroon a few
weeks ago without major incidents is proof that those
efforts are being carried out. Let us not limit ourselves
to making calls to the Government of Cameroon, let
us also provide it with support so that it can carry out
those efforts to overcome the crisis.

Let me conclude my statement by congratulating
Mr. Fall, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head ofthe United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa, for the excellent work he is doing
in our subregion; for highlighting his ongoing contact
with our Governments; for conducting frequent visits
and promoting dialogue; and for his presence at all the
major political events in each of our countries. All of
that gives him an exhaustive knowledge of the day-to-
day political events in the subregion, as demonstrated
by the briefing he gave us today.

