Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): The Botswana delegation
joins in sincerely commending the presidency of your
country for hosting today's debate and in thanking
you, Madam President, for the very insightful and
comprehensive concept paper (S/2014/75, annex) that
has been produced to guide our deliberations. My
delegation is therefore delighted to have the opportunity
to share perspectives and experiences on the subject
matter of today's debate.

Throughout human history, societies have been
governed through a set of commonly held standards,
cultural values and rules. Those rules are still as
applicable and as relevant today as they were centuries
ago. Even as we define new development frameworks
as modern societies, we continue to cherish these basic
rules, as they not only maintain peace but also govern
relations between States and citizens.
The rule of law requires that a Government, its
officials and the representatives of the people should
be accountable to the people. Such accountability, in
turn, should be clearly set out in the law, which should
also provide remedies in cases of a breach thereof.
Respect for the rule of law is therefore an essential
condition for peace, security, the prevention of conflict,
conflict resolution and post-conflict reconstruction.
Most conflicts, especially in Africa, are attributable
to deficiencies in governance institutions and in the
justice system.

It can be said, therefore, that the rule of law places
obligations on both the State and its citizens, including
civil society, to observe, respect, and, most importantly,
take ownership or have a stake in the legal order of the
country.

These general observations on the rule of law are
equally applicable at the international level, where
relations among States should be based on a clearly
defined framework as set out in the United Nations
Charter. Alignment between national and international
law is therefore critical.

My delegation believes that the rule of law and
accountable governance are the core foundations of
societies, big or small, rich or poor, and that these must
be promoted by the international community in order to
bring about peace in the world.
My delegation is also of the View that social and
economic growth and sustainable development are
closely linked to, and interdependent with, the rule of
law and human rights. Economic development should
not be seen only as a goal for countries or Governments,
but also as a right to which citizens are entitled.

We in Botswana believe that our modest
achievements on the economic front have been
greatly facilitated by our investment in a functioning
democracy, a legal framework that is both clear and
predictable, and respect for the rule of law and human
rights.

My delegation remains gravely concerned at the fact
that the world continues to experience gross violations
of human rights as well as violations of international
law and international humanitarian law. We continue
to be concerned about the ongoing conflicts across
the globe, especially in the Central African Republic,
in Mali, in Syria, in South Sudan and, more recently,
Ukraine, where conflicts have displaced innocent
civilian populations, leaving them stranded without
food, shelter or medical care.

It is our View that States have a duty and an
obligation to protect their citizens. My delegation
therefore supports the notion that the United Nations
system should continue to foster accountability for
gross violations of human rights and serious violations
of international law, and we call on Member States
to fully cooperate with the established mechanisms
mandated by the United Nations or created with its
support to dispense justice.

The events of 21 August 2013, during which
hundreds of people were massacred through the use of
chemical weapons in Damascus, cannot go unaccounted
for. The ensuing conflict and the continued inability of
the Syrian regime to protect its population place a moral
obligation on the international community to come to
the rescue of the suffering masses in that country.

In that respect, we reiterate our long-held position,
which is shared by many Member States, that the
Council must refer the worsening situation in Syria to
the International Criminal Court. We remain steadfast
in our support for the work of the Court as well as that
of the Security Council in their continued efforts to
strengthen the international criminal justice system.

Botswana, as a member of the international
community, pledges to continue to play its part in
promoting the rule of law not only within its borders
but throughout the world. It will continue to support the
efforts of the United Nations system, especially those
that are targeted towards peacekeeping, post-conflict
zones and transitional arrangements.

My delegation remains appreciative of the efforts
of the United Nations system to support national law-
enforcement mechanisms through programmes that
continue to benefit our respective law-enforcement
officers and our judicial and correctional institutions.
That has made an immense contribution to the greater
appreciation of the rule of law at the national level.

