Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): At the outset, Sir, I
should like, on behalf of my delegation, to extend to
you our congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February and to wish you every success in guiding the
work of the Council to a successful conclusion. We
wish also to express our appreciation to your
delegation for initiating today's debate, which is aimed
at developing a comprehensive, coherent and
integrated approach to security sector reform.

My delegation attaches great importance to the
concept of security sector reform, as it constitutes one
of the key elements in the restoration of peace, stability
and normalcy in post-conflict settings. We therefore
note with satisfaction the increased level of awareness
among the general membership of the United Nations
and the international community at large on security
sector reform.

As a country emerging from more than two
decades of armed conflict, Afghanistan is well aware of
the importance of security sector reform in ensuring
security, recovery and development, as well as in
improving human rights and the rule of law in post-
conflict countries.

Security sector reform has served as the linchpin
of the entire State-building process in Afghanistan.
That process has also been the flagship of the
international engagement in rebuilding Afghanistan's
security forces and law enforcement agencies. The
security sector reform process in Afghanistan has
consisted of five pillars, each supported by a lead
country in the following areas: military reform, police
reform, counter-narcotics, judicial reform and the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
of former combatants.

The DDR process, launched in October 2003,
marked the beginning of the security sector reform
process in Afghanistan. In accordance with the
programme's mandate, more than 60,000 former
combatants were disarmed and demobilized, with a
view to creating an environment conducive to the
implementation of security sector reform and the
reconstruction process in the country. As the second
phase of our reform process, we embarked upon the
disbandment of illegal armed groups, which is aimed at
disarming military units not registered with the
Ministry of Defence. We remain committed to
concluding this process by the end of 2007, with the
support of our international partners.

Security sector reform has not only facilitated
improvements in the security environment; it has also
served as a precondition for the formation of our
national army and police. Over 35,000 soldiers of the
national army and 62,000 officers of the national police
have been trained. Our goal is to reach the target
strength of a 70,000-strong standing army and a
82,000-strong police force by the end of 2008.
Moreover, additional reforms in the Ministries of
Defence and the Interior have constituted the main
components of the security sector reform process in
Afghanistan. In this regard, a number of steps have
been taken to implement institutional and personnel
reforms to achieve greater professionalism and to
ensure adherence to democratic principles such as
accountability, transparency and respect for human
rights.

Despite our progress, we continue to face
significant challenges in strengthening the capacity of
our security institutions. The lack of resources and
modern equipment and the low salaries of soldiers have
had a drastic impact on the effectiveness of both the
national army and the police to address the prevailing
security challenges in the country. We are thus of the
firm conviction that a sustained level of international
engagement in building the capacity of security
institutions in post-conflict countries should constitute
an essential component of a successful security sector
reform process.

I would like to take this opportunity to express
our appreciation for the unwavering support of the
international community and of donor countries in
assisting the process of reforming our security
institutions. In this regard, we welcome the recent
announcement made by the United States of America
that it will increase its assistance to enhancing the
effectiveness and capacity of our national army and
police. Moreover, we stress the importance of
additional international assistance for the
implementation of our national drug control strategy
and the reform of our judiciary.
Security sector reform is a long-term process that
requires a favourable atmosphere for its
implementation. Our experience in security sector
reform has been particularly challenging, given the
prevailing security environment in the country.

Continued terrorist attacks conducted by groups whose
sanctuaries are located outside Afghanistan, and the
nexus between insecurity and the narcotics trade,
represent the main challenges to a successful security
sector reform process in Afghanistan. In this
connection, I would like to acknowledge the pivotal
role of the international coalition and the NATO-led
International Security Assistance Force in creating
conditions conducive to the implementation of security
sector reform, as well as to the reconstruction and
development of Afghanistan.

On the basis of our experience and lessons
learned, we would like to refer briefly to some of the
issues contained in the concept paper distributed by the
presidency as an annex to document S/2007/72.

First, we must be aware of the fact that security
sector reform is an endeavour that will be achieved
over many years. There is no quick-fix solution.
Reform of the security sector is not just about
disarming former combatants or training and equipping
a new army; rather, it is a long-term process that
requires a particular focus on development. The
objective should be to transform former combatants
back into civilians. In this regard, it will be of
paramount importance to facilitate the provision of
long-term income-generating projects. Doing so will
prevent former combatants from resorting to illegal
activities.

Secondly, we are of the view that national
ownership is an essential component of a successful
and sustainable security sector reform process. In the
case of Afghanistan, security sector reform is
increasingly based on consensus among all segments of
Afghan society. Indeed, without the lead role and
cooperation of the country concerned, efforts to
achieve a successful reform process will risk failure.

Thirdly, we stress the need for enhanced
coordination between the relevant organs and agencies
of the United Nations and other international actors
with a view to achieving a comprehensive, coherent
and integrated approach to security sector reform. In
this respect, my delegation would welcome the
preparation of a report by the Secretary-General
covering existing United Nations-related activities on
security sector reform and including a concrete set of
recommendations for future action. Equally important
is the need to ensure greater coordination among donor
countries and the country concerned in coping with the
challenge of building national capacity.

Finally, we believe that security sector reform
should be addressed as part of an overall strategy to
ensure lasting peace and stability in countries emerging
from conflict. Equal attention must be accorded to
building and strengthening State institutions and to
enhancing the rule of law and good governance if we
are to achieve a successful transition from conflict to
peace in post-conflict countries.

