Mr. Dacie (interpretation from Serbian provided by the delegation): As I said earlier, Ms. Citaku devoted
her time to speaking about the same things she spoke
of previously and levelling accusations related to the
alleged ethnic cleansing of Albanians. She said she did
not speak about false narratives but simply provided
specific precise data. I think that she insulted the
Security Council, member States and representatives,
because she said that this was a charade. I do not know
ifthe Council is ready to accept this statement; I do not
have anything against that. I am much more worried
about other things: the fact that the United States, the
United Kingdom and France have obviously aligned
their position with that of Kosovo concerning the
need for the finalization of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.

So how is this to be interpreted? You say that you
want to be Serbia's partner. Do you believe that it is
enough to carry out the secession process and now say,
we do not need to speak about this anymore? I posed a
question; is someone going to reply to this question?
Is anyone ever going to mention here the more than
200,000 Serbs who were persecuted of whose number
only 1.9 per cent returned? Do you believe that we
should never mention this again?

I was presenting data to the Council from 1981, the
year when the protests started in Kosovo and it started
to ask for independence and for the status of a republic.
Milosevic was not in power at the time; it was the time
of Communist Yugoslavia. At that time, 43,000 Serbs
lived in Pristina. So where are those Serbs today? I
mentioned other towns as well. Are you going to say,
all right, they are not there anymore, and we will not
gather here anymore and talk about it?

All of the large Powers I mentioned have deeply
hurt the Serbian people by their conduct, because
Serbian victims want justice, just as Albanian and all
other victims do. If 1,000 people died between 1999 and
today, and no one was accused in that connection, then
Serbian victims also seek justice. After all, the United
States denies 41 per cent of visa applications from
Kosovo. That is official information. If the situation
in Kosovo is so good, as Ms. Citaku says it is, then
why are Albanians fleeing Kosovo en masse and going
to Europe?

Turning to the Government, the President speaks
of peace and his various initiatives. Mr. Mustafa also
speaks about various initiatives in three municipalities
of central Serbia and says that he has been receiving
representatives from eastern Kosovo. So whom are you
lying to? You are representing only yourself here today,
but in fact you are the people who persecuted hundreds
of thousands of Serbs in Kosovo. Of course, I do not
mean Ms. Citaku personally, but there is no need to
pretend that this never happened at all.

Ms. Citaku spoke of the Kosovo Liberation Army
as the most successful liberation movement, but it is on
the United States list of terrorist organizations. I simply
want to ask Ms. Citaku, when she speaks about this
issue, to bear in mind that Serbia is repaying Kosovo's
debts from the time of Yugoslavia. Why does she not
speak about that? Why not say that she does not want us
to repay their loans? A few million dollars have already
been paid. In one instance Kosovo is Serbia, and in
another it is not.

Anyone who believes that the situation in Kosovo
has been resolved is living in a state of deep confusion.
One Prime Minister has been accused of war crimes
while another is in favour of the unification of Kosovo
and Albania. Without going any deeper, anyone
who believes that it is enough to declare a unilateral
secession to resolve the issue, or that simply recognizing
a country is enough to settle the issue, has forgotten
history and all that happened in the Balkans over the
past century. France and Serbia are strategic partners.
We have a signed agreement. How logical is it to make
such statements here when we have not spoken about
it before?

I do not wish the fate of Serbia on any country. I
hope that what has happened to Serbia happens to no
country represented here. We will certainly not be the
cause of wars. The majority of Albanians from Kosovo
participate in the wars of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant. There are no participants from Serbia there.
If anyone is unaware of that, it would be difficult for
someone from the outside to explain it.

If someone believes that meetings like today's
should no longer take place, I urge them to make that
decision. Let them propose it. Let them propose that
resolution 1244 (1999) be revoked and reversed. Who
is asking Serbia about it? We know the international
situation. We are well aware that such a decision cannot
be adopted in the Security Council; that being the
case, I would ask certain members not to insult Serbia.
Serbia is a proud country that contributed greatly to
the establishment and formation of the United Nations,
unlike other countries that used to welcome Hitler with
flowers. We ended our pact with him on 27 March 1941,
and I would urge no one to forget that.

