Mr. Zambrana Torrelio (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, we express
our gratitude for the briefing by Deputy to the High
Representative for Disarmament Thomas Markram, and
to the presidency of Peru for convening this meeting.

We underscore the Syrian Government's
cooperation in initiating the last phase of destroying
the remaining facilities declared by Syria and verified
by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW). In that regard, we highlight the
most recent meeting held in Beirut this past March,
which consisted of representatives of the United
Nations Office for Project Services, the OPCW and
the Syrian Government, the outcome of which made it
possible to agree on new amendments to the tripartite
agreement that would facilitate the destruction of the
those facilities, which would take two to three months.

We call on the Syrian authorities to continue
and expand upon that cooperation by providing the
clarifications requested by the Declaration Assessment
Team in connection with activities carried out by their
Government and the Scientific Studies and Research
Centre. We highlight the fact that the second round of
inspections at the Barzah and Jamrayah facilities, as
well as visits others, this past February has shown that
their activities were consistent with obligations under
the Chemical Weapons Convention.

On the other hand, we reiterate our concern about
recent reports of the alleged use of chemical weapons
in Syria. As it has always stated, Bolivia categorically
condemns the use of chemical weapons and the use of
chemical components as weapons, while considering
such use an unjustifiable and criminal act, wherever,
whenever and by whomever it is committed. We
believe that nothing can justify their use regardless
of circumstances and those who use them, as they
constitute a grave violation of international law and a
threat to international peace and security.

In that regard, we reiterate our firm support for
the OPCW and its Fact-finding Mission so that, in
line with their mandates, they can continue their
investigative work and verify the alleged use of
chemical weapons in the most objective, methodical
and technical manner possible. We call on all parties
to lend their full cooperation so that an effective,
transparent and conclusive investigation can be carried
out as soon as possible. We must be aware, however,
that an investigation of the facts alone is not enough. It
is crucial to be able to depend upon a mechanism that
enables perpetrators to be identified so that they can
then be brought to justice before the appropriate entities.

If it is our goal to establish a new transparent
mechanism that enables investigating and identifying
the perpetrators of such atrocities, then we confront
the challenge and shoulder the responsibility of not
politicizing or instrumentalizing the Security Council.
We reiterate the need and the utmost importance of
demonstrating the Security Council's unified stance
on this issue to the international community, and call
on the parties involved to discuss and exchange views
on the establishment of an independent, impartial
and representative mechanism that will allow for a
complete, reliable and conclusive investigation.

Bolivia categorically rejects the unilateral
imposition of sanctions, as they represent a grave
threat to the international order and run contrary to the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, thereby
jeopardizing the political process and, consequently,
peacebuilding in Syria.

Lastly, we emphasize that the only way to settle
the conflict is through an inclusive political process,
deliberated and led by and for the Syrian people.

