Mr. Mapuranga (Zimbabwe): Mr. President, I wish
to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of December 1996.
My delegation is confident that the Council will benefit
immensely from your wide experience and able
leadership.

Allow me also to express my delegation's gratitude
and appreciation to your predecessor, Ambassador
Wisnumurti of Indonesia, for the manner in which he
presided over the affairs of the Council last month.

My delegation wishes to express its appreciation to
the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for his
two most informative reports on the situation in Angola,
dated 19 November and 2 December 1996.

My delegation notes with regret and disappointment
that two years have come and gone since the signing of
the Lusaka Protocol and that we still lack the requisite
measure of progress to show that the peace process in

 

Angola has come of age. When this Council met last time
to consider the situation in Angola, it expressed in strong
terms its concern over the dangerously slow pace of
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and enumerated a
series of requirements which UNITA had promptly to fulfil.

We fully share the critical observation of the
Secretary-General that the peace process in Angola has
continued to progress in "fits and starts". We remain
particularly disturbed by the fact that, even at this late stage
in the peace process, progress has often come only in
response to increased pressure applied by the international
community, particularly on UNITA.

The peace process in Angola has reached a critical
stage for both the people of that country and the
international community as a whole. Statistics on
cantonment, demobilization and reintegration alone,
important as these processes are, can no longer impress
either the people of Angola or the international community.
Progress in those areas alone, even if it were more
resounding and more satisfactory than it is today, could no
longer serve as an adequate measure or reflection of
progress for the peace process as a whole.

Time is marching on and, at this very critical moment,
we join the people of Angola in demanding and expecting
no less than landmark decisions and measures on the part
of the Government of Angola and UNITA. For the people
of Angola, the disquieting news of the final expiry of the
initial mandate of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM. III) on 28 February 1997 must be
counterbalanced by unprecedented breakthroughs in the
peace process.

In this regard, my delegation joins the Secretary-
General in appealing to all who can make a contribution to
facilitating the return to Luanda of UNITA deputies to the
National Assembly, the establishment of the Government of
National Unity and Reconciliation, and the cooperation of
UNITA in the search for an agreement on the special status
of its leader. We also wish to reiterate our strong view that
a meeting in Angola between President Jose Eduardo dos
Santos and Mr. Savimbi would be most timely and
appropriate at this stage.

Above all, until today we were going to demand that
UNITA be pressured to make the formal and written
declaration required of it in paragraph 12 (e) of Security
Council resolution 1075 (1996), stating that all UNITA
soldiers had been quartered and that UNITA had no more
weapons and military equipment in its possession, in order
to remove any obstacles to the extension of State
administration throughout Angola.

We now understand that that declaration has been
belatedly made by UNITA, a typical example of
UNITA's now-well-known tactic of making a meaningful
move only when the Security Council meets to consider
further steps to be taken to give impetus to the peace
process. We warmly welcome the news of the
incorporation of the nine UNITA generals into the
Angolan Army.
My delegation could not agree more with the
Secretary-General that as we approach the end of the two-
year period foreseen in the initial mandate of
UNAVEM. III, the countdown towards the completion of
that operation can only be gradual and progressive. We
also agree, and most unreservedly so, that several crucial
tasks of the peace process are far from complete and that
Angola will continue to need the stabilizing presence of
the United Nations forces.

The peace-loving people of Angola will remain
restless until the respite offered under the Lusaka Protocol
transforms itself into a lasting peace. We in Zimbabwe
and in southern Africa in general join the people of
Angola in holding fast to the dream that led to the
commitments of the Lusaka accord, and in demanding
that those commitments be implemented in order to
normalize the situation in Angola and in the entire
subregion, in the interest of international peace and
security.

In conclusion, my delegation welcomes the
unanimous adoption of the latest resolution, 1087 (1996),
and particularly the extension of the mandate of
UNAVEM. III to 28 February 1997.

