Mr. Jurica (Croatia): I should like first of all to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the duties
of Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab
J amahiriya and to thank you and the Libyan presidency
of the Security Council for organizing this important
open debate.

I also thank Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa;
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union; and former Prime
Minister of Italy Romano Prodi for their important
contributions and valuable remarks.

Croatia recognizes the primary responsibility and
leading role of the Security Council in the maintenance
of international peace and security as the only global
body mandated with that task. Nevertheless, we have
all come to agree that this global task can be more
effectively implemented with active engagement at the
regional, subregional and national levels. Optimally,
because of their interrelated nature, those three levels
of responsibility - global, regional and national -
should act in harmony in order to achieve peace and
security, respecting the principles of subsidiarity, the
clear division of labour and effectiveness. In that
respect, regional organizations should assume their
share of the responsibility, as appropriate, in
global/regional partnership mechanisms.

I would mention that this week we have
witnessed a transfer of authorities from the European
Union-led peacekeeping force in Chad to the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and
Chad - a good example of successful cooperation
with a regional organization.

The African Union is an organization set to build
an even more solid and permanent architecture in order
to address the numerous challenges facing Africa. In
that respect, the African Union is a fitting regional
partner for the Security Council and the United Nations
in general in the project to achieve peace and stability
in the continent. The question remains how to
maximize the comparative advantages of each
respective partner, thus making the best use of this
United Nations/African Union partnership. We would
like to emphasize a couple of points in that respect.

First, any true and effective partnership must
have a common vision and shared expectations of
which goals can realistically be achieved. The
strengthening of ties and increased contacts between
appropriate United Nations and African Union
structures seems like a good step towards achieving a
better understanding of, among other things, each
partner's role, ability and limitations. Thus, we
welcome and support initiatives aimed at that goal.

Secondly, we could not agree more that the
concept of conflict prevention should be strengthened
and given more prominence in the work of the United
Nations/African Union partnership. The United
Nations has continuously built up its conflict
prevention capacities, including through the work of
the Peacebuilding Commission. The African Union has
also created its own preventive diplomacy mechanisms,
including the Panel of the Wise and the Continental
Early Warning System. All this represents a positive
and most welcome development.

Thirdly, we stress the importance of capacity-
building as a way of enhancing the African Union's
effectiveness and efficiency as it performs tasks the
organization has set for itself with respect to conflict
prevention, management and resolution. In that regard,
we see merit in the proposal to establish a voluntary
multi-donor trust fund to address capacity-building
1ssues.

As for the African Union's peacekeeping efforts,
we firmly believe that they cannot be separated from
the broader deliberations, including those initiated by
the United Kingdom and France, on re-evaluating how
peacekeeping in general is undertaken. Furthermore,
while we agree that there is a need for more systematic,
sustainable and predictable funding for the African
Union's peacekeeping missions, we strongly advocate
finding a viable, realistic and responsible way to deal
with this challenge.

