Mr. Zhukov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Fernandez for his briefing on the
situation in Haiti and the work of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). We have
listened with interest to the briefing and have taken
note of the Secretary-General's report (S/2012/128),
whose assessments we share. The Security Council's
mission to Haiti has proven a significant resource for
information.

Unfortunately, despite some stabilization, the
situation in Haiti remains complex. We are concerned
about political rivalry, including between the executive
and legislative branches of the Government. We hope
that the resignation of Prime Minister Conille will not
lead to even greater political and social division.
Regrettably, political upheavals have overshadowed the
country's socio-economic recovery. The Government
must take urgent steps to achieve national consensus
and to unite society. It must assume leadership in
tackling key tasks, in particular economic and

humanitarian issues. There should be no delay in
adopting crucial decisions directly linked to the
country's recovery. That applies to stepping up the
constitutional process, the adoption of relevant laws
and the implementation of reforms.

In that regard, questions have been raised over
the announcement by the executive of tentative plans
to re-establish the country's armed forces. We do not
question the sovereign right of Haiti to independently
take decisions on security sector reform, but while the
key challenges are linked to the imperative for
economic recovery and the need to combat crime and
strengthen legality and the rule of law, the primary task
in that regard should be improving the effectiveness of
the National Police. We believe that the
implementation of such plans, if they become a
realistic possibility, can only increase political tension
and cause concern among the international community,
which is giving Haiti its firm support.

I would like to note MINUSTAH's significant
contribution to stabilize the situation in the country, in
particular its assistance towards maintaining security,
establishing State institutions and enhancing the
capacities of the national police in improving law and
order. We are pleased that the reconfiguration of the
Mission, in accordance with resolution 2012 (2011), is
going according to plan. MINUSTAH must smoothly
conclude the reform process under way and work
within a new format, both quantitatively and
qualitatively. We can then assess the effectiveness of
the implementation of its mandate under Chapter VII
of the Charter, and possibly consider additional
measures.

With regard to the accusations of peacekeepers
committing serious crimes, we think that exacerbating
the negative atmosphere concerning the Mission's
work would be counterproductive. Such incidents
should be promptly and thoroughly investigated, with
the involvement of the troop-and police-contributing
countries. If certain troops are found to be guilty by the
relevant national judicial bodies, they should definitely
face punishment in line with the criminal legislation of
the countries of which they are citizens. The Mission
needs to focus on enhancing the degree of discipline
and to do its utmost to prevent the recurrence of such
cases. Only through actual acts can it repair the
damage to its authority.
The international assistance given to Haiti, in
which the United Nations plays a leading role, is
unprecedented in terms of scale and solidarity. We
believe that efforts to provide comprehensive
assistance to Haiti, including for the strengthening of
State authority structures, must continue so that the
Haitians can independently tackle all issues in the areas
of security and recovery and of ensuring sustainable
national development.

