The President (spoke in Arabic): Following
consultations among the members of the Security
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
briefing provided by representatives of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), including Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Ghana Nana Akufo-Addo, Minister of
Foreign Affairs of Cote d'Ivoire Mamadou
Bamba, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Guinea
Francois Fall, Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Nigeria Oluyemi Adeniji, Permanent
Representative of Senegal Ambassador Papa
Louis Fall, and Executive Secretary of ECOWAS
Ambassador Mohamed Ibn Chambas, on the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement reached in
Accra, Ghana, on 18 August 2003.

"The Security Council welcomes the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement reached by
Liberia's Government, rebel groups, political
parties and civil society leaders in Accra, Ghana,
on 18 August 2003.

"The Security Council appreciates the
efforts of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), particularly
organization Chairman and President of Ghana
John Kufuor, Executive Secretary Mohamed Ibn
Chambas, and mediator General Abdulsalami
Abubakar in negotiating this agreement.

"The Security Council remains concerned at
the situation in Liberia, particularly the
continuing dire humanitarian situation of much of
the population. It calls on all parties to allow full,
secure and unimpeded access for humanitarian
agencies and personnel.

"The Security Council again stresses the
need to create a secure environment that enables
respect for human rights, including the well-being
and rehabilitation of children especially child
combatants, protects the well-being of civilians,
and supports the mission of humanitarian
workers.
"The Security Council pays tribute to the
donors that are supporting the deployment of
ECOMIL, encourages all Member States to
provide financial, logistical and material support
to the Member States participating in the
ECOWAS-led force, and calls on the donor
community to provide urgent humanitarian
assistance to those in need in Liberia.

"The Security Council urges all parties to
respect fully the ceasefire and to implement fully
all their commitments under the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement signed in Accra on 18 August,
including through full cooperation with the
Economic Community of West African States'
Mission in Liberia (ECOMIL), the United
Nations, the International Contact Group on
Liberia (ICGL), the African Union (AU), and the
United States to establish a Joint Monitoring
Committee (JMC), which is a critical aspect of
the Liberian peace process, as required under the
Accra Agreement.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
readiness as stated in paragraph 2 of its resolution
1497 (2003) of 1 August 2003 to establish a
follow-on United Nations stabilization force to
support the transitional Government and to assist
in the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement for Liberia."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/ZOOS/IA.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I should now like to
invite Council members to a private meeting to
continue our discussion of this subject.

The meeting rose at 10.50 am.
