Mr. Kruljevie (Serbia): At the outset, I would
like to express my respect for His Excellency
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and His Excellency Mr. Nikola
Spiric', Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. I read very carefully the latest report
of the High Representative contained in document
S/2009/246 and listened to the statements made in the
Council today.

As a neighbouring country and one of the
guarantors of the Dayton Peace Agreement, Serbia
continues to be committed to full respect for the
Agreement as a basis for stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the whole region of the Western
Balkans. My country fully respects Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a sovereign State, with its two entities
and three constituent nations.

One of Serbia's foreign policy priorities is
development of good-neighbourly relations and a
strong commitment to regional stability in the Western
Balkans. Serbia is working actively to promote the
stability of the entire region and considers respect for
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of all States to
be of vital importance in that regard.

Regional cooperation is a way to resolve
differences through dialogue, not confrontation. We
therefore support the participation of all United
Nations Member States in Southeastern Europe in
various regional projects and initiatives. We also
welcome the continued participation of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo on
behalf of our southern province of Kosovo and
Metohija, in accordance with Council resolution 1244
(1999). Europe has become a regional unifying force.
All of us share the same dedication to join the
European Union. It is Serbia's central strategic priority.

As a signatory of the Dayton Agreement, Serbia
fully respects its obligations and firmly believes that its
consecutive implementation and strict compliance with
its provisions are of paramount importance. It is our
View that the relations between the three constituent
nations in Bosnia and Herzegovina should be dealt
with by the international community with due attention
and mutual respect. Any reform should be carried out
in a way that it could contribute to Bosnia's path
towards integration in the European Union.

Serbia supports all efforts towards stability,
democracy and the social and economic prosperity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and welcomes all decisions
and solutions that are the result of a democratic
agreement between its three constituent nations -
Serbs, Bosniacs and Croats.

I would also like to reiterate the importance of
the commitment of all countries in the region to the
universal values in the areas of the rule of law and
human rights, as well as to respect for the Charter of
the United Nations and the fundamental principles of
international law. It is our firm belief that all those who
perpetrated heinous crimes during the tragic conflict in
our region must be brought to justice and that that is
the moral and political duty of all countries that have
been affected. Serbia continues to make efforts in that
regard and towards full cooperation with International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.

