Sir David Hannay (United Kingdom): Two months
ago this Council adopted resolutions 981 (1995) and 982
(1995), which addressed, among other issues, the situation
in Croatia. On that occasion I expressed my
Government's satisfaction with the signs of progress in
building confidence between the Government of Croatia
and the Serb communities in Croatia. Stability had been
achieved in what had been a very tense and volatile
situation. The Economic Agreement was being
implemented, step by step, by both parties. I also stressed
the importance that we attached to the role of the new
force, the United Nations Confidence Restoration
Operation in Croatia (UNCRO), in securing that peace
and promoting the start of talks on a political settlement.
I acknowledge that progress had not been as great as the
Croatian Government had a right to expect, but the
prospects were encouraging.

Events since then have given my Government cause
for very grave concern. Much of that earlier progress has
now been placed in jeopardy by recourse to military
action, and in the process the lives of United Nations

 

peace-keepers were put at risk. The resolution we have just
adopted, of which my country was a co-sponsor, condemns
in the strongest possible terms any actions, by whichever
party, directed against United Nations personnel, and we
demand that status of UNCRO and the safety of its
personnel be respected without exception.
The United Nations, with support of my Government,
is willing to help both parties resume the process of
reconciliation and cooperation. We warmly commend the
efforts of Mr. Akashi to prevent any further escalation. It
is welcome that there has been real progress towards the
withdrawal of troops from the zones of separation in the
various United Nations sectors, but it is essential that this
withdrawal be completed forthwith. Otherwise, there is little
chance of getting the political process back on track, and
only when withdrawal has been completed will UNCRO be
able to redeploy so as to begin its task of implementing the
mandate the Council established two months ago.

It is also essential that the United Nations and other
international bodies be given full access to Western
Slavonia so as to lay to rest the concerns that have been
expressed about human rights. The report from the
Secretary-General, expected within the next two weeks, on
the implementation of this resolution will be an important
one. The Security Council will need to consider at that
stage how best to ensure full deployment of UNCRO in
accordance with its mandate.

My Government is very conscious of the
understandable frustration in Zagreb at the slow pace of
progress towards a political settlement. We have made clear
on numerous occasions our full support for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Croatia and our view that this
must be the basis of any political settlement. The local Serb
authorities cannot evade their responsibility in this respect.
But there are no short-cuts towards this goal: securing
reconciliation requires commitment and patience on both
sides. A negotiated settlement is the only way to achieve a
lasting peace.

