Ms. Landgren (spoke in French): Since the last
meeting of the Security Council on the situation in
Burundi (see S/PV.6439) five months ago,
developments have taken place in the country, in
particular with respect to transitional justice, human
rights and laws governing the political parties.

Last month, Parliament adopted a law on the
functioning and organization of political parties. The
extra-parliamentary opposition, fearing an attempt to
constrain its activities, followed this process closely. In
response to that concern, an amendment that would
have required all political parties to obtain new
authorization was modified. Some opposition political
parties still believe that the new law restricts the
political space and have announced that they will not
comply with it. The Government is also in the process
of drafting a bill on the status of political parties in the
opposition that would allow the creation of an official
post of leader of the opposition, and on the funding of
political parties and the functions of civil society
organizations.

National, regional and international actors,
including the United Nations Office in Burundi
(BNUB), continue to encourage initiatives to promote
dialogue between the Government and the extra-
parliamentary opposition. To date, none of these
initiatives has had the desired result of returning the
2
main leaders of the opposition to Burundi so that they
can again participate in the political life of the country.

On 14 March, the Executive Committee of the
Conseil national pour la defense de la democratie-
Forces nationales pour la defense de la democratie
(CNDD-FDD) expelled a party executive, the Secretary
of its Council of Elders, following his allegations of
corruption and impunity within the party. He was
replaced during the course of a special party congress
on 14 May, during which congress members assessed
the achievements of the CNDD-FDD since 2005.

While the security situation is generally calm,
there has been an increase in violent incidents in
Bujumbura Rural province in April. Until recently, the
violence was attributed to bandits, but the Defence
Ministry has just publicly blamed the lack of security
on Mr. Agathon Rwasa and Mr. Leonard Nyangoma.
The Government has launched important initiatives in
the province, to include socio-economic recovery
activities and the mandatory collection of weapons
held illegally by the population. In a speech in
Bujumbura Rural on 6 May, President Nkurunziza
reassured the population that security would be
re-established within two months.

(spoke in English)

The Government is preparing the second poverty
reduction strategy paper. It will incorporate key
elements of the Strategic Framework For
Peacebuilding and harmonize efforts in both peace
consolidation and development planning. This
document, anticipated for July, will give focus to
governance goals and resource mobilization efforts.

Burundi faces severe poverty and high
unemployment, including among young people. The
cost of fuel has increased by over 20 per cent since
October, raising the prices of all basic commodities in
turn and placing severe strains on many families.
Burundi was traditionally self-sufficient in food
production, but this is no longer the case, and 90 per
cent of Burundian families now live on an average of
half a hectare of eroded land. Agricultural tools and
technology remain poor, and market incentives are
limited.

Land has been the cause of many past conflicts in
Burundi and remains an emotive issue. Parliament
adopted a revised land code in April that includes the
decentralization of land issues to the communes and
11-34143
the establishment of a National Land Commission
tasked with managing the redistribution of land and
resolving disputes. These issues are among the
daunting socio-economic challenges that need to be
addressed to help consolidate peace in the country, as
highlighted during the meeting of the Peacebuilding
Commission on 21 April.

Graft remains a problem in Burundi. In April, the
Ministry of Good Governance presented a broad-based
national plan on good governance and the fight against
corruption, taking on board substantive comments from
the World Bank, the United Nations Development
Programme and bilateral partners. This is intended as a
framework for all partners and includes elements
related to elections; judicial, legal and public sector
reforms; human rights; and the media. This strategy is
expected to be adopted on 23 May.

Other steps include the introduction of
performance contracts for all officials, including
ministers, since the beginning of the year. Their work
will be evaluated every six months. All Government
ministers have also presented their work plans to
Parliament. In his Labour Day address to the nation on
1 May, President Nkurunziza reiterated the need to
meet performance targets, warning that underperforming
public officials would be dismissed.

I am pleased to report that the process of
establishing an independent national human rights
commission has moved steadily forward. On 5 January,
the law creating the commission was promulgated by
President Nkurunziza. An ad hoc parliamentary
commission was then set up and vetted a large number
of candidates. Twenty-one names were submitted to the
National Assembly, which is expected to nominate
seven as commissioners. I understand that this issue
will be taken up today during a three-day extraordinary
session of the National Assembly.

An impartial and independent national human
rights commission can strengthen Burundi's
compliance with its international obligations and
enhance the protection and promotion of human rights,
thus promoting national stability. In a related positive
development, the Government responded favourably to
a request for a return visit by the independent expert on
the situation of human rights in Burundi, Mr. Fatsah
Ouguergouz. His visit began yesterday.

A persistent concern has been the continued
reports of extrajudicial executions. BNUB investigated
11-34143

and documented nine such cases between January and
Much 2011 alone, and several other cases reported in
April are under investigation. Between August and
November last year, BNUB documented 11
extrajudicial executions. The Government set up a
commission of inquiry in October 2010 to investigate
specific allegations made against the security forces in
this regard. It remained dormant until the end of April,
when the Government announced that the commission
had resumed work. We encourage the Government and
the commission to establish the facts and make
actionable recommendations where Violations are
established.

I want to acknowledge the relatively vibrant
media that exists in Burundi, and the recent resolution
of a case that had raised concerns. Jean-Claude
Kavumbagu, director of NetPress, was detained in July
2010 on a charge of treason. While the State Prosecutor
sought a maximum life sentence, the court acquitted
Mr. Kavumbagu of the treason charge last Friday,
finding him guilty of violating press laws. He was
fined and sentenced to eight months in prison. As he
had been detained for 10 months, he was released
yesterday.

There are significant developments to report in
the realm of transitional justice, where - following the
national consultations that concluded in 2010 4 the
Government is taking steps to set up these
mechanisms. On 3 May, a delegation led by the
Minister of External Affairs outlined the Government's
transitional justice strategy during a meeting with
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Ms. Navi Pillay. The Government intends to create a
truth and reconciliation commission, to be operational
by January 2012, and to establish a judicial mechanism
to address impunity after the commission has
completed its work.

These are important commitments. The
Government has underlined to BNUB that the truth and
reconciliation commission process must be grounded in
reconciliation and not in score-settling. For that, broad
public awareness and orientation will be crucial.
BNUB continues to sensitize the public through
workshops where the results of the national
consultations are shared and discussed. The
Government will set up a seven-member preparatory
committee to develop appropriate legislation and a
budget and to review the experiences of other countries
that have had truth and reconciliation commissions.
The United Nations looks forward to more detailed
discussions with the Government, and remains ready to
assist in the establishment of transitional justice
mechanisms consistent with international standards.
We anticipate that international financial support will
also be needed in this area.

The full reintegration of demobilized
ex-combatants is crucial for sustained peace in the
country. While they had all received reintegration
assistance by the end of April, much still remains to be
done to help them become productive members of
society. To that end, the Government and BNUB have
developed a proposal to support the continued socio-
economic reintegration of people affected by the
conflict, including ex-combatants. The $24 million
programme would support labour-intensive projects
targeting the demobilized, youth and other vulnerable
groups. The programme is in line with the United
Nations strategic development framework in Burundi
for the period 2010 to 2014. We are working with the
Peacebuilding Support Office to mobilize initial
funding to launch the programme.

As stipulated in resolution 1959 (2010), the
United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB)
has been succeeded by a scaled-down presence,
namely, the United Nations Office in Burundi. I am
pleased to report that the transition is going well. We
expect to reach BNUB's authorized level of 134 staff
by 1 July. That represents a 70 per cent reduction from
BINUB. As difficult as it is for any staff member to
lose his or her job in the current climate, the process
has been peaceful. We continue to work with the
Government of Burundi to ensure that the needs of
separated staff are dealt with in a responsible manner.

Throughout the transition, BNUB has continued
to carry out its core tasks in support of the
consolidation of peace and democracy in Burundi. We
continue to encourage efforts to promote inclusive
political dialogue between the Government and the
extra-parliamentary opposition. We are helping the
Government to strengthen its key institutions and
supporting efforts to professionalize and enhance the
capacity of security and defence forces. We are
working with civil society and other stakeholders to
promote and protect human rights and prepare the
ground for the establishment of viable transitional
justice mechanisms. And BNUB is identifying possible
areas of support with regard to the country's
integration into the East African Community, which is
determined to see Burundi move forward in peace and
economic strength.

In accordance with its mandate, BNUB is
currently developing benchmarks for its exit and
evolution into a regular United Nations country team
presence. Discussions within the United Nations family
have begun and will be followed by consultations with
national and international partners. As the Council is
aware, the Secretary-General has appointed Ms. Rosine
Sori-Coulibaly as my Deputy and United Nations
Resident Coordinator in Burundi. I look forward to
working closely with her to maximize the impact of the
United Nations system's efforts in support of the
Burundian Government and people.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the members
of the Council and of the Peacebuilding Commission,
the United Nations family and all other partners who
have been so steadfast in their support of Burundi in its
remarkable transition. The commendable efforts of the
Burundian Government and people in consolidating the
gains achieved in peacebuilding and paving the way for
sustainable development deserve our strong and
continued support.

