Mrs. Pucarinho (Portugal): I would like to
thank Poland for convening today's debate on a very
crucial topic during its presidency this month. I also
thank the Secretary-General and the briefers for their
comprehensive insights and valuable perspectives, and
for the recommendations that they have shared with us.

Portugal aligns itself with the statements delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union and the Group
of Friends of the Protection of Civilians. I would like to
make some additional remarks in my national capacity.

Portugal welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General on the implementation of Council resolutions
on the protection of civilians (S/2018/462) and fully
supports the recommendations outlined, whose
implementation will definitely require additional
collective efforts. Once again, the report emphasizes that
prevention is the most effective way to protect civilians.

Despite the fact that the Council put the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict at the heart of
its agenda almost two decades ago and has adopted a
number of resolutions on this crucial topic, every year
we are confronted with alarming rises in the number
of civilian deaths and the destruction and suffering
caused by parties in armed conflict. Civilians continue
to account for the vast majority of casualties in armed
conflict. They continue to be exposed to violence and
are the primary victims of violations of human rights
and of international humanitarian law.

The humanitarian environment faces challenges
that are contributing to shrinking the space for
humanitarian action and jeopardizing protection-of-
civilian obligations under international humanitarian
law and human rights law. Regrettably, in some
instances humanitarian access has been deliberately
blocked, often for political reasons or alleged security-
related concerns. Although international law requires
that schools and hospitals be treated as sanctuaries,
such facilities continue to be systematically used for
military purposes or are deliberately targeted, thereby
overexposing civilians, especially children, young
people and the elderly, to violence.

We cannot stress enough the need to protect and
promote the human right to health in conflict, and we
will continue to draw the Council's attention to this
critical issue. I would also like to add in that regard a
specific note on the importance of ensuring adequate
health care for those who are more vulnerable or in
need of special protection, such as women, children
and persons with disabilities, including those related to
mental health.

Health-care providers are crucial humanitarian
agents in conflict situations and deserve special
protection in performing their noble task. Any violence
aimed at them, or at medical facilities and vehicles,
is a humanitarian issue with a widespread and long-
term multiplier effect. I want to remind the Council
that the duty to prevent and address acts of violence,
attacks on and threats to medical care in armed conflict
must be honoured, and we must act collectively to
ensure that those in need have access to medical care.
We should mention civil-society organizations in that
regard, as they play a vital role in providing medical
and other kinds of essential care to people affected by
conflicts all over the world. It is therefore often crucial
to collaborate closely with them in order to enhance
assistance to those in need.

Any failure to halt violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights abuses, which may
amount to crimes against humanity and war crimes, also
highlights the importance of prioritizing prevention
and the fight against impunity. That can be achieved
only by ensuring accountability and systematic and
impartial investigations of reported violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law, including
attacks on medical convoys and personnel, civil society
and journalists. Whenever national authorities fail to
take the necessary measures to ensure the protection of
civilians and respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law, the Security Council can play a
more active role, as appropriate. In this regard, the
International Criminal Court remains key to fighting
impunity for the most serious violations ofinternational
humanitarian law, in complement to the roles of national
tribunals and some international tribunals, as well.

Although there has been undeniable progress in
integrating a protection-of-civilians component into the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping missions and
making it a priority in the allocation of capacity and
resources, United Nations peacekeeping missions still
struggle to fulfil their mandates and protect their own
personnel and innocent civilians on the ground. That
trend must be reversed, and for that United Nations
peacekeeping missions must be given clear mandates,
act in full respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law in accordance with the highest
standards of conduct, discipline and accountability,
and be provided with adequate capabilities, including a
human-rights-protection component. They should also
reflect a gender perspective. All of these, including
a more equitable gender representation, have been
shown to contribute to enhancing the performance
of peacekeeping operations. That also applies to
mandatory, standardized and United Nations-certified
training ofmilitary and police, notably on the protection
of civilians and children. In this regard, Portugal
reiterates its pledge to continue conducting training
programmes for its national personnel and the members
of its armed and security forces who are currently
assigned to seven international peacekeeping missions.

In conclusion, we believe that only a coherent
and long-term approach, based on addressing the
root causes of conflict, using political diplomacy
for prevention and conflict resolution and bringing
humanitarian, development and peacebuilding efforts
together, can effectively strengthen compliance with
international humanitarian law. That should promote
accountability for perpetrators, improve humanitarian
access to those in need and strengthen international
efforts and the operational response to current realities,
including that of massive global displacement. In that
regard, I would like to mention the global compacts on
migration and refugees currently being negotiated, as
it will be crucial to ensure that those future regulatory
frameworks reflect an approach based on international
solidarity and respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law in order to respond to the global
issues of migration and refugees. All of this should
make an effective contribution to protecting civilians
and building sustainable peace.

