Mr. Okio (Congo) (spoke in French): First of all,
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for December and, of course, to assure you of the full
cooperation of my delegation. My delegation would
also like to express its thanks to the Indonesian
delegation and, of course, Ambassador Natelegawa for
the brilliant presidency last month.

We have very carefully followed the presentation
of the sixth report of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) that has just been given to us by the Prosecutor,
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, who we welcome.

Having listened to his presentation, we would
like to note that this report reveals the ongoing
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Darfur
and the ongoing war crimes, crimes against humanity
and grave violations of international humanitarian law.
All this cannot fail to affect our collective conscience.

This is the opportunity for my delegation to
welcome the efforts of the Prosecutor and his team. We
would like to assure him of our support and we have
been able to express this support to him during our
meetings last August. The Congo has always supported
all of the efforts of the Security Council and all actions
to combat impunity.

In the specific case of Darfur, the Congo has to
deplore the lack of cooperation from the Sudanese
Government. Everyone involved must be brought
before justice and we would like to call on the
Sudanese Government to take the necessary steps
under its jurisdiction. However, in saying this, the
Congo would like to insist on the fact that all of the
perpetrators in Darfur must be charged. Here, we are
thinking as well of those on the other side, those in the
rebel movements for instance. If the two indictees cited
by the Prosecutor represent, as he said, the first stage,
the second stage should be visible as well.

Impartiality will serve as the criterion for judging
the action of the Court and, of course, the Security
Council. A firm and unanimous message would be one
that spared no parties. The perpetrators of attacks
against the African Union peacekeepers - this was
something mentioned in previous consultations -
must also answer for their actions. We would call upon
the ICC to pursue its inquiries in this regard. All
perpetrators of crimes against humanity, human rights
violations and atrocities, wherever they may be, in
Darfur or elsewhere, must be made responsible for
their actions.

That is the role of the Court, and we will support
it in all its efforts in that regard. It is through such
work, to paraphrase the representative of Belgium, that
justice will become a factor for peace and stability. We
agree with those who spoke earlier that the Council
must provide all its support to the International
Criminal Court in carrying out its work.

