Mr. Jinga (Romania): Romania aligns itself with the statement to be delivered on behalf of the European Union. I will now make a few remarks in my national capacity. Romania believes that the United Nations remains the most appropriate platform to collectively tackle threats to international peace and security. The Charter of the United Nations is fundamental to that aim. My country's commitment to multilateralism goes back long before the establishment of the United Nations. Romania is the only country to have provided a diplomat who was elected twice to head the League of Nations. His name was Nicolae Titulescu. In line with the ambitious objective set out in the Preamble of the Charter to establish conditions under which justice and respect for the obligations arising from treaties and other sources of international law can be maintained, the United Nations is the main global cooperation framework for States and a pillar of international law and justice. Today the role of the United Nations is much debated. Yet we can all agree that, 75 years after its inception, the United Nations has helped our societies to develop through dialogue, negotiation and shared responsibility. The Charter has proven to be a living and visionary document that contains, or allows for the creation of, tools to address challenges to international peace and security. It is our duty to improve those tools. Romania commends and supports the efforts of the Secretary-General to pursue the reform of the United Nations system so that it can better respond to current global challenges. We recognize the role of Chapter VI of the Charter in supporting the peaceful settlement of disputes and call for an increased use of conflict prevention and political settlement of disputes through early warning, mediation, coordination and strategic communication. In the current volatile international environment, following the political path to de-escalation is needed more than ever. Recent developments in the Middle East and North Africa confirm that the international community has a responsibility to create openings for political solutions in support of lasting peace. There is no other viable option for us to take. Chapter VIII of the Charter provides the basis for the involvement of regional organizations in the maintenance of international peace and security. Allow me to recall that, in 2005, Romania, as a non-permanent member of the Security Council, promoted the very first resolution on cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations. Furthermore, when Romania chaired the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in 2018, cooperation between the PBC and the African Union was institutionalized for the first time. In the same vein, the Romanian Ministry for Foreign Affairs, with the support of the African Union, organized a training programme for African experts on stabilization and post-conflict reconstruction, held in Addis Ababa in November 2019. Although the establishment of peacekeeping operations is not explicitly mentioned in the Charter, it is in the spirit of the Charter that United Nations peacekeeping is implemented. Dag Hammarskjeld famously considered peacekeeping operations as "Chapter Six and a Half of the Charter", projecting them between the peaceful settlement of disputes mentioned in Chapter VI and the more coercive methods stipulated in Chapter VII. Thus, the United Nations gradually took its place as the leading organization in the field of peacekeeping, and Romania has been a steady supporter of that approach. For instance, my country participated in 10 United Nations missions and operations in 2019. As we embark on a new year in which we must try to find solutions to the most pressing global challenges, allow me to reaffirm Romania's commitment to the provisions of the United Nations Charter and its core values. The Charter calls for the protection of the dignity and worth of human beings. While improving its tools is a matter of consideration and decision, trusting its principles and values remains axiomatic.
