Mrs. Viotti (Brazil) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank the French delegation for having organized
today's very timely debate. I wish to also thank the
Secretary-General and Minister Raymond Tshibanda
for their statements.

(spoke in English)

Through Minister Tshibanda, I would like to
commend the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo for the notable progress made over the
past few years. Security and stability have improved as
the Government has progressively achieved greater
control over its territory and enhanced its relations
with the countries of the region. Nevertheless, as has
been noted by previous speakers, challenges remain,
particularly in the east, where rebel groups still pose a
serious threat to the civilian population. The
persistence of cases of sexual violence and the
recruitment of children is of special concern.
We welcome the very clear vision that Minister
Tshibanda has expressed concerning his country's
priorities for the near future. They deserve our full
support.

The elections to be held in November will be an
important milestone in the consolidation of peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. All
of us expect the polls to be free, fair and transparent,
and to thus contribute to strong democratic institutions
and to serve as a sound basis for social and economic
development. We trust that the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and bilateral
partners will do their best to meet the country's request
for assistance. Brazil stands ready to participate in that
effort.

Sustainable progress in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo will require the strengthening of
institutions and national capacities. In that regard, we
welcome the Government's development of a peace
consolidation programme, with the support of
MONUSCO. We also welcome its integrated approach,
which stresses the importance of the three pillars:
justice and the rule of law, security sector reform, and
economic recovery and access to basic social services.
We encourage MONUSCO, with the participation of
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, to
fully support that strategy.

We take this opportunity to welcome the
constructive dialogue between the United Nations and
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The joint assessment process has proven to be a
useful tool and has provided for excellent
communication with the local authorities.

As Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004)
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo, I
would also like to commend the cooperation between
the Government and the Committee's Group of
Experts. That dialogue was particularly important for
the development of guidelines on due diligence so as
reinforce the fight against the illegal exploitation of
natural resources. On that issue and regarding other
challenges faced by the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, it is important to underscore the role that
regional cooperation can play.

Brazil remains a committed partner in support of
peacebuilding in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Last November, we donated $1 million to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights to finance projects designed to assist
victims of sexual violence. Brazil stands ready to
deepen its bilateral cooperation with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We look forward to Minister
Tshibanda's upcoming visit to Brazil and hope that it
will lead to the further development of our bilateral
ties. We are confident that, with the support of the
international community, the Congolese people will be
able to achieve long-term peace, democracy and socio-
economic development.

