Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Yesterday, a truly historic event took
place - the reunification of Russia and Crimea, which
our peoples have awaited for six decades. In strict
compliance with international law and democratic
procedure, without outside interference and through a
free referendum, the people of Crimea have fulfilled
what is enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations
and a great number of fundamental international legal
documents - their right to self-determination. They
turned to Russia with a request to welcome Crimea
into the Russian Federation. Russia as a sovereign State
agreed to the Crimean people's request. A treaty to that
end has been signed between the Russian Federation
and the Crimean Republic on the accession into the
Russian Federation of the Republic of Crimea and the
city of Sevastopol and the creation within the Russian
Federation of two new territorial units.

The results of the referendum were quite clear. More
than 82 per cent of voters participated in the voting,
more than 96 per cent of whom chose in favour of
reunification with Russia. This figure is the expression
of the free will of the people of Crimea.

I shall now briefly depart from my text. I was
stunned by how the Permanent Representative of
Ukraine tried to discredit the referendum by using the
arguments of Western propaganda - that those who
did not want to vote were visited at home with the
police in tow. A few of my Western colleagues may
not know this, but my Ukrainian colleagues know very
well that this is an old, tried and tested tradition in our
elections. If someone cannot vote because they are
too ill to come to the polling booth, members of the
electoral commission will visit that person at home to
afford him or her an opportunity to vote.

But I am going to stick to the topic. I will not dwell
on the history of the issue in detail. The President of
the Russian Federation, Vladimir Putin, spelt it out
yesterday in a televised appearance with which I trust
all present here are familiar. I shall focus on just a few
aspects. Today, out of the 2.2 million inhabitants of the
Crimean peninsula, close to 1.5 million are Russian;
350,000 are Ukrainians, most ofwhom consider Russian
to be their mother tongue; and between 290,000 and
300,0000 are Crimean Tatars, a significant proportion
of whom, as shown by the referendum, also favour
Russia, regardless of what others elsewhere might have
suggested in the run-up to the referendum.

A historic injustice has been righted. It resulted
from the arbitrary actions of the leader of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics at the time, Nikita
Khrushchev, who, with the stroke of a pen in 1954,
in violation of constitutional norms, transferred the
Russian region of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol
to the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, which was
then part ofthe same State. He did so without informing
the population of Crimea and without their consent.
No one has showed any regard for the views of the
Crimeans during the break-up of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics. Over the years, many citizens and
community activists in Crimea have repeatedly raised
this issue, stating that Crimea is intrinsically Russian
land and that Sevastopol is a Russian city. It is only now
that the will and freely expressed choice of the Crimean
has been fulfiled.

Of course, we have taken note of the reaction of a
number of our Western partners who simply cannot rid
themselves of the imperial colonial habits of attempting
to impose their writ on other peoples and countries.
Now they are nervous as their reckless geopolitical
gamble in Ukraine has led to such unexpected results.
The people of Crimea have spoken and made their
choice, as have the people of Russia, and those choices
must be accepted and respected by all.

Let me now turn to the alarming situation in
Ukraine and the international assistance provided
to it to overcome its pronounced internal crisis. The
pseudo-friends of Ukraine need to understand once and
for all that the cause of the crisis there lies not with
Russia but in the irresponsible actions of individual
Ukrainian political forces and their foreign mentors.
The attempt to drive Ukraine, like other targeted
States of the eastern partnership, to make an artificial
choice between the European Union and Russia, largely
provoked the deep-seated internal political crisis that
led to the unconstitutional changes in Kyiv.

However, Western capitals, it would seem, continue
to feel no shame about backing people who are not
ready to listen or heed the views of the entire Ukrainian
people and who are fully dominated by the ultra-radical,
nationalist organizations Right Sector and the Freedom
Party, which according to the European Parliament, is
anti-Russian, anti-Semitic and xenophobic. And yet, it
is with them that the European Union is planning to
sign the political section of an association agreement in
the near future.

In that respect, we are puzzled by Mr. Simonovie's
glib, one-sided assessment of the human rights situation
in Ukraine. We are especially puzzled by the fact that
Mr. Simonovie referred to the Maidan snipers. Not a
word was said about the evidence that provocateurs
fired both on the representatives of law and order and
on the opposition forces to pave the way for the use of
force to seize power.

One simply cannot claim that there has been
no politically motivated killing or mass torture; no
kidnapping of individuals, no attacks on journalists and
human rights defenders; no political detentions. One
cannot claim that nationalist radicals, like the Taliban in
Afghanistan, are not destroying and profaning historical
sites, that there are no chilling racist incidents with
anti-Russian and anti-Semitic undercurrents, backed
or at least passed over in silence by those who have
seized power in Kyiv. The Kyiv extremists have offered
rewards for killing journalists, the self-proclaimed
authorities have shut down foreign television stations,
foreign correspondents have been denied all access,
and they are even trying to scramble the retransmission
of satellite signals.

Two scandalous incidents occurred only yesterday.
Two dozen members of Parliament and activists of the
Freedom Party pushed their way into the Cabinet, and
in front of cameras beat up and took away the General
Director of the Ukrainian First National television
station, who knows where. Who is in authority in Kyiv?
Neo-Nazi slogans are heard, Nazi enforcers and their
Bandera-loving storm-troopers are glorified, and calls
are sent out for violence against Russian-speaking
Ukrainians and Russians in general, with all the signs
of ethnic cleansing, and for the armed overthrow of the
legal authorities. These must all be clear and obvious
to anyone claiming to be objective. Instead, supposedly
profound concerns are raised about the human rights
situation in Crimea. As a result of the combined efforts
of the people and the self-defence forces, law and
order has been maintained, and Crimean authorities
have guaranteed the rights of all minorities, without
exception.

In that respect, we would especially like to draw
attention to the fact that, pursuant to the treaty between
the Russian Federation and the Republic of Crimea
regarding succession to the Federation, there will be
three equal State languages in the Republic: Ukrainian,
Russian and Crimean Tartar. Crimeans, with the
support of the entire Russian people, are doing all in
their power to preserve peace and tranquility in Crimea.
No provocation will keep them from doing so, not even
such incidents as that which occurred a few days ago
in Simferopol, where, in Maidan style, sniper fire from
an unfinished building across from the Ukrainian
military base killed an unarmed self-defence soldier
and a Ukrainian national soldier. The attack by Russian
forces on a Ukrainian military facility, to which the
Permanent Representative referred today, simply did
not take place. It was clearly a planned provocation
that was immediately seized on by Mr. Yatsenyuk and
Mr. Turchynov to call on the Ukrainian military forces
in Ukraine to use their weapons - against whom?
Against their fellow countrymen?
Russia stands ready to work in close cooperation
with all international partners that are genuinely
interested in normalizing the situation in Ukraine on
the basis of a broad internal Ukrainian dialogue with
the participation of all responsible political forces and
all regions. Establishing a multilateral mechanism for
the settlement ofthe Ukrainian crisis could be promoted
with out partners through our proposal to create an
assistance group for Ukraine. We await responses to
our constructive initiative.

We will continue to discuss proposals aimed
at fulfilling the agreement of 21 February with the
objective of restoring order, launching comprehensive
constitutional reform in Ukraine, and putting an end
to the provocations of the ultra-nationalist and radical
forces against the Russian-speaking population and our
fellow countrymen in south-eastern and other parts
of Ukraine. To that end, observers of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Council
of Europe are invited as long as they implement an
impartial mandate and mutually agreed modalities for
such a deployment in various regions of Ukraine.

