Mr. Bakin (spoke in Russian): The Russian Centre
for the Reconciliation of Opposing Sides and Refugee
Migration Monitoring is focusing its main efforts in the
Syrian Arab Republic on the non-military resolution of
the conflict and on providing comprehensive assistance
to Syrian citizens to return home and rebuild peaceful
lives. Through joint efforts with the Syrian Government
we have been able to achieve considerable improvement
in the situation in those areas of work. The statistics for
Syrian citizens returning home speaks for themselves.
Since the beginning of 2019 alone more than 220,000
Syrian citizens have returned home, more than 30,000
of them internally displaced persons and more than
190,000 refugees from abroad. The majority of Syrians
are returning from neighbouring States. Between
1,000 and 2,000 people are returning from Jordan and
Lebanon every day, which testifies to the effectiveness
of all the measures that have been taken.

However, along with the positive results there
are also problems. Despite the establishment of the
cessation of hostilities regime, the situation in the Idlib
de-escalation zone is complicated. Militias from some
uncontrolled terrorist groups are currently refusing to
observe the ceasefire regime in the Idlib zone and are
actively obstructing Russia and Turkey's joint efforts
to stabilize the situation in north-western Syria. The
tensions in the zone have been spiralling once again
since April. Militias from the Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham
terrorist organization have united various terrorist
groups under their leadership and have ramped up
their attacks on Government positions and shelling of
towns and villages. In April we recorded 169 violations
of the ceasefire regime by illegal armed groups, with
41 Syrian soldiers killed and 74 wounded, while eight
civilians died and 20 received injuries of varying
degrees of seriousness.

In May, 338 cases of shelling by militias were
recorded, with 36 Syrian soldiers killed and 118
wounded, along with 24 civilians killed and 32
wounded. In particular, on 5 May five children and one
woman were killed as a result of shelling by the Jaysh
A1-Izza group with a multiple launch rocket system
from the town of Al-Suqaylabiyah. On 15 May, a mortar
shell fired by Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham terrorists killed
eight civilians, including two children, in the village
of Al-Nayrab in Aleppo governorate. At the same time,
between the end of April and the beginning of May, a
significant number of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham militias
and groups allied to them concentrated near the cities of
Hama and Aleppo. Radical groups attempted to enter the
predominantly Christian cities of Al-Suqaylabiyah and
Muhradah in Hama governorate. During the attack on
the Government positions the terrorists used unmanned
aerial vehicles, tanks, pickup trucks fitted with heavy-
calibre machine guns, and suicide-bombing vehicles.

There has been no decrease in the terrorist activity
in the Idlib de-escalation zone in June. There have
been 302 cases of shelling and armed provocations
by militias, and Syrian soldiers and civilians have
continued to die. On 17 June, 11 civilians were killed and
15 injured by mortar fire from Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham
in the village of Kudeh, in Aleppo governorate. In
response to the ongoing provocations by terrorists, the
Government forces have been forced to take defensive
action. According to objective information, illegal
armed groups allied to Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham have
been resisting the Syrian armed forces in all areas
where there has been fighting, as well as members of
the Caucasus Emirate, Haras Al-Din and the Turkistan
Islamic Party. All those entities have been recognized
as terrorist organizations by the Security Council. The
jihadists have also repeatedly used multiple rocket
launch systems to fire on Russia's Khmeimim air
base, posing a genuine threat to the lives of Russian
troops. The Russian Aerospace Forces have been forced
to retaliate with precision strikes on firing positions,
ammunition stockpiles and clusters of terrorists, but
their fire has been directed only at known targets
outside residential areas.

The situation as a whole is under control thanks
entirely to Russia and Turkey's joint coordinated
actions, in accordance with the memorandum signed
in Sochi on 17 September 2018 on the stabilization
of the situation in the Idlib de-escalation area. In the
quest for ways to resolve the problem of Idlib, we and
the Turks have been working actively to come up with
new measures and mutually acceptable solutions for
stabilizing the situation. At Russia's request, in May
and June the Syrian Army twice established a ceasefire
regime under the framework of those actions. However,
a number of radical groups in the Idlib de-escalation
area have continued to violate the ceasefire regime
every time, firing on the Turkish armed forces'
observer posts as well as on the Government forces'
positions and on towns. We continue to see terrorists
preparing to stage provocative actions in order to
blame Government forces for allegedly using chemical
weapons against them.

We who are working here on the ground are
constantly seeing a one-sided interpretation of events
in the Idlib de-escalation area from a number of
countries that blame Syria and Russia for escalating
tensions while at the same time turning a blind
eye to the atrocities of jihadists and their terrorist
activity in the area. We categorically deny all the
allegations about the indiscriminate nature of strikes
by Government forces on targets in Idlib. We are sorry
to have to say that anti-Syrian non-governmental
organizations are deliberately disseminating this kind
of false and unverified information, misleading the
global community and thereby shielding Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham terrorists. Meanwhile, the Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham militias and other groups, whose activities
are not properly comprehended by the international
community, continue to execute captured Syrian
soldiers and local civilians just as the terrorists of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant did in Palmyra and
Raqqa. In the past two years, Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham
fighters in the Idlib de-escalation zone have abducted
at least 5,000 people, whose fate is unknown. Hundreds
have been executed without trial or evidence.

In View of the desperate humanitarian situation
in the area, the Syrian Government, working with
the Russian Reconciliation Centre and the support of
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, has been taking the
necessary measures to enable the civilian population
to make a decent, safe and voluntary departure from
the Idlib de-escalation area. Specifically, the Abu
Al-Duhur crossing point in Aleppo governorate was
established on 4 March 2018. It can accommodate 1,100
people and 50 vehicles a day, although the movement
of refugees through it has currently been suspended
due to the serious threat of shelling by terrorists. An
additional crossing point was set up at Suran on 27 May
of this year that can admit 1,000 people and 50 vehicles
a day. Since the crossing-point operation began, a
total of more than 44,000 people have left the Idlib
de-escalation zone, including more than 14,000 women
and 20,000 children.

According to our information, between 40,000 and
80,000 internally displaced persons (IDPs) are ready
to leave the de-escalation area right now. The required
number of places have been prepared for them to be
received in IDP centres in Hama, Horns and Deir ez-
Zor governorates. The Syrian Government is ready
to use all existing capacities to ensure the conditions
necessary to enable the civilian population to return
from the Idlib de-escalation area. Some 15,000 Syrians
who have left the Rukban refugee camp, as well as the
United Nations representatives who have been given
the opportunity to speak with Syrian citizens returning
to Homs and Hama governorates, have been able to see
for themselves that the Syrian Government has created
appropriate living conditions for its citizens.

In general, the cooperation between the guarantor
countries is enabling us to effectively counter
international terrorist organizations on Syrian territory
and keep the situation in the north-west under control.
We would like to point to our Turkish colleagues' active
efforts to support the ceasefire regime in the Idlib
demilitarized zone.

I want to underscore that the actions of the
Russian Reconciliation Centre are strictly within
the framework of the implementation of the Russian-
Turkish memorandum to stabilize the situation in the
Idlib de-escalation area and the agreements reached
during the ongoing consultations with Turkey and Iran
in the Astana format. All of the efforts of the Astana
guarantors are aimed at implementing resolution
2254 (2015) in the interests of restoring normal life in
Syria. However, I want to draw the Council's attention
to the fact that any agreements on a cessation of
hostilities cannot extend to the fight against terrorist
organizations, wherever they are. We believe that the
only way to rebuild Syria is through the definitive
elimination of terrorism, including in the de-escalation
zone, and through the return of IDPs and refugees to
their homes and the post-conflict reconstruction of
the country.

