Mr. Snoussi (Morocco) (interpretation from French): First of all, the Kingdom of Morocco would like
most warmly to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
We are also very pleased to express our best wishes for
success in the performance of your lofty responsibilities.
We are confident that your personal and professional
skills will ensure that the activities of the Council under
your leadership will be successful.

 

Furthermore, my delegation takes great pleasure in
warmly congratulating Ambassador Legwaila of Botswana
for the very wise and skilful way in which he conducted the
work of the Council throughout the month of March.

Since the launching of the peace process in the Middle
East, the Kingdom of Morocco has watched developments
with very great interest, inspired by a tireless resolve to
help remove all obstacles that might undermine or endanger
it. In this respect, my delegation warmly welcomed the
democratic elections that permitted the Palestinian people
to elect its representatives, and it hopes that future
negotiations on the final status of the questions still
outstanding will take place in an atmosphere of good will
and constructive dialogue.

In its concern to see that process take place in a calm
atmosphere and within the framework of bilateral and
multilateral negotiations, my country has spared no effort
to bring the points of View of the parties concerned closer
together and to promote peacemaking and respect for the
legitimate interests of all.

By participating in the Summit of Peacemakers in
Sharm El Sheik in March, His Majesty King Hassan II
wished to demonstrate the resolve of the Kingdom of
Morocco to safeguard the peace process and ensure the
desired success.

At the opening of that Summit, convened in such
timely fashion by Presidents Clinton and Mubarak, His
Majesty the King stated,

"Our meeting should be a door open to the future and
not a door locking out all hope."
Admittedly, betting on peace is a difficult wager, but
the results achieved thus far have made the process
irreversible. As a result, the partners for peace have no
choice but to persevere firmly and resolutely in their
historic undertaking in conformity with the commitments
signed, in spite of tragedies, acts of violence and despair.
This is why we should all take action to prevent terrorists
and indiscriminate violence from holding prisoner this
peace of the brave, so patiently constructed.

We must also act to keep up the Palestinian people's
hopes for and confidence in the peace process, a process
which should enable it to exercise its national rights
pursuant to international law, including with respect to the
city of Al-Quds al-Sharif.

The Palestinian people is experiencing a very critical
situation that calls for assistance on a large scale. The
situation has been aggravated by recent measures taken
against the Palestinian people and which, unfortunately,
are reminiscent of the sorry times before the peace
process. These measures that we all so profoundly regret
have dealt a severe blow to the Palestinian people's socio-
economic life and have begun to shake its motivation to
move forward. They may also, if they continue, pave the
way for a reaction with unfortunate and unforeseeable
consequences.

No one can dispute that the positive developments in
the peace process depend essentially on improvements in
the living conditions of the Palestinian people. Hence, the
vital need to provide appropriate assistance to the
Palestinian National Authority in the implementation of a
programme of economic, social and cultural development
and in the strengthening of institutional and socio-
economic structures in the embryonic Palestinian entity.
By doing this the international community, which has
constantly encouraged the peace process, will enable the
Palestinians to demonstrate that they were right to opt for
peace.

Having said this, there can be no question that the
lasting settlement of the Palestinian question can be built
only on law, justice and equity. These are also the
foundations of the advent of lasting peace also between
Syria and Lebanon on the one hand, and Israel, on the
other, in order to achieve at last a comprehensive peace
based on international law.

The Kingdom of Morocco, which has continually
contributed to the building of a just, comprehensive and
lasting peace in the Middle East, takes the view that it is
essential for the international community to protect the
peace process by taking every possible step to put an end
to acts of violence and by providing effective political,
economic and moral support. The partners for peace
deserve our encouragement if we wish them to work for
genuine peace, protected against any act and any measure
that might undermine it - a peace based on mutual
understanding, cooperation, security, dignity and respect
for the legitimate rights of all the parties concerned.

