Ms. Intelmann (Estonia): First of all, let me
congratulate South Africa upon its assumption of the
presidency this month and thank it for organizing
today's debate.

Estonia aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union (EU).

We welcome the increased focus that the United
Nations is placing on the rule of law and justice
through discussions here in the Security Council, in the
General Assembly and through the concrete activities
that the United Nations system is undertaking. In the
light of recent profound political changes in many parts
of the world, and of new threats to international peace,
it is even more important that the rule of law remain on
the agenda of the United Nations.

My statement today is mainly about the
International Criminal Court (ICC). The relationship
between the Court and the United Nations is of crucial
importance in many ways. The year 2012 marks the
tenth anniversary of the Court. By now, the institution
has an established reputation and a respected role in
the international arena. In 1998, States agreed to create
a permanent International Criminal Court as the court
of last resort to end impunity for the most heinous
international crimes. They also agreed to assume, on a
national basis, primary responsibility for bringing
perpetrators of such crimes to justice. At present,
120 States are parties to the Rome Statute. The
campaign for the universality of the Statute is ongoing;
it is supported by the States parties, regional actors and
the United Nations.

As efforts towards achieving the universal
ratification of the Rome Statute continue, the need to
work on strengthening national jurisdictions to be able
to prosecute crimes under the Rome Statute is
becoming more and more acute. The Court and States
parties are carrying out important activities in support
of countries in need. It is clear, however, that, if we
want to succeed, the ability to prosecute international
crimes must become an integral part of the broader rule
of law activities of all major development actors. The
United Nations system is well placed to play a major
role in that endeavour. Our joint efforts to provide
assistance for developing national capacities to cope
with crimes under the Rome Statute would strengthen
national justice systems as a whole. I am very glad to
say that there is an ongoing dialogue between the
Court, the Assembly of States Parties and the United
Nations concerning that issue. While combating
impunity, the ultimate goal is preventing the
commission of crimes in the first place.

The ability of the Court to fulfil its functions also
depends on the ability and resolve of States parties and
other States to offer their cooperation. There are still a
number of outstanding arrest warrants. States parties
are constantly working through their Bureau and their
President to ensure full cooperation with the Court,
especially in the crucial area of the execution of arrest
warrants. The Security Council has referred two cases
to the ICC, and in these cases, too, arrest warrants are
outstanding. Recently, two findings of non-cooperation
were referred to the Security Council by the Court.
Continuing international focus on cooperation with the
International Criminal Court and international tribunals
is of the utmost importance if the quest to end impunity
is to be credible and successful.

The face of those suffering from atrocious
international crimes is very often that of the most
vulnerable - women and children. Addressing the
plight of victims through broader community
programmes, including education, is one of the
activities the Court has undertaken. These activities,
funded by voluntary contributions, target affected
communities and help in healing, while making a
contribution to a deeper change in society by helping
them regain their dignity and rebuild their
communities. Here again, interaction with the United
Nations system is of great value.

Resolution 1325 (2000) and other Council
resolutions on women, peace and security and on
children in armed conflict should remain high on the
agenda of the United Nations. We are concerned by
continued reporting about mass rapes as a method of
war and the very low numbers of perpetrators who
have been brought to justice. The only way to remedy
this situation is to ensure that all national jurisdictions
are able to investigate and prosecute the worst crimes
under international law.

Considering that the Council has recognized that
conflict-related sexual violence is a legitimate threat to
international peace and security, we hope that it will
remain actively engaged with the matter. It is important
to maintain focus on gender equality and the
empowerment of women in broader rule of law
activities. I hope that the high-level meeting on the rule
of law to be held by the General Assembly in
September will provide new impetus to these
discussions.

In conclusion, I would like to say that Estonia is
firmly committed to the international order based on
international law, including human rights law and the
rule of law. Estonia has become an international donor
and the rule of law enjoys a prominent place in our
development cooperation strategy. Estonia has created
a stable and fruitful basis for cooperation with many of
our partner counties by sharing our recent experience
of social, political and economical reforms. That is
why we support and highly value EU cooperation in
the field of rule of law with its eastern neighbours in
the framework of the Eastern Partnership. We are also
actively involved in several EU civilian crisis-
management operations with a focus on the rule of law.

