Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Sandra Honore, for her briefing today. We
recognize the continued contribution of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) to
stability and progress in Haiti, and I would like to thank
the departing Force Commander, Lieutenant General
Edson Leal Pujol, for his service in MINUSTAH. We
would also like to welcome Lieutenant General Jose
Luiz Jaborandy Jr. as the new Force Commander.

Haiti stands in a stronger position today than it
has for some time in recent history. As we see from
the Secretary-General's report (S/2014/162), notable
progress has been made in areas such as rehousing
internally displaced persons, building the capacity of
the Haitian National Police, who are taking greater
responsibility for security throughout the country,
and the striking downward trend in major crimes. We
also welcome the economic growth reported by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the building block that that provides for sustainable
development.

However, those gains can be threatened by a lack
of political progress in holding elections. In order to
ensure Haiti's future development and stability, long-
overdue local, municipal and partial senatorial elections
must be held. Dialogue between the executive and
parliamentary branches of Government and the political
parties in Haiti is essential to resolve the political
impasse. We urge all parties to address democratic
governance, elections and constitutional amendments
through the national dialogue process. As the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General said, a path
has been prepared towards inclusive and transparent
elections. It is essential that that path be followed in
2014, leading to a clear destination in the form of the
holding of elections.

We are pleased to see that the benchmarks laid out
in the consolidation plan are on track, and we welcome
the Secretary-General's assessment that those could be
accelerated, given the progress in Haiti to date. The
Haitian National Police are more visible, more proactive
and more in the lead of security operations across Haiti.
We applaud the advances made in recruitment, training
and operational responsibility.

At the same time, in order to complement
improvements in the Haitian National Police, the
judicial and prison sectors must make similar advances.
More work is necessary, in particular on the part
of the Government of Haiti, to develop justice and
accountability institutions. Today, those institutions
provide limited access to justice, are weak and open to
influence and maintain pre-trial detention periods that
are unacceptable, and that must change.

We agree with the report of the Secretary-General
that the functions likely to remain relevant beyond
2016 will be continued support for the development of
the Haitian National Police, consolidation of political
stabilization gains through good offices, continued
strengthening of the rule of law through security
sector and legislative reforms, and the promotion and
protection of human rights.

With those tasks in mind, we agree with the report's
assessment that the future United Nations presence in
Haiti will need to have a more tailored mandate and a
lighter footprint so as to ensure that the United Nations
presence is appropriate to Haiti's needs today. We now
await the outcomes of the strategic assessment and
urge that to be conducted as soon as possible. We look
forward to hearing the outcomes of that assessment in
the next report of the Secretary-General.

We welcome the fact that the Secretary-General's
recent report sets out a broad range of options,
particularly given what we have just heard about
political progress and continued improvement in the
performance of the Haitian National Police, and if those
welcome trends are sustained, we believe we should
be ready to consider ambitious options for the United
Nations presence post-2016 that prioritize Haitian
ownership.

The future of Haiti is in the hands of the national
authorities. Only they can build on MINUSTAH's
efforts and consolidate the gains of the past few years.
As the Council begins to consider how best to support
the Haitian authorities after the end of the consolidation
plan, now is the time for them to assume the
responsibilities conferred on them by Haitian people.
The Government cannot rely on MINUSTAH to be in
Haiti forever, and cannot shirk their obligations in the
hope that the international community will fill the gap.

Lastly, we echo the Secretary-General's view that
it has become imperative for the national authorities
to assume greater responsibility in establishing the
rule of law and in preparations for the next elections.
Doing so will provide the political stability necessary
for economic investment, and we urge the Haitian
authorities to fulfil those responsibilities to safeguard
Haiti's future.

