Mr. Cardi (Italy) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for your very detailed briefing as Chair
of the Committee. I would also like to align myself with
my colleagues in addressing the families of Michael
Sharp and Zaida Catalan. On behalf of my Government,
I would like to once again pledge our sympathy and
solidarity as wejoin them in their grief. Italy hopes that
those responsible for the deaths of the two members
of the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo extended pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2293 (2016) will be swiftly brought to justice
and tried.

In that connection, and in welcoming the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we appeal once
again to the authorities of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to expeditiously and thoroughly investigate
those murders and to cooperate with the investigations
carried out by Sweden and the United States. As for the
United Nations investigation, following the Secretary-
General's letter to the Council, we support the efforts
of the Secretary-General to ensure justice and we
encourage him to implement an effective follow-up
mechanism without delay, after consulting with the
Congolese authorities.

Today's meeting seeks to analyse the results
of the work of Michael Sharp, Zaida Catalan and
their colleagues - precious work that will help us
understand the complexity of the Congolese reality. As
you just pointed out in your briefing, Mr. President, the
final report of the Group of Experts on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (see S/2017/672/Rev.l) provides
a detailed analysis of the persistence of negative forces,
especially in eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, where armed groups foment instability,
namely, by exploiting the country's natural resources.

Italy is therefore deeply concerned about that illicit
exploitation. As the Security Council has repeatedly
mentioned in its resolutions, putting an end to that
illegal trafficking is critical to the peace and security of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Government
in Kinshasa has taken several measures to better secure
the supply chain of minerals and to implement a tracking
system. We encourage the Government to redouble its
efforts, especially with regard to the trafficking of gold,
in which, according to the latest report of the Group of
Experts, certain members of the Congolese army have
been implicated. We therefore urge the authorities of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to prosecute
them for those illegal activities in order to send a clear
message against impunity.

As for imposing sanctions on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we are ready to work with the
chairmanship of the Committee and to participate in
dialogue with regional countries, which, in our view,
play a key role in ensuring an effective regime.

Michael and Zaida lost their lives as they were
investigating human rights in the greater Kasai region.
For months, the southern provinces of the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo have been plunged into a cycle of
violence and murder. Italy hopes that the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo will carry
out a swift and transparent investigations to establish
the facts and circumstances for the human rights
violations and abuses committed in the Kasais over
recent months. In that regard, while recalling that the
Congolese authorities have the primary responsibility
of protecting their population, we hope that they can
cooperate with the international Group of Experts
appointed by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. The perpetrators of
those crimes must be prosecuted and convicted.

At the political level, Italy is concerned about
the lack of progress in the implementation of the
31 December 2016 agreement, which remains the only
credible road map for resolving the crisis and supporting
the legitimacy of the transitional institutions. In
that connection, we call on the Government and the
political forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to rapidly implement the agreement and to ease
tensions, in keeping with that agreement. In our view,
those are essential steps to organizing democratic and
transparent elections. We believe that we must urgently
set the electoral timetable and accelerate the preparation
of peaceful, credible and inclusive elections - to be
held as soon as possible and in accordance with the
Congolese Constitution and the agreement I have just
referred to.

In conclusion, Italy continues to attach great
importance to the rigorous implementation of the
sanctions regime. We remain committed to working with
the other Council members to renew the regime. The
Group of Experts report that has been submitted for our
consideration will also serve as a vehicle for honouring
the memory of Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalan.

