Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): We
believe that today's debate on securing borders against
illicit cross-border trafficking and movement and how
cross-border crime and its manifestations can
exacerbate situations under the Council's consideration
is taking place at a very timely moment. The Secretary-
General made some very pointed comments on the
implications of such activities and the involvement of
the United Nations.

Managing, securing and protecting borders is a
sovereign prerogative of States. We believe it
necessary to strike a balance between control measures
to maintain secure borders and facilitating the
movement of persons, funds and legitimate goods. This
discussion should lead us to deepen the cooperation
between the Security Council and other bodies of the
United Nations system concerning an issue that, by its
very nature and global scope, requires concerted and
coordinated action of the various organs and bodies of
the United Nations system in development of the
principles of the Charter and the framework of its
respective responsibilities and mandates.

Illicit trafficking in nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons and their delivery systems, as well
as the movement of terrorists and their funds across
borders, are recognized as threats to international peace
and security. Moreover, in specific contexts, the
Council has discussed different manifestations of
organized crime that contribute to the deterioration of
situations that are already fragile. These complex
criminal activities transcend the trafficking and cross-
border dimensions and require a comprehensive and
balanced approach that addresses all their aspects.

The international community must combat such
criminal activities with unwavering resolve. That is
why it is a priority to adopt, in the context of the
Organization, a binding instrument to improve control
of the trade in small arms and light weapons,
explosives and related materials, and the marking and
registration of munitions in order, and to prohibit their
transfer to armed non-State actors. The illicit cross-
border traffic in weapons is probably one of the factors
with the greatest impact on national and international
security, and further exacerbates violent situations.

We must acknowledge that effective compliance
with obligations arising from the Council's decisions
adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter depends not
solely on political will, but also on the tools available
to Member States. That is why, on the basis of an
assessment that emphasizes cooperation and
coordination, we should focus our efforts on improving
the efficiency of binding decisions taken by the
Council to strengthen the capacities, institutions and
normative frameworks of Member States.

In exercising sovereign power to manage and
control their borders, States have the responsibility to
fully meet their international obligations. In that
context, Colombia welcomes the creation of an
inventory of actions and initiatives that have been
taken by the Organization at the request of States in
order to strengthen its capacities in this area.

The criminal manifestations under consideration
today are also regulated by specialized international
treaties, in conformity with a broad and comprehensive
legislative framework that offers the legal tools
adequate to combating them. Similarly, agreements
reached in the context of the General Assembly
recognize overall concepts that are broadly accepted
within the Organization and allow the development of
inclusive and balanced strategies. The Organization as
a whole must focus its efforts on providing the
assistance requested by States towards achieving
comprehensive compliance with the obligations that
arise from these agreements.

It is also necessary to adopt efficient mechanisms
and measures to strengthen international cooperation
and coordination among States to combat the various
manifestations of the crimes under consideration. It is

therefore a priority to strengthen border controls
through the allocation of technological and financial
resources, to establish effective legal cooperation
agreements, and to exchange information.

My country believes that these challenges should
be addressed holistically and in respect for the balance
between measures to strengthen security and avoiding
obstacles to social and economic development. While
we understand the need to protect ourselves from the
dangers posed by what has been referred to as illicit
cross-border trafficking and movement, Colombia's
laws and Constitution consider borders primarily as
zones of integration wherein economic, social,
scientific, technological and cultural development
should be promoted. As such, they emphasize the
strengthening of systems for cross-border customs
cooperation, as well as of networks for the sharing of
information among law-enforcement authorities.

