Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): My delegation is pleased that we have in our
midst today legitimate representatives of the Government of
Sierra Leone - a Government that was elected
democratically through a process, recognized and
commended by us all, which was followed from beginning
to end by the international community.

I will not go into the circumstances that prompted the
Security Council today to discuss the question of Sierra
Leone. I will limit myself to noting, along with other
members of the Council, that on 25 May, that the
democratic process in Sierra Leone was brutally

interrupted following a coup d'etat perpetrated by a

military junta.

The international community did not hesitate for a
minute. It mobilized to unambiguously condemn the coup
and to demand the return of constitutional order and the
unconditional restoration of the Government of President
Kabbah.

The military junta has distinguished itself by
atrocities that we condemn, by systematic human rights
violations and by actions that run counter to the most
basic human rights. That is why we are here today to
express clearly our solidarity with the people of Sierra
Leone and once again to reject any policy of fait
accompli.

The Security Council has three times now made it
clear in presidential statements that it rejects the exercise
of political power by force. The Security Council
pronounced itself in favour of the restoration of
constitutional order to Sierra Leone and has consistently
stated its readiness to consider appropriate measures to
help to bring about a return of constitutional order to
Sierra Leone.

Today we are asked to respond in practical terms to
the appeal made to us by the people of Sierra Leone. That
appeal is a distress call because 18 months ago, when the
people of that country were for the first time asked freely
to express themselves, they unanimously chose President
Kabbah to lead their country and to preside over the
destiny of their homeland.

The Organization of African Unity (OAU), at its
thirty-third summit, held in Harare in June, solemnly
condemned the coup d'etat. It indicated that the era of
coups d'etat was long since over and that it was
inadmissible for the military to decide to perpetrate them
in order to claim the right to lead their country against the
wishes of the people, as expressed freely through the
ballot box.

The Government of President Kabbah has
distinguished itself by a democratic approach since its
accession to power, to the extent that the President and
his colleagues have striven to carry out a policy of
national reconciliation that includes all the vital forces
and the political parties of their country, with a view to
creating a secure foundation for democracy and for the
exercise of power by the people.
 

Unfortunately, all of those efforts were inconclusive.
The Government of President Kabbah went to Abidjan,
where an agreement was signed that acceded to certain
claims of the opposition. That agreement was to constitute
the political and juridical framework which was to enable
the consolidation of democracy in Sierra Leone. The
international community, through the President of the
Security Council, welcomed that agreement, which gave
rise to hopes that this was to be the start of a new era in
Sierra Leone - an era of peace, national reconciliation and
democracy. Unfortunately, the perpetrators of the coup
destroyed the hopes of the people of Sierra Leone.

The Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), in keeping with the spirit of solidarity of our
peoples, spared no effort in helping to bring about a return
to democracy in that fraternal country. Following the
ministerial meeting held in Conakry on 26 June, the
Committee of Four Foreign Ministers - Guinea, Cote
d'Ivoire, Ghana and Nigeria, and later Liberia - was set
up to implement the decisions taken at that meeting through
an ongoing search for ways and means to undertake
negotiations with the putschists, because negotiations were
never set aside during this process. I believe that we should
stress here both the devotion and the determination of those
five countries, which, as I said earlier, have spared no
effort to negotiate a settlement that would be acceptable to
all.

The Security Council twice - on 11 July and 19
September last - received a delegation led by the Foreign
Ministers of Nigeria, Guinea, Cote d'Ivoire, Ghana and
Liberia. They came not only to tell Council members of
their concern at the seriousness of the crisis prevailing in
Sierra Leone but also to remind the Security Council of its
obligations stemming from the Charter, that is, our
commitment to defend the principles that the Secretary-
General reiterated in his letter dated 7 October addressed to
the Council.

We feel that today's meeting responds to our need to
contribute to a quest for peace through negotiations.
However, the stubborn refusal of the military junta to
relinquish power and to accept the restoration of
constitutional order, notwithstanding the efforts of the
international community and particularly of the mediation
committee of ECOWAS, obliges us today once again to
express strong condemnation and, we hope, to take steps
that will be a clear response to that stubborn refusal.

The failure of the negotiations conducted at Abidjan
on 29 July between the mediation committee and the junta
proved once again that the members of the junta are not
prepared to cooperate in good faith in establishing
conditions that would permit the return to constitutional
order, by which I mean the return of President Kabbah,
a President democratically elected to the head of his
country.

Today, having noted that stubborn refusal and in
light of the evasiveness we have witnessed - and here
we base ourselves on the summit communique of the
ECOWAS heads of State held at Abuja on 28 and 29
August 1997 - our Council has decided to help in the
subregional effort that is being made by ECOWAS once
again to categorically reject any decision that would allow
any illegal perpetuation of unconstitutional power
following the coup d'etat perpetrated by the putschists in
May and to contribute, through firm and appropriate
action, to a return to constitutional order in that country.

Given those considerations and the various
discussions we have had in the Security Council on this
subject, Guinea-Bissau finds this meeting today timely,
necessary and wholly appropriate. The draft resolution
before us both reflects our concerns and gives
unambiguous expression to the will and determination we
all feel to work to consolidate peace in Sierra Leone -
through negotiations, certainly, but also through
resolutions that will remind the junta that it must
compromise and listen to reason.

The draft resolution we about to adopt will, we
hope, be a clear expression of our resolve, and we hope
that the military junta in Freetown will not interpret it as
just another Security Council statement like those made
here in the past. As we have said, it is an appeal to
reason. It is an appeal for negotiations. It is an appeal for
the return of the democratically elected Government of
President Kabbah and for a return to the peace that the
people of Sierra Leone so ardently desire.

It is of course with some reluctance that we adopt a
draft resolution that imposes sanctions on Sierra Leone.
We too, like some other members of the Council, are
concerned about the possible humanitarian impact on an
innocent population which, as I have said, is already
experiencing the horrors of a power that has no respect
for the most elementary humanitarian principles. I believe,
however, that the people of Sierra Leone will agree with
us as we try once again, through these sanctions, to lend
assistance to them and that they will be prepared to
accept these additional sacrifices, to the extent that the
 

sanctions will, we hope, help to bring about a speedy return
of peace and democracy.

I would like here to pay tribute to the African
countries that are members of the ECOWAS mediation
committee, who have been working tirelessly in this
collective effort which the Security Council is asked to join
today. I would like to thank them in particular for agreeing
to receive, in the dignified manner traditional to Africa,
hundreds of thousands of refugees at a time when we know
that those countries, Guinea, Cote d'Ivoire and even
Liberia, are facing socio-economic difficulties. I think that
this is an expression of African solidarity, and it goes
without saying that it will be up to the international
community - as indeed the draft resolution we are about
to adopt indicates - to lend every assistance in exercising
this very African solidarity.

I should like to say that my delegation will vote in
favour of the draft resolution because it is the expression of
our condemnation of the military coup and the
unambiguous expression of the rejection by the international
community, and by the Security Council in particular, of
faits accomplis. It represents our refusal to accept the fact
that a military group can seize power by force and destroy
a democratic process that was the free expression of the
wishes of an entire people.

