The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"Recalling all previous resolutions and
statements of its President regarding the situation
between Ethiopia and Eritrea, the Security
Council emphasizes the importance of the
commitments undertaken by the Government of
the State of Eritrea and the Government of the
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia to the
Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities signed in
Algiers on 18 June 2000 (S/2000/60l) and the
subsequent Peace Agreement between the parties
(S/2000/ll83) signed in Algiers on 12 December
2000 ('Algiers Agreements').

"The Security Council reiterates its strong
support for the Secretary-General's role in
helping to implement the Agreements, including
through his own good offices, and for the efforts
of his Special Representative. It further expresses
its appreciation for the continued role of the
Organization of African Unity in helping to
implement the Algiers Agreements.

"The Security Council also reiterates its
appreciation for the continued deployment of the
United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
(UNMEE) both to the troop-contributing
countries and to those Member States that have
provided UNMEE with additional assets.

"The Security Council encourages both
parties to continue working towards the full and
prompt implementation of the Agreements and, in
this context, to take concrete confidence-building
measures. The Council further reaffirms its
continued commitment to a peaceful definitive
settlement of the conflict. In this connection, the

Council notes with satisfaction that the parties
have agreed to the Secretary-General's proposal
of 1 May 2001, on the composition of the
Boundary and Claims Commissions, critical
components to the peaceful definitive settlement
of the conflict. It now calls on the parties to fully
cooperate with the Boundary Commission and to
fulfil their financial responsibilities regarding the
Boundary Commission's work.

"The Security Council stresses that the
parties must provide free movement and access
for UNMEE and its supplies as required
throughout the territories of the parties, without
any restrictions, including within the Temporary
Security Zone (TSZ) and the 15 km wide adjacent
area. Free and unhindered access for UNMEE is a
fundamental condition for the success of the
peacekeeping operation. The Security Council
emphasizes further that the purpose of the TSZ is
to separate the parties' armed forces. The TSZ
must be completely demilitarized. The civilian
populations inside the TSZ should be supported
by an appropriate but limited number of Eritrean
civilian militia and police.

"The Security Council calls on the parties to
cooperate fully and expeditiously with UNMEE
in the implementation of its mandate and to abide
scrupulously by the letter and spirit of their
agreements, particularly regarding the
inviolability of the TSZ. It also calls on both
parties to exercise restraint in their public
statements.

"The Security Council further calls on the
parties to continue to facilitate mine action in
coordination with the United Nations Mine
Action Service. It encourages the parties to
exercise caution in returning civilians to the TSZ
before it has been adequately demined. The
Council further calls for the immediate
establishment of a secure air corridor between
Addis Ababa and Asmara that does not require a
detour through other countries. It also calls on
Eritrea to conclude the necessary Status of Forces
Agreement for UNMEE.

"The Security Council notes that, in
accordance with paragraph 16 of resolution 1298
(2000) of 17 May 2000, the arms embargo on the
parties expires on 16 May 2001. The Council

recognizes that the Algiers Agreements

consistent with paragraphs 2 through 4 of
resolution 1298 (2000). Under the current
circumstances, the measures imposed by
paragraph 6 of the same resolution have not been
extended by the Council beyond 16 May 2001.

"The Security Council urges the parties to
ensure that efforts are redirected from weapons
procurement and other military activities towards
the reconstruction and development of both
economies, and regional reconciliation, with a
View to achieving stability in the Horn of Africa.
The Council reiterates its encouragement of
Member States to exercise the highest degree of
responsibility in discouraging arms flows to
countries and regions emerging from armed
conflicts.

"The Security Council remains vigilant and
expresses its intention to take appropriate
measures if the situation between Eritrea and
Ethiopia again threatens regional peace and
security.

"The Security Council will remain seized of
the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2001/14.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

Before adjourning, I wish, on behalf of the
Council members, to extend a warm send-off to the
Security Council mission due to depart this evening to
the Great Lakes region. We wish the members of the
mission a safe and successful trip and look forward to
their return and reporting.

The meeting rose at 12.25 pm.
