Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): Before I start, I would
like to thank you, Madam President, and everybody
around the table, for your patience in waiting for us
to deliver our statement. I know that we are delaying
your dinner, I will do my best to be quick. I would
also like to thank the high-level visitors, Secretary of
State Pompeo, for his briefing and his presence at the
Security Council, as well as the State Secretary of the
Federal Foreign Office of Germany, Mr. Michaelis,
and the Chef de Cabinet of the Executive Office of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Viotti.

It is 20 August, late in the supposedly calmest
month of the year in the Security Council, and the
Council has held no fewer than 11 meetings on Middle
East issues so far. This reflects the increasing number
of challenges as well as the alarming deterioration of
the security and humanitarian situation in many parts
of our region.

The situation in the Palestinian occupied territories
involves multiple challenges or, rather, deficits: a
political deficit, in the form of an absence ofa credible
peace effort and the challenge of bringing about a
just solution; an economic deficit, where the financial
and economic situation of the Palestinian people is
desperate; a humanitarian deficit, where the needs of the
Palestinians under occupation and the refugees outside
are so enormous that the alarming deficit in security for
Palestinians everywhere is a natural consequence; and
a deficit in respect for international law, international
humanitarian law and human rights law. But the worst
deficit that the Palestinians are suffering from now is
the deficit of hope.

The Israeli policy ofcontinuing to create facts on the
ground is depriving the Palestinians of an independent
and sovereign future and a life of peace and dignity.
The most glaring examples of the challenges are the
continuing Israeli expansion of the settlements and
the continued unlawful confiscation and demolition
of Palestinian homes, and the Israeli violations of the
Al-Aqsa Mosque, the third-holiest site in Islam. These
actions are heightening the tension in the occupied
territories, the region and the Muslim world. Holy sites
should be respected and their sanctity preserved. It is
the responsibility of the Organization and the Security
Council to make sure that United Nations resolutions,
the Geneva Conventions and international law are
respected in that regard.

The United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
is experiencing an existential crisis. As a major
host country, Lebanon is very concerned about the
implications of this crisis on Palestinian refugees and
host communities. While commending the countries
that provide much-needed financial contributions,
Lebanon calls on the international community to find a
sustainable solution to UNRWA's financial ordeal.

Lebanon reiterates the Secretary-General's strong
conviction that there is no plan B for the Palestinian-
Israeli issue. There is one way out of this intractable
conflict, namely, a just and comprehensive peace
based on United Nations resolutions, the right to self-
determination, a return to the pre-1967 borders, the
Arab Peace Initiative and a two-State solution that
gives rise to a Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as
its capital. The absence of such a settlement condemns
the whole region to continued conflict and bloodshed.
Despite these difficult times, Lebanon has
succeeded in shoring up its internal stability and is
putting itself on the path of an economic recovery. A
few days ago, Prime Minister Saad Hariri reiterated
Lebanon's dedication to advancing key initiatives in
the Government's reform agenda, such as the CEDRE
conference on economic development and reform and
the capital investment plan, which are essential to the
revival of the Lebanese economy and to bolstering
security and stability for Lebanon and the region.

On the peace and security issue, the Government
is doing its best to maintain Lebanon's stability and
security, especially on its southern border, with the
help of the international community and the United
Nations. The Lebanese Government expressed its
commitment to promptly developing a plan to enhance
the naval capabilities of the Lebanese Armed Forces,
in accordance with resolution 2433 (2018). But this
situation will remain fragile as long as Israel continues
its occupation of Lebanese territories in south Lebanon
and its territorial waters.

Lebanon is committed to conflict resolution and
has sought the good offices of the United States in a
process aimed at finding such a solution. Last week,
Prime Minister Hariri confirmed to Secretary of State
Pompeo Lebanon's commitment to continuing the
negotiations process on the land and maritime borders.
He called the process vital for Lebanon and viable.
The Prime Minister vowed to continue to support the
constitutional next step leading to a final decision in
the coming months, hopefully in September.

The Prime Minister reaffirmed Lebanon's
commitment to resolution 1701 (2006) and its readiness
to move from cessation of hostilities to a ceasefire
under a United Nations mechanism. But for that to
happen, the Prime Minister emphasized, Israel has to
implement its part of the resolution.

In contrast to the Lebanese commitment to
resolution 1701 (2006), Israel continues its daily
violations of Lebanese sovereignty with impunity.
Those violations have taken a dangerous turn, because
Israel is continuing to use Lebanese air space to conduct
military operations against Syria. The latest such
operation from Lebanese air space happened on 1 July,
when nine Israeli military jets breached Lebanese
sovereignty to launch a rocket attack on Syria.

In a few days, the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
will be upon us. In a letter to Council members, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lebanon, Mr. Gebran
Bassil, expressed Lebanon's

"strong support to the existing UNIFIL mandate
and its full commitment to the implementation of
United Nations Security Council resolution 1701
(2006) in its entirety, including the withdrawal of
Israeli forces from the Lebanese occupied territories
Kfar Shuba Hills, Shab'a farms and the northern
part of Ghajar village, without further delay".

Lebanon applauds the dedication and
professionalism of UNIFIL's peacekeepers, staff and
leadership, and its continued cooperation with the
Lebanese Armed Forces. Lebanon is grateful for the
support of the troop-contributing countries and highly
values their efforts and sacrifices. UNIFIL is doing a
formidable job in maintaining stability in the south. We
hope that its make-up, mandate and role are renewed in
a spirit of understanding of the important role of this
peacekeeping mission and of the challenges in the area.

