Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): I would like to begin
by aligning myself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union.

Journalists, including bloggers, are still all too
often the targets of aggression, harassment, arbitrary
detention and even extrajudicial killings. The adoption
ofresolution 1738 (2006), though an important step, has
not put an end to attacks on reporters, so more must
be done. This open debate will be instrumental to that,
in our View, and I would therefore like to thank you,
Mr. President, and through you to commend the United
States delegation for organizing this important event.

The role of journalists before, during and after
conflict is indispensable. The very fact that they are
intentionally being targeted testifies to that. The
media play an important role in preventing conflict
by ensuring that their reporting separates facts and
tangible realities from assumptions and spin. And
after a conflict has broken out, the media also have a
responsibility to provide a reliable account of what is
really going on. Their stories and images show what
is actually happening, which can help a community to
understand the conflict that is taking place. Real insight
may also help to generate international commitment to
conflict resolution.

Resolution 1738 (2006) summed it up well.
Intentional acts of Violence against journalists are
unacceptable and should be condemned and prosecuted
by the authorities, because attacks on the media have
the sole and illegitimate purpose of curtailing freedom
of expression, and through that the people's voices. And
we need more voices to be heard, not fewer. Thanks
to the advent of the Internet, that is exactly what is
currently happening. Everyone can now reach large
audiences with their story or footage. Citizenjournalism
has become an important source of information during
conflict and real-time images often have enormous
impact, which also makes them an attractive instrument
for manipulation for some.

The Netherlands has therefore decided to
encourage new forms of journalism and to contribute
to the protection of its messengers. We provide
such encouragement by financially supporting the
development of the StoryMaker application. This
application enables citizen and professional journalists
in conflict areas to immediately tell and share their
stories by mobile phone with millions of people around
the world without endangering their online privacy and
security. The application also includes an interactive
training guide on independent and safe reporting. It
is available for free and can be downloaded through
www.storymaker.cc.

We are promoting our second priority, protection,
by establishing the Freedom Online Coalition. This
cross-regional coalition, now numbering 21 countries,
was set up in 2011 and is committed to respecting
human rights and fundamental freedoms offline and
online alike. As a part of that, several members of
the Freedom Online Coalition have set up the Digital
Defenders Partnership to promote innovative solutions
in keeping access to the Internet open. The Partnership
is also used to support journalists, bloggers and
cyberactivists who find themselves under attack and to
facilitate deployment of emergency Internet access in
countries where the Internet is not accessible.

These are just two examples of concrete action to
protect the freedom of expression and its messengers.
But more still needs to be done. The Netherlands looks
forward to collaborating with the members of the
Council to ensure better protection for the courageous
journalists who help to ensure that the truth is not the
first casualty in conflict situations.

