Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
welcomes today's meeting for our quarterly open debate
on the situation in the Middle East. We would like to
thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his detailed and
comprehensive presentation.

This being our first statement on this subject in our
capacity as a non-permanent member of the Council,
we want to emphasize our concern about the situation
in the Middle East and to reiterate our commitment to
finding a solution to the question of Palestine that will
help to achieve sustainable peace in the region. In that
regard, we would like to highlight three aspects.

First, Peru, guided by its commitment to
multilateralism, international law and the peaceful
settlement of disputes, supports a two-State solution
within internationally recognized and secure borders,
to be negotiated directly between Israel and Palestine
on the basis of the 1967 borders. The negotiations
should also determine the final status of Jerusalem. In
1947, Peru was one of the 11 member countries of the
United Nations Special Committee on Palestine that
recommended the establishment of two States, which
was reflected in the General Assembly's adoption that
year of its historic resolution 181 (11). Peru was one of
the 33 countries that voted in favour of it. In that regard,
I would like to cite part of the renowned Peruvian jurist
and diplomat Alberto Ulloa Sotomayor's statement in
support of Peru's position:

"We believe that the best solution consists in the
formation of two States in which the corresponding
majorities are respected."
On the basis of that principled position, Peru
has developed excellent relations of friendship and
cooperation with the States of Israel and Palestine that
reflect and strengthen the historical bonds established
and promoted by our country's Jewish and Arab-
Palestinian communities. We want to emphasize that,
70 years after the adoption of resolution 181 (II), the
solution to the question of Palestine has not changed.
As the Secretary-General said recently, "There is
no alternative to the two-State solution. There is no
plan B."

Secondly, if we are to resolve the question of
Palestine and promote sustainable peace in the Middle
East, we have to act in accordance with international
law and the Charter of the United Nations. The trust
and credibility required for any negotiation in good
faith necessarily involves respect for the rule oflaw and
for minimum standards of peaceful coexistence. In that
regard, we urge the parties that are directly involved to
cease, investigate and punish all violations of human
rights or international humanitarian law, all acts of
terrorism and all attacks on civilians. We must reject
hate speech, anti-Semitism and discrimination in any
form. Ethnic, cultural and religious diversity should be
appreciated as values for all societies, and should never
be seen as threats.

Peru recognizes the right of Israel to safeguard
its own security and existence through legitimate
self-defence, in accordance with the principles of
proportionality and legality. We would also like to recall
in that regard the obligation to comply with Security
Council resolutions. In line with resolution 2334 (2016),
we consider it particularly urgent to end the practices,
which have increased during the past year, of building
settlements, demolishing buildings and evicting
residents in the occupied Palestinian territories.

We want to recognize and encourage the efforts
of the various stakeholders aimed at arriving at a
sustainable peace between Israel and Palestine. We
welcome the willingness that various countries,
particularly those that have historically been participants
in the process, have expressed to contribute their good
offices in that regard. We would like to highlight the
efforts of the Quartet and the Arab Peace Initiative.
We also welcome the Secretary-General's readiness
to promote the parties' resumption of negotiations.
We especially encourage the peoples of Israel and
Palestine, their political and religious leaders, and all
those with the capacity for influence, to act responsibly
and to encourage moderation, detente, commitment
and dialogue. We have been attentively following the
Palestinian Authority's process of restoring control
of the Gaza Strip, which we hope will alleviate the
humanitarian crisis in that area and help to relaunch the
peace process.

Lastly, we would like to acknowledge the important
work being done by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees in the Near
East. We consider it important to support it and provide
it with stable and predictable financing.

In conclusion, we want to say that Peru will continue
to strongly support all initiatives aimed at building the
peace and security that Israelis and Palestinians deserve
and that the whole world longs for.

