Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would like
to express my appreciation to the Chinese presidency
for convening this important open debate, allowing
us to share our views on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. I also wish to
thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General to the
Palestine Liberation Organization and the Palestinian
Authority, for his informative briefing.

Viet Nam aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Last month marked the fiftieth anniversary of the
1967 Six-Day War, which resulted in Israel's occupation
of the Palestinian and Arab lands. It is painful that we
still have to witness unprecedented, grave crises in the
Middle East, with the unsolved question of Palestine at
the heart. After a half century, the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict remains complex with the peace process stalled
and a lack of dialogue between the parties. The situation
has become ever-more complicated and inflamed by
continued illegal settlement activities, acts of terror, the
rise of violent extremism and increased radicalization.
These ongoing activities have caused the vast loss of
lives, disruption of culture and livelihoods of civilians,
constitute an obstacle to the peace process, including a
two-State solution, and pose a serious threat to regional
and international peace and security.

Together with the international community,
Viet Nam is deeply concerned about the serious
developments in the region, especially the recent
escalating tensions and violent clashes in and around
the old city of Jerusalem. We strongly condemn all
acts of terrorism and violence and extend our sincere
condolences to the bereaved families of the victims,
and wish a speedy recovery for the wounded. We are
also very much concerned about the closure of the holy
Al-Aqsa Mosque.

It is clear that half a century of occupation is a
tragedy for all sides. It is illegal under international
law and makes achieving peace impossible. We call on
Israel to cease any further settlement activities, as well
as its closure of the Gaza Strip, respect and restore the
historic status quo of the holy sites in Jerusalem, and
at the same time, step up efforts to improve the living
condition of the Palestinian people. We urge all parties
concerned to fully freeze actions of hostility, incitement
and violence, and allow the rapid and safe access of the
United Nations and other humanitarian aid agencies to
help ease the sufferings of the Palestinian people.

It is essential for all parties to exercise self-
restraint; strictly comply with the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, including international
humanitarian law and human rights law; implement the
relevant United Nations resolutions and take concrete
actions to reduce tensions and resume peace talks
without any further delay.

Viet Nam reaffirms our unconditional support
for the legitimate struggle of the Palestinian people
for their fundamental rights, especially the sacred
right of self-determination and the establishment of
an independent and sovereign State. We consistently
advocate the settlement of disputes through constructive
dialogue and negotiations, in accordance with relevant
resolutions of the United Nations, including Security
Council resolution 2334 (2016), the 2002 Arab Peace
Initiative and the Quartet road map for peace in the
Middle East, with a view to ultimately achieving a
vision of two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in peace, security and mutual recognition.

In that regard, we welcome the continued efforts
of the League of Arab States to relaunch serious peace
negotiations based on a two-State solution, establishing
a Palestinian State on the lines of 4 June 1967. We are
also of the view that more integrated support from
the international community is needed to facilitate
Palestinian economic development and job creation and
to enhance the State of Palestine's institutional capacity.

Today's open debate represents an important fresh
appeal for action to push forward the peace process
in the region. We must make use of every window of
opportunity to strive for a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the Middle East through negotiations,
under strong United Nations leadership and with
the good will of all Member States and the proactive
contributions of relevant regional organizations and
other stakeholders.

Let me conclude by reiterating Viet Nam's readiness
to continue to work with the international community
for such meaningful collective endeavours.

