Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I thank you, Mr. Yun
Byung-se, for organizing this open debate on a topic
that is of particular importance to my delegation. I
would also like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General
for his statement.

Let me start by welcoming the adoption by the
Council ofpresidential statement S/PRST/2014/7, which
reaffirms the undiminished importance of resolution
1540 (2004) a decade after its adoption.

Lithuania associates itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union.

Terrorism continues to pose increasing threats
to individual countries, as well as the international
community as a whole. Motivated by extreme ideologies,
characterized by diffused organizational structures and
having no attachment to a clearly defined support base,
modern terrorist groups and illicit networks turn to
indiscriminate violence of a magnitude not previously
imagined. To achieve their aims, those groups have
increasing sought to capitalize on deep-seated and
justified fears associated with the possible harm caused
by nuclear, chemical and biological materials if used to
attack nuclear facilities, poison water supplies or render
entire areas uninhabitable.

The traditional weapons of mass destruction
regimes were established to address non-proliferation
by States. As terrorist threats evolved, they were no
longer sufficient to deal with the new international
security environment. By adopting resolution 1540
(2004), the Council aimed to fill those emerging gaps
by establishing universally applicable measures aimed
at preventing weapons proliferation to non-State actors
and ensuring that States take practical steps to prevent
such proliferation through the adoption of effective
national legislation and the establishment domestic
controls. The resolution also established a universal
means by which to create export control standards
outside multilateral export control regimes.

Since the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004),
Lithuania has been a consistent and dedicated supporter.
Through a number of workshops held in Lithuania, we
have sought to focus on the main elements of prevention,
detection and response to illicit trafficking of chemical,
biological and nuclear materials. Lithuania recognizes
the need for a universal and comprehensive reporting
under the resolution. We presented our initial report on

the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in 2004
and we continue to provide regular comprehensive
updates, most recently in November 2013.

Let me now turn to strengthening global nuclear
security as a crucial element of achieving the goals set
by resolution 1540 (2004). The Hague communique,
adopted at the 2014 Nuclear Security Summit, reaffirmed
that strengthening nuclear security and preventing
terrorists, criminals and all other unauthorized actors
from acquiring nuclear materials remains one of the
most important challenges in the years to come. It
also welcomed the significant work undertaken by the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) in strengthening nuclear security.

At The Hague, Lithuania joined a statement
on promoting full and universal implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), expressing commitment to its
full and universal implementation and undertaking to
consider a number of measures to that end. We also
co-sponsored the initiative on strengthening nuclear
security implementation, which is a significant step to
ensure continuous improvement of the nuclear security
regime worldwide. During the previous Nuclear
Security Summit in Seoul, Lithuania also announced
its support for two important initiatives - activity and
cooperation to counter nuclear smuggling, by Jordan,
and nuclear security training and support centres, by
the United States.

Established in April 2012, the Nuclear Security
Centre of Excellence in Lithuania is working towards
increasing capacities of national and regional experts
to counter nuclear smuggling and improve nuclear
security culture. Over 400 experts have been trained
so far, including through projects for officials from
Georgia, Ukraine, Armenia and Moldova. Lithuania is
committed to expanding its international cooperation
in that field in the years to come.

We believe that all would benefit from more
cohesion and a communitarian approach to nuclear
security. We are fully transparent in meeting all
necessary nuclear safety and security requirements.
Living in an interconnected world, we want to see
more transparency and cooperation among States,
especially with neighbours developing nuclear
facilities. Any planned or existing nuclear projects in
any State must be implemented via open, transparent
and honest consultations with all affected countries
and by constructively settling transnational issues and
disputes to that effect.

Ensuring the continued engagement of all States
in implementing the goals of resolution 1540 (2004)
should be Council's key objective. Whether through
outreach, encouraging the submission and updating
of national reports, or through matchmaking between
States seeking assistance and States able to provide it,
the resolution must continue to be a useful tool for all
States. At the same time, it is important to be very clear
about what the States are required to produce and how
their cooperation contributes to implementing the aims
of the resolution. Overburdening States with numerous
and complex reporting obligations will only result in
reporting fatigue.

It is also important for the Panel of Experts of
the 1540 Committee to continue country visits and
active participation in non-proliferation related events.
Furthermore, the Committee should make further use
of possible synergies with other Council bodies dealing
with non-proliferation issues. We would encourage
closer links between the 1540 Group of Experts, the
panels of experts of the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1718 (2006) on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea and 1737 (2006) on Iran,
as well as the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, in particular through making sure that all
Council activities on non-proliferation are sufficiently
reflected in their outreach. Finally, although the
comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004) is due
in 2016, it is important to start preparations early, in
order to ensure an inclusive and productive process.

Let me finish by expressing once again our
appreciation for the efforts of the Republic of Korea,
as Chair of the 1540 Committee, in strengthening the
implementation of the resolution and its universal
application.

