The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the members of the Council that I have received
a letter from the representative of Pakistan in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
2
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite that representative to participate
in the consideration of the item, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Shah
(Pakistan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council.

(spoke in English)

"The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms the twin suicide terrorist attacks
that occurred in Wah Cantt, Pakistan, on
21August 2008 causing numerous deaths and
injuries. It expresses its deep sympathies and
condolences to the Victims of this heinous act of
terrorism and to their families, and to the people
and Government of Pakistan.

"The Security Council underlines the need
to bring perpetrators, organizers, financiers and
sponsors of this reprehensible act of terrorism to
justice, and urges all States, in accordance with
their obligations under international law and
resolution 1373 (2001) and consistent with
resolution 1624 (2005), to cooperate actively with
the Pakistani authorities in this regard.

"The Security Council reaffirms that
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security, and that any acts
of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation, wherever,
whenever and by whomsoever committed.

"The Security Council further reaffirms the
need to combat by all means, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, threats to
international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts. The Council reminds States that
they must ensure that any measures taken to
08-46908
combat terrorism comply with all their
obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law.

"The Security Council reiterates its
determination to combat all forms of terrorism, in
accordance with its responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations."
08-46908
(spoke in French)

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2008/32.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

