Ms. Colakovic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At
the outset, I should like to thank the presidency of
the People's Republic of China for convening this
important and timely thematic debate. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and the Ministers for
their participation. This debate offers an opportunity
to review the roles of the United Nations system and
the Council in maintaining international peace and
security and to enable the Council to draw lessons on
the understanding of war and the tools necessary for the
achievement of permanent peace.

This year, the global community is celebrating the
seventieth anniversary of the founding of the United
Nations. Regrettably, in the very same year we are
commemorating 70 years since the Holocaust and 20
years since the genocide in Srebrenica, while numerous
tragic and pressing conflicts still continue throughout
the world. The nature of conflict has changed
dramatically in the recent period. That fact increases
the challenges to the United Nations and the Security
Council in accomplishing their fundamental purpose
of maintaining international peace and security, the
international rule of law and international fairness
and justice. Conflicts today are less often inter-State
and more predominantly intra-State, asymmetric and
multilayered, not to mention the threats of terrorism and
extremism as very dangerous forms of transnational
instability.

Conflicts are driven by a wide range offactors. They
are often preceded by clearly recognizable indicators
and warning signs. In response to those warnings, a key
challenge for the Council has been in finding consensus
on the balance between a response to an early prevention
of threats to peace and security, on the one hand, and
respect for the prerogatives of national authorities to
resolve internal crises, on the other. The crisis that the
Council is facing today shows that the balance has not
yet been found. The solution could be in better use of
the tools provided by the Charter and of the capacities
of the United Nations system.

My country, Bosnia and Herzegovina, supports the
French initiative on a code of conduct for the use of the
veto in the Security Council in situations of genocide,
war crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic
cleansing. The proposal does not advance a limitation
of the Security Council; it is an attempt to overcome
the current paralysis, to prevent future deadlocks, and
to reclaim the Council's ability to make decisions that
uphold its international responsibility for peace and
security.

Many United Nations actors have to contribute to
maintaining peace and security. The Secretary-General,
pursuant to resolution 1366 (2001), has an important
role to play through good offices, such as those of his
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, his
Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect, his
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and his Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict.

The Security Council regularly considers issues
of post-conflict peacebuilding. However, it is also
important that the Security Council exchange views
with States that have first-hand experience in conflicts
and peacebuilding processes, which could help in the
further optimization of the United Nations mechanisms
and enhance a common understanding of existing
problems. We strongly support the position that there
is a need to enable the United Nations, especially
the Security Council, to draw conclusions from its
understanding of war and to determine the means
necessary to achieve a permanent peace. In many cases,
the United Nations still needs to put additional effort
into achieving reconciliation among former parties to
conflict, based on an agreed or shared narrative of a
troubled past.

The United Nations, as we have heard many
times today and I reiterate, has unique legitimacy and
accumulated invaluable experience. In that regard,
we support demands for more effectiveness in United
Nations efforts in the areas of potential conflicts,
existing conflicts and post-conflict response. I should
like to underline that it is our collective duty to remain
persistent and courageous, to have more strength
than those who are threatening the peace, and to
continue building a better world. The elevant reports
of the Secretary-General and the Security Council's
resolutions and well-crafted mandates, and our
experience and lessons learned remain our best guides.

Lastly, Bosnia and Herzegovina aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union.

