Mr. Srivihok (Thailand): Thailand aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and that delivered by the representative of
Panama on behalf of the Human Security Network.

Let me offer our thanks to Poland for the
comprehensive concept note (S/2018/444, annex).
We also thank the Secretary-General for his recently
released report (S/2018/462) and for his substantive
briefing today as well as the valuable insights from the
representative of the International Committee of the
Red Cross.

Allow me to highlight the elements we believe
deserve special emphasis in today's discussion.

First, priority must be given to raising awareness of
and respect for the obligations related to the protection
of civilians under international law, including under
the United Nations Charter. The State has the primary
responsibility to protect its citizens, and all parties to
armed conflict must honour and strictly comply with
their obligations under international law, international
humanitarian law and human rights law. All personnel in
peacekeeping missions need to understand clearly their
protection mandates, priorities and responsibilities.

As an active troop- and police-contributing country,
we continue to support the delivery of consistent and
coherent training. We firmly believe that intensive
predeployment and periodic in-mission training, on
both operational tasks and other protection-related
elements, is vital. We hold all of our peacekeepers to a
high standard ofconduct and are pleased to have recently
signed the voluntary compact on the elimination of
sexual exploitation and abuse.

Secondly, we need stronger partnerships to
strengthen the protection of civilians. This requires an
integrated approach among military, police and civilian
components. They must, in turn, coordinate with
national authorities, local communities and the relevant
humanitarian organizations in the field. In sum, all
stakeholders must exchange information on frank
and clear situational assessments that are supported
by adequate capabilities and resources and further
underpinned by practical and achievable expectations.

Thirdly, it is essential to reduce threats to
sustainable peace and development and to build and
sustain a protective environment for civilians. We
support the Secretary-General's view that the most
effective way to protect civilians is through a long-
term process and a comprehensive approach applied
before, during and after conflict. Sustaining peace
requires us to view peacebuilding more holistically as
part of the peace continuum from conflict prevention to
conflict resolution to laying down the foundations for
sustainable peace and development.

Our peacekeepers are trained, as a standard
procedure, to assist the local population in their
efforts to prevent any relapse into armed conflict and
to promote sustainable development. By sharing best
practices in agriculture, health care and water-resource
management with local villages in Timor-Leste, Haiti
and Darfur, our assistance has resonated well with an
emphasis on the prevention of backsliding into conflict.

We must also remember the incredible role of
women, especially when it comes to building trust and
ensuring protective environments. The reach and impact
of women within their local communities has long been
underestimated. We are proud to say that our current
contribution to United Nations peacekeeping operations
includes more than 20 per cent female personnel.

Durable peace is not tenable ifcivilians lack security
and are not safe. Let us redouble our investments in
practical measures that address that lack of security
comprehensively and for the long term.

