Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom):
Mr. President, it is very good to see you in the chair
today. Thank you, Mr. Minister, for your delegation's
very imaginative approach to this debate. I also would
like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General for her
statement, which set us off to a good start.

The Permanent Representative of Sweden spoke
this morning on behalf of the European Union, and
what he said reflected the United Kingdom's views on
the fundamental points of this issue. But I would like to
say a few words from our own perspective as a Council
member and as a regular and major contributor to
peacekeeping in one form or another. I would also like
to react to some of the interesting and substantive
interventions of troop contributors this morning, which
set out a number of points that we will have to take
into account.

It was a good idea to have this debate in this
format. As we in the Security Council, and others in
the wider United Nations system, grapple with making
peacekeeping operations work better, one thing has
become clear. We - that is, the Council and the
Secretariat - need a comprehensive approach to
peacekeeping that looks at reform in a cohesive way
and raises the professional capability of the United
Nations effort across the board. Our key partners in
that must be the troop contributors. I very much agree
with Ambassador Cunningham's accent on partnership.

The non-paper that your delegation, Mr. President,
circulated before this debate acknowledged that this is
not a new subject. But it has resurfaced with force in
recent months. Some of the contributors to the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) spoke
this morning about their particular experiences of that
operation. The points of criticism are perhaps not quite
so clear cut as has sometimes been suggested, but we
must take careful note of what they have said. The
Brahimi report also pointed out the need to involve
troop contributors in our work in a much more
systematic way.

The truth is that peacekeeping operations in 2001
face much more complex challenges than the
mechanisms we have so far put in place can meet. The
nature of conflict has changed. National contingents
have harder work to do in securing peace in situations
where the parties to a conflict can be difficult to
identify and where their commitment to peace is all too
often ambivalent, or worse. Contingents have been
given new and tougher tasks in ever more complicated
situations, where the political problems are not
necessarily solved by a force deployment or a peace
agreement.

We should be clear that the benefits of a more
proactive approach to cooperation are not merely to be
found in building a better relationship with
contributors, important though that may be. Driving for
more effective peacekeeping operations means
ensuring that contributors know what to expect in both
general and specific terms. Better and more regular
consultations will ensure that national contingents do
not arrive in theatre unprepared or unequipped for the
mission that the Council expects them to fulfil. They
should mean a more cohesive operation, with all
contributors clear about the goals that the Security
Council has set. And they will help to ensure that the
resolutions we adopt will not be paper tigers, fruitless
in practice because the necessary contributions cannot
be found for a mandate that is over-ambitious.

Everybody recognizes that the arrangements we
have had for cooperation with troop contributors in the
past have not worked properly. The standard meetings
have too frequently been desultory affairs, with little or
no exchange of views, though the fault for that is not
necessarily only on one side. We need to know how
current or potential contributors feel about the
decisions we are planning to take. They need to be able
to comment on the Secretariat's and the Council's
analysis of the situation. For instance, what
information might they have from their contingents on
the ground that would impact on our considerations?
We need to explain better to them the specific concerns
that are driving our work. The aim is, as the European
Union statement says, greater transparency throughout
all the phases of a peacekeeping operation.

That is not to say that the Security Council should
devolve its Charter duties. The troop contributors are
not contesting, I think, that the Council makes its own
decisions, in line with its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. But
we must do so on the basis of the widest possible
consultation. Our decisions have to be right, and the
implementation of them has to be quick and effective.
No national defence system, and no large corporation,
would separate out its decision-making and its
operational processes to the extent that the United
Nations has done up to now.

We also need to bear in mind that Security
Council consultations with troop contributors cannot
cover all of the ground. Informal consultation between
troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations will remain
critical to the task of preparing and sustaining effective
peacekeeping operations. As the European Union
statement made clear, this will require decisive action
to give the Secretariat the capacity it needs to do the
job. While the new posts endorsed by the Fifth
Committee before Christmas are a good start, we need
to take further steps to improve the planning capacity
of the Organization, the military and the civilian
police. A proper flow of information to the troop
contributors means ensuring that the Secretariat has a
proper analytical capacity. We need to revisit the
concept of an Information and Strategic Analysis
Secretariat, or EISAS, which was contained in the
Brahimi report.

Resolution 1327 (2000) gave us a good
framework for all this work. Holding a private meeting
at key stages of the consideration of new or evolving
mandates will help. But new procedures are only half
the story. We also need a step change in our attitudes.
We in the Council, the Secretariat and the troop
contributors have a shared responsibility to make those
consultations productive: to exchange views in a frank
and forthright manner and to listen to what others have
to say.

When I spoke at the Council debate on "No exit
without strategy" on 15 November, I suggested forming
a working group of the Council to look at generic
peacekeeping issues. I think it is now time to move to a
decision on this idea, which will provide the Council
with a new instrument to increase the effectiveness of
its work in this area, while respecting the prerogatives
of the General Assembly.

A working group would bring cohesion to the
way the Council handles peacekeeping, currently all
too often dealt in an ad hoc way in piecemeal
discussion or through thematic debates. It would allow
us to take a step back from time to time and examine
the overall trends in our work on peacekeeping,
learning lessons where we can. It could examine in
depth particular issues causing problems. It would also
help us to look carefully at our working methods. We
need to be sure that we are getting the best military
advice and that our own decisions are militarily sound.
A working group would give us the machinery to
address that issue. It might also play a role in
establishing a more direct and proactive relationship
with the troop contributors, who could perhaps think of
forming a corresponding grouping for each main
operation.

Neither should such a working group shy away
from the difficult questions that United Nations
peacekeeping must face if it is to become a truly
professional force for international peace and security.
These could include questions such as the increasingly
robust nature of modern peacekeeping and - another
issue I raised in the November open debate - the
reasons why modern hi-tech armies may be unwilling
to put themselves under United Nations command and
control. These are not easy questions to address and we
will not always agree, but a frank and open discussion
would help. Above all, it would help us to see beyond
the frequent assumption that political attitudes are
always the problem, when there are often concrete and
resolvable difficulties that should be addressed.

I look forward to your summing up of this debate,
Mr. President. It is clear from what we heard from the
troop contributors this morning that we have food for
thought and a need for pragmatic change. Where there
are substantive ideas for progress that can find
consensus, we should move to decisions quickly, but
we should be clear that what is required is as much a
change of approach as a change in procedure. My
delegation is beginning to make that shift and we look
forward to working through the various problems that
we will face in the future with our partners both in the
Security Council and in the wider United Nations
system.

