Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
first like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on you
and your team's effectiveness and hard work during
your leadership of the Council in November. We have
watched you seriously improve the new, interactive
discussions in the Council, allowing us to save time
during our meetings. I would also like to thank all
those who have extended kind words to us, in particular
to Ambassador Cherif, and wished us success in our
upcoming presidency. It will be an honour for the
delegation of Chad to occupy the Security Council
rostrum for the first time in its history. With the
Council's support, we strive to live up to the challenge.

With that said, allow me to say that the 5 November
meeting on Burundi (see S/PV.7295) highlighted the
very delicate situation in that country on account of the
tensions leading up to the elections to be held in 2015,
two months after the withdrawal of the United Nations
Office in Burundi. The meeting of 12 November on
Liberia (see S/PV.7310) addressing the Ebola crisis
allowed Council members to unanimously adopt very
important measures in that connection. At that meeting,
Mr. Herve Ladsous underscored the need to consider
what international assistance would be needed during
the post-Ebola reconstruction in the country. Also
with regard to the Ebola crisis, we must acknowledge
that your leadership, Mr. President, led the Council to
address the matter on two occasions, with the broad
participation of Member States in the open meeting on
Ebola on 21 November (see S/PV.7318). With regard to
the increasing terrorist threat, the Australian presidency
organized a high-level debate (see S/PV.7316), led
by your Minister for Foreign Affairs, at which
77 delegations spoke, underlining the importance of
the issue and the mobilization of Member States in
addressing it. Presidential statement S/PRST/2014/23
was adopted by the Council at that time.

We congratulate you, Mr. President, on having
taken the initiative to hold the first meeting of the
Security Council on the key role of United Nations
policing in peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations
(see S/PV.7317), during which resolution 2185 (2014)
on that issue was adopted unanimously. We reiterate
our support for the strengthening of the police
components in peacekeeping operations and special
political missions, which largely contribute to post-
conflict peacebuilding and the sustainable protection
of civilians. We also believe that the issue of the level
of linguistic and cultural knowledge could become a
criterion for the selection of police officers.
The meeting held on 25 November on the
effectiveness of sanctions (see S/PV.7323) provided an
opportunity to consider the very important issue of the
implementation of sanctions by the Security Council.
That debate will contribute to opening the door for
subsequent decisions to fill the gaps that we observed
in that area.

I cannot end without talking about the retreat in
Greentree on 13 and 14 November, organized by the
Permanent Mission of Finland, which brought together
the Council members, including the newly elected
members, on relevant issues related to an assessment
of the Council's activities in 2014 on methods of work
and lessons learned. From those discussions, it became
clear, inter alia, that briefings and consultations are
virtually identical. It was also stressed that the Council
is still divided on some so-called sensitive issues and,
as such, solutions do not appear forthcoming, as is the
case with the question of Palestine, for example.

In conclusion, I once again congratulate you, Sir,
and the entire Australian team on your tremendous
work, the relevance of the issues you took up and your
perseverance throughout your presidency. Do not forget
to tell us the secret of your success. It will be a precious
gift.

