Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, Gabon welcomes the initiative of your
country, Lebanon, to organize a debate on Somalia, a
country where the situation remains troubling on the
political, security and humanitarian fronts.

We welcome the participation in this important
debate of His Excellency Mr. Abdurahman Ibrahim,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Fisheries
and Marine Resources of Somalia. His informative
statement has of course provided us with useful
information on recent developments in his country. It
strengthens our enduring confidence in the ability of
Somalia to take up the many challenges ahead.

My delegation would also like to thank
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for the clarity and high quality of
his presentation of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/234) and for his consistent commitment to
peace and reconciliation in Somalia. 1 also naturally
welcome the participation of the Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union, my friend and
brother Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, who has shared with us
the African Union's views on the matter.

As members know the situation in Somalia is of
the highest concern to Africa and the international
community, which are making tireless efforts to restore
peace and stability there. We are firmly convinced that
regular wide-ranging discussions on the Somali crisis,
such as the one that will take place in Istanbul from
21 to 23 May 2010, can help the Security Council to
better assess progress on the ground and the further
initiatives to take in order to best continue restoring the
Somali State.

The Somali crisis is first and foremost political
and institutional in nature. Thus, the country will find a
lasting solution only through further emphasis being
placed on restoring State authority and strengthening
the peace process.

In that regard, my country reiterates its support
for the Djibouti peace agreement, signed on 19 August
2008. Thus, we praise the efforts of the Transitional
Federal Government to fully implement that agreement,
as shown by an agreement signed between the
Transitional Federal Government and the Ahlu Sunnah
Wal Jama'a resistance movement at the headquarters of
the African Union on 15 March. That outreach initiative
is undeniable progress, greatly welcomed, moreover, by
the International Contact Group on Somalia at its
meeting in Cairo on 21 and 22 April 2010.

The Somali authorities must continue dialogue
with the insurgent groups so as to bring them into the
peace process and to actively seek ways to achieve
reconciliation and a lasting peace. Hence, the Security
Council, and the international community in general,
must continue to support to the Transitional Federal
Government in order to strengthen its authority
throughout the territory.

This is the place to encourage the implementation
of the Trust Fund for Somalia and the full honouring of
the pledges made at the April 2009 Brussels
conference. Along the same lines, we should encourage
a stronger presence of the international community and
greater coordination of its action with the Transitional
Federal Government in Mogadishu.

The signing of a memorandum of understanding
last April by the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and the United Nations Political Office
for Somalia seeks precisely to facilitate the
coordination on the ground of the action of the
signatories with regard to protecting civilians, in
particular women and children.

The crisis in Somalia is also a security crisis.
Armed violence must be stopped, in particular the
fighting between the regular army and the insurgents.
In a word, the international community must
participate in securing the country.
My delegation commends the significant role that
the African Union Mission in Somalia continues to
play, despite the difficult conditions it faces owing
both to the environment and to its operational
capacities. Despite the broad consensus enjoyed by the
Transitional Federal Government within the
international community, the support provided to
AMISOM, which barely comprises the required 8,000
soldiers, unfortunately has still not enabled its optimal
deployment. The human and logistical resources
necessary for its mission are still lacking.

My delegation wishes to reiterate its hearty
congratulations to Uganda and Burundi, which, despite
those extremely difficult conditions, have agreed to
provide troops to AMISOM. Those congratulations
also go to Djibouti, which last January decided to make
450 soldiers available to the Mission. Lastly, I extend
our gratitude to the other countries which, from near or
far, contribute in various ways to the viability of that
African operation.

However, AMISOM. is not forever. I would like to
believe that sooner or later it will be bolstered or
replaced by a true United Nations peacekeeping
operation, whose modalities could be defined in
consultation with the African Union.

Recalling that the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security lies
with the Security Council, my delegation is convinced
that a larger United Nations presence in Somalia would
help improve the security conditions required for a
successful transition by 2011.

In the medium term, securing the country is a
task that must return to the Somali army. The optimal
discharge of such a mission requires that the troops be
well trained and that the army must be closer to the
communities. Here, the challenge is to form a truly
national army. We welcome the initiative recently
taken by the European Union to establish, in Uganda, a
training programme for the Somali armed forces. Such
initiatives should be duplicated with the help of the
African Union and undertaken as part of a national
action plan developed by the Somali authorities.

In that regard, as indicated in the report under
consideration, we welcome the current efforts of the
Transitional Federal Government to prepare a report to
assess the security sector and the implementation of the
national security and stabilization plan.

Acts of piracy against ships at sea are a threat not
only to the security of other States in the region, but
also to international navigation and the safety of
commercial maritime routes. We support all initiatives
seeking to improve the fight against piracy in the
territorial waters of Somalia and the Gulf of Aden and
to bring to justice those guilty of acts of piracy.

Gabon is among those that believe that piracy at
sea is simply a result of the insecurity prevailing on
Somali territory. It is therefore logical to approach this
issue in a comprehensive way and to give high priority
to resolving the internal situation.

I cannot end my statement without mentioning the
humanitarian crisis hitting Somalia, which is one of the
worst that Africa has ever experienced. Some 20 years
of violence and anarchy have caused at least 2 million
Somali citizens to flee for their life. The assistance
provided by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, UNICEF, the World Food
Programme and other partners, whose indispensability
we recognize and whose work on the ground we
welcome, unfortunately still proves insufficient owing
both to a lack of resources and to security constraints
that make the needy populations' access to food aid
difficult. It is therefore essential to step up efforts to
support the action of humanitarian organizations on the
ground.

Regarding Somalia's reconstruction, the
international community's support must also take into
account the country's economic development, in
particular restoring infrastructure, providing basic
services, promoting trade and business and creating
jobs.

