Mr. Ibrahim (Somalia): I take this opportunity to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
on Somalia and enabling us to participate in the
discussion. I also want to thank you for the excellent
way you have been facilitating the work of the Security
Council. At the same time, I want to thank the
Secretary-General, the Secretariat, and the bilateral,
multilateral and non-governmental organizations that
have assisted Somalia, in one way or another, during
the very difficult past two decades. We are especially
grateful to the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), the African Union and the brotherly
countries of Uganda and Burundi for their heroic stand
with us and their sacrifices.

My address to the Council today will be in three
parts. The first will attempt to put the position of
Somalia and the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) in the proper perspective. The second will be on
our full support to the position of the African Union,
and the third will be on a few suggestions I have for
the Security Council on the way forward in Somalia.

In view of the prevailing negative media
coverage of Somalia and in the interest of enhancing
understanding of the plight of the Somali people and
their TFG, I would like to spend a few minutes, without
going into unnecessary detail, on the background to our
discussion. It goes without saying that, when things are
not going as well as we would like, it is tempting to
engage in the blame game. I guess that is part of
human nature.

In our opinion, what happened to Somalia in
1990 and 1991 was a catastrophe without precedent in
modern times. In Somali, we call it the barbar, which
literally means "disintegration" or "breakdown". After
20 years of military rule, the regime came to an abrupt
end without any transfer of power. The ruler - or
dictator - simply walked away when his adversaries
started to close in on him. He moved to a remote
border area, which was his ancestral home. The rest is
history. With the breakdown of law and order, what
happened afterwards was terrible but could have been
even worse. For the sake of argument, let us imagine,
for a moment that one's own country, God forbid,
found itself in a similar situation. I am sure that the
consequences would be too ghastly to contemplate.

I submit that the history of Somalia during the
past two decades has not been just doom and gloom.
The focus of the reporting on Somalia has been on the
capital, Mogadishu, which admittedly did not do well
for most of that time. But Somalia is bigger than
Mogadishu. Some regions have experienced a
relatively peaceful existence. The few reporters who
ventured to these areas found booming towns where
local businessmen, together with their relatives in the
diaspora, managed to set up clinics, electricity, schools,
telephones and running water despite the lack of a
central Government. It was not surprising to find that
the private sector moved into many areas where the
Government was traditionally involved. Even in
Mogadishu, private radio stations, television stations,
new hotels and internet cafes could be found.

I believe that this testifies to the resilience of the
Somali people. Furthermore, when the banking system
collapsed with the central Government, a parallel
internal banking system sprung up and is still
functioning. A Somali in the diaspora can send, say,
$50 to a relative in the remotest areas of Somalia, even
where there is fighting at the time, within 48 hours.
This is done by money-wiring services operated by
Somalis for Somalis. To the surprise of many, the
Somali shilling is still resilient because the informal
banking sector still has faith in it.

I would like to touch briefly on the nature of the
adversaries of the TFG. Every effort was made during
and after the Djibouti peace process to advance
reconciliation, but these extremists, with foreign
ideology and support, had no interest in dialogue or the
peaceful resolution of conflicts. They used force to
take over the town of Baidoa, which was the seat of the
TFG at the time. As soon as the TFG was installed in
Mogadishu, they decided to topple it by coup. Since
then, they have used relentless violence to reach their
objective of destroying life, property, the TFG and
AMISOM.

It can be argued that the very existence of the
TFG, under the circumstances, is a clear plus. Recently,
the former Prime Minister saw fit to resign in order to
allow the Transitional Federal Government to go

forward. This can be interpreted as an exercise in
democracy and governance. Now we have a new Prime
Minister, who is expected to be confirmed by
Parliament momentarily and to form a new
Government shortly.

I would like to reiterate that the people of
Somalia and the Transitional Federal Government fully
realize that the primary responsibility for stabilizing
the country lies with them. Others can only help. We
value our sovereignty, political independence, unity
and territorial integrity. The Transitional Federal
Government will do whatever it takes to stabilize the
country and implement the road map provided by the
Transitional Federated Charter during the remaining
period of office. In that connection, we hope that the
United Nations Secretary-General will be able to
revisit the time needed - six months, as noted in his
report - to prepare his vision of United Nations
cooperation with regional groups such as the African
Union.

I now would like to refer to the two important
documents guiding our discussion of the situation in
Somalia. The African Union communique and the
report of the United Nations Secretary-General
(S/2010/447) have both given an account of the
situation in Somalia. Indeed, we remain in a dire
situation, given the following aspects: first, the overall
security situation and what that means for the people of
Somalia, the neighbouring countries and the rest of the
world; secondly, the glaring tragic humanitarian
situation; thirdly, the growth and menace of piracy in
the Gulf of Aden and the Indian Ocean; fourthly, the
phenomenon of virulent terrorism and extremism
fuelled by Al-Qaida, foreign fighters, extremists,
spoilers, saboteurs and profiteers; and fifthly, the
obvious threats to international peace and security.

I now would like to go on record as completely
endorsing the African Union communique issued on
15 October, 2010 by the African Union Peace and
Security Council and made available to all Security
Council members. In particular, the Transitional
Federal Government welcomes the African Union
calling on the Security Council to take the decisions
now required of it in line with its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace by first, endorsing the African Union proposal on
a new force strength of 20,000, with the requisite air
and maritime capabilities, and an enhanced police
component of 1,680, comprising 560 police experts on

mission, eight formed police units of 140 each and an
enhanced civilian component and secondly, authorizing
an enhanced support package for AMISOM, funded
through United Nations assessed contributions based
on the newly-authorized force strength and guaranteed
reimbursement of contingent-owned equipment costs,
including minor and major equipment and payment of
troop allowances at United Nations rates, in order to
ensure adequate, predictable and sustainable support to
the Mission. In addition, the Peace and Security
Council requests that such support be made available
to the Mission, both within and outside Somalia, as
required.

Let me now address the role of the Security
Council in relation to the urgent situation in Somalia.
As we all know, the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, and it is incumbent upon the
Security Council to cooperate with regional and
subregional organizations in matters relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter. Such cooperation can improve collective
security. We believe that the African Union is calling
for such cooperation to be effective.

Furthermore, we hope that the Security Council
will respond to the various Governments, peoples,
institutions and organizations that do not comprehend
why the Security Council has not already taken
appropriate measures commensurate with the urgent
situation in Somalia, by: first, taking decisions aligned
with those endorsed by the African Union on numerous
occasions including the African Union Peace and
Security Council endorsement of 15 October 2010;
secondly, demonstrating that the Council fully realizes
the urgency of the situation and that it is indeed a
threat to international peace and security; thirdly,
reaffirming the Council's commitment and political
will prioritize peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding; fourthly, committing itself to uniform
standards and consistency in relation to the deployment
of United Nations peacekeepers, and fifthly,
convincing the international community that the
Council is prepared to take decisive and urgent action
whenever that is warranted.
Finally, I would like to summarize the solution,
as I see it, to the Somali crisis as follows: first, the
Transitional Federal Government will obviously try to
organize itself and upgrade its performance in earnest
despite the daunting obstacles and roadblocks;
secondly, the Somali security sector, including its army
and police, must be strengthened significantly to
enable the establishment of law and order throughout
Somalia; thirdly, AMISOM. must be strengthened by
resolving the urgent problems of reimbursement to the
troop-contributing countries, soldier allowance parity
and funding and by enabling the immediate
implementation of phase I of AMISOM's mandate. The
Security Council must also endorse the African Union
proposal on the new force strength and revised concept
of cooperation.

I believe that, if we embark on the course I have
outlined above, we will achieve something worthwhile
and the world will be a better place for all.

I would like to conclude by informing all Council
members and the Secretary-General that the new Prime
Minister was recently appointed by the President and
now awaits the Parliament's confirmation. We look
forward to the early formation of his cabinet. The
Government has promised to fulfil the obligations of
the Transitional Federal Government to, first, maintain
cohesion and unity of purpose, and secondly, address
the security issue in Somalia and mobilize the Somali
people and its forces to reverse the security situation in
Mogadishu by defeating the extremists with the
confirmed support of AMISOM. and the international
community. We all know that there are no better people
to defend their country than the country's own people.
We request, therefore, that the Council provide us with
the means and support us in forming our police and
army to be in a situation to effectively confront the
extremism, both terrorism and piracy, in our own
country.

