Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): We have read with interest
the Secretary-General's report on the situation in Tajikistan.
It is encouraging to note that, after many months of
prevarications, the parties have finally been able to break
the deadlock and meet for the fourth round of the inter-
Tajik talks on national reconciliation. This is a welcome
development, even though the two sides could not reach
agreement on a comprehensive political settlement. It is
worth noting that the talks were held in an atmosphere of
mutual respect and trust. My delegation hopes that the
agreements reached at Almaty on the release of political
prisoners and a safe return of refugees to their homes will
pave the way for an overall settlement to the crisis in
Tajikistan and bring about national reconciliation.

There is no doubt that the presence of the United
Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) has
served as a stabilizing factor and has provided an enabling
environment for a peaceful settlement to the conflict. It is
for this reason that my delegation will vote in favour of the
draft resolution before us.

I wish, however, to emphasize the importance we
attach to operative paragraph 2, which links the continued
presence of UNMOT in Tajikistan to a commitment by
both parties to an effective cease-fire, to national
reconciliation and to the promotion of democracy. We are
seriously concerned that, after four rounds of talks, no
progress has been achieved on institutional matters. It is our
hope that the parties will make full use of the presence of
UNMOT in their country over the next six months and will
cooperate with the Secretary-General's Special Envoy in his
endeavour to promote a peaceful settlement to the conflict
in Tajikistan.

The international community has demonstrated its
readiness to assist the people of Tajikistan. However, the
international community can help only where the parties
are in all seriousness ready and willing to resolve their
differences. The ultimate responsibility for a peaceful
settlement and national reconciliation lies with no one
else but the people of Tajikistan.

We have noted that an agreement has been reached
to extend the cease-fire by three months. Our preference
would have been for an indefinite extension.

We appeal to the two parties to adhere strictly to the
spirit and letter of the cease-fire. The resumption and
intensification of hostilities during the month of April, in
violation of the cease-fire agreement, and the resulting
heavy casualties have not helped the peace process. We
hope there will be no repetition.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to pay a special
tribute to the positive and facilitative role played by the
Russian Federation and other countries in the region -
and by the Organization of the Islamic Conference and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe - and to their efforts to bring about
reconciliation between the two parties in conflict in
Tajikistan. I should also like to extend my delegation's
sincere appreciation to Ambassador Piriz-Ballon, the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy, for his untiring efforts
in the search for peace in Tajikistan.

