Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to wish a warm welcome to
Mr. Javier Solana, High Representative for the
Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European
Union, at the Council table. As a country associated
with the European Union, Bulgaria fully associates
itself with his statement. On a more personal note, I
should like to say that today, it is even more of a
pleasure than usual to associate myself with a common
statement of the European Union, because, among
other things, the sending of the multinational Force to
Bunia is one of the European Union's most courageous
actions with regard to foreign policy beyond the
European continent.

In Mr. Solana's comments, I noted a genuine
pride; I believe that it is very well founded. This action
was obviously made possible, above all, by the
extremely courageous decision of the French
authorities. I must thank France for what it has done in
Bunia. I participated in the Security Council mission to
Bunia, and I must say that what has been accomplished
by General Tonier, the officers of his staff, his soldiers
and the representatives of the other countries
participating in the Force - there are also non-
European countries - deserves not only to be
welcomed but also to be highlighted, since this is a
decision that is fully in keeping with European and
global public opinion regarding the intolerable horrors
that took place in Ituri. I believe that it is a good
example of the sometimes positive aspects of
globalization, because public opinion can take the lead,
and influence decision makers fairly rapidly, as is the
case here. I believe that the decision on Bunia also
made it possible for the political process in the Congo
to make important progress.

If today we are celebrating the establishment of
the national transitional Government in Kinshasa, it is
because of the fact that the international community -
particularly by sending the contingent to Bunia - has
made it clear, first of all to the Congolese themselves,
but also to the countries of the region, that its
commitment to the Congo is for the long term and is
very strong. I believe that the Security Council is fully
playing its role here and should continue to do so in the
future.

From that perspective, the draft resolution
elaborated by the Security Council for a strengthened
and extended mandate for the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) is a very positive and important
development that Bulgaria has supported. We hope that
the draft resolution is adopted as quickly as possible. In
particular, we welcome the fact that it provides for the
imposition of an arms embargo on the eastern part of
the Congo. We also believe that a monitoring
mechanism should eventually be established and that
sanctions should be provided for those who violate the
embargo.

I shall not speak at length about what the
transitional Government should do. The task that faces
it is immense. I should like to say only that one of the
most important tasks is undoubtedly the organization of
free and transparent elections at all levels and
throughout the country's territory.

But I should like to dwell on an issue that, I
believe, is of concern today to all speakers around this
table: the issue of impunity. Bulgaria has always
favoured respect for the principle of responsibility for
actions committed, whether in the African Great Lakes
region, in Sierra Leone, in Timor-Leste or, obviously,
in the Balkans. It is fundamental for the future, not
only of the Congo itself, but also of the rest of Africa,
that the international community do everything
possible to ensure that that principle is respected.
Unfortunately, we do not forget that the Congolese
conflict, because of its length, the ferocity of the
warlords and the size of the country itself, has caused
violations of human rights and of international
humanitarian law to take on proportions that challenge
the universal conscience and cannot be ignored.

Clearly, a question arises, as in so many
situations of this type: how do we express the
international community's support to the Congolese
people along with the imperative need for the effective
pursuit of the principle of non-impunity? The answers
are not obvious or easy, but one thing is sure: the
Security Council must be provided with the means -
including the legal means - to implement that
principle. From that perspective, the statements made
by Mr. Moreno Ocampo, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, are very encouraging,
and Bulgaria welcomes them.

I would like to conclude my comments by
expressing Bulgaria's gratitude to Mr. Ngongi, the
former Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. We are grateful to him for the outstanding
work he has done in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and for his energy and dedication in extremely
difficult circumstances. We would also like to welcome
Ambassador Swing, who is making his diplomatic
talent available to the United Nations. We would also
like to thank the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations for its professionalism in its management of
the Congolese issue, which is one of the most difficult
issues facing it. We would also like to thank Mr. Jean-
Marie Guehenno personally for his own involvement in
this issue.

