Sheikh Hasina (spoke in Bengali; English text furnished by the delegation): Today, as I address this
Summit of the Security Council, I remember the day 26
years ago when the Father of the Nation Bangabandhu
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman addressed the General
Assembly immediately after Bangladesh was admitted
to membership in the United Nations. In his speech,
Bangabandhu pledged our full adherence to the
principles of the United Nations Charter. We have
remained faithful to that pledge, and we continue to
serve the United Nations by taking a proactive role.

As a member of the Security Council, Bangladesh
has been contributing to the preservation and
maintenance of international peace and security. This is
a reflection of Bangabandhu's commitment to peace,
security and harmony among nations.

We are here at a time of changing realities and
increasing challenges. the maintenance of international
peace and security in a globalized world is a major
responsibility. The Security Council, as the only body
devoted exclusively to the maintenance of international
peace and security, can do better in a world of civil
conflicts.

It is encouraging to note that the Security Council
is giving more attention to situations of humanitarian
crisis involving the civilian population. For the first
time, peace operations are being provided with child
protection advisers. These are promising beginnings.

Bangladesh appreciates Secretary-General Kofi
Annan's report, prepared by Ambassador Brahimi, on
improving United Nations peace operations. The
recommendations contained in the report should
receive our serious consideration. The Security Council
mandates should enable operations to address root
causes of conflicts. In this context, this Summit should
express strong support for poverty eradication,
sustainable development, democracy, good governance,
rule of law and human rights as foundations of durable
peace.

During the Bangladesh's 1971 war of liberation,
we acquired experience of the harmful effects of wars
and conflicts wrought on humanity at large. Two
hundred thousand women were raped, and hundreds of
thousands were victims of mass murders. Our freedom-
loving people fought valiantly at the call of our great
leader, the Father of the Nation, Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman, and were victorious. But the
vanquished forces killed the Father of the Nation,
along with most of the members of my family, on 15
August 1975. This conspiracy has not ended yet.
Several attempts were made to kill me.

International peace and security must be
understood in terms of human security. We should put
emphasis on mitigating the effects of war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide on the civilian
population. The Security Council has to focus on the
prevention of armed conflicts by building a culture of
peace.

Women should not be seen as mere victims of
war; they should be allowed to play their rightful role
in resolving conflicts. The women of Burundi, the
Congo and Somalia have demonstrated great
commitment in establishing peace and democracy and
in the reconstruction of war-ravaged countries.
Similarly, special efforts are needed to address the
needs of children affected by armed conflicts. Here I
would invite the Council's attention to Bangladesh's
proposal for child-soldier-free zones in various parts of
the world.

Striving for general and complete disarmament is
our constitutional commitment. Yesterday, we
deposited our instrument of ratification for the
Convention banning anti-personnel mines and our
instrument of accession for the Convention on Certain
Conventional Weapons.

Necessary action must be taken against those who
capture power by illegally overthrowing any
constitutionally elected Government. I feel that the
United Nations can take action on this subject. This is a
prerequisite for peace, democracy, human rights and
economic advancement.
I therefore propose that this supreme
Organization of the peoples take a decision to choose
and sustain government of the people, by the people
and for the people as a universal system of governance,
and never to recognize illegal military takeovers of
power achieved by trampling constitutional systems.

Bangladesh resolved major outstanding issues
with neighbours by means of peaceful negotiations,
paving the way for greater cooperation among our
peoples. In our national context, we have found that,
given the political will and respect for human rights,
peace is possible. It is by demonstrating respect for
these values and principles that, through peaceful
dialogue, we have been able to resolve decades of civil
strife in the Chittagong Hill Tracts in south-eastern
Bangladesh.

Given the enormous challenges ahead, we believe
that the Security Council should meet more often at the
summit level than it has in the past. The world looks up
to its leaders for making history. History demands of
us - as a generation taking human civilization into the
new millennium - that we live up to our solemn
pledge of a world free of wars, a world where the
culture of peace has taken deep, deep root.

