Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, we commend last month's French presidency
for its efficient work in leading the Council. We wish
the German presidency every success and welcome the
presence of the German Federal Minister for Foreign
Affairs, His Excellency Mr. Heiko Maas, as well as the
other high authorities present today.

We also thank the briefers for their
informative presentations.

In this year commemorating the seventieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions, which enshrine
the regulation of hostilities and ways to alleviate
the devastating consequences of armed conflicts,
Peru reaffirms its commitment to international
humanitarian law and its proper implementation, as
well as to international human rights law. We affirm
this in a context in which these legal regimes are
violated on a regular basis, which is why we stress the
urgent need for the Council to fulfil its legal obligation
and primary responsibility to act in unity and put an
end to the suffering of millions of people in regions
throughout the world. This should be complemented by
effective action to promote sustainable peace - that is,
activities to prevent, combat the root causes of conflict,
strengthen institutions and promote the rule of law.

Peru is a signatory to the foundational international
instruments of law of armed conflict, the provisions
of which are duly developed and implemented in our
domestic legal system, including the ongoing training
of national authorities - in particular, our armed forces
participating in peace operations - and the generation
of measures to improve the protection of civilians. In
that regard, we highlight the primary responsibility of
every State to protect its population; when this does
not occur, the international community has the duty
to assume that responsibility, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations.

Moreover, in accordance with resolution 2286
(2016), we reject all types of attacks against medical
facilities and humanitarian workers, which constitute
war crimes under customary international law. We
express the same concerns about schools and condemn
attacks against them.

Similarly, as we recently said in the Council (see S/PV.8496), any State action in the area of counter-
terrorism must consider the effects it could have on
humanitarian assistance efforts. As other delegations
have said, we believe it is essential to ensure
accountability forthe commission ofatrocity crimes. The
universalization of international criminal jurisdiction
and the predictability of access to justice will also help
to more effectively prevent the suffering of civilians in
conflict. In that regard, Peru reiterates the importance
of cooperating with the International Criminal Court.
We also advocate for the Council to make greater and
better use of the institution by referring new situations
to it. We reiterate our support for the work of the
recently established evidence-gathering mechanisms.

We would like to conclude by highlighting the
sacrifice and risky protection efforts of humanitarian
agencies and workers assisting civilians in conflict
situations. Their sacrifice and efforts must be duly
recognized by the international community.

