Mr. Chergui: I thank His Excellency Mr. Kishida,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan, for presiding over
today's meeting, I also thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, Her Excellency and my sister, Ms. Amina
Mohamed, Cabinet Secretary for Foreign Affairs and
International Trade of Kenya, and the ministers present
here.

I wish to express the gratitude of the African
Union (AU) to the Security Council and also to
Japan for organizing this open debate on the subject
of peacebuilding in Africa. The high calibre of the
representatives gathered here in the Chamber shows
the importance that we all attach to the critical issue of
peacebuilding in Africa.

At the outset, let me say that I fully endorse the
important contribution made by my sister, Amina, on
this matter.

As everyone knows, in 2013 the African Union
celebrated 50 years of existence since the birth of
that continental body in 1963, under the theme of
pan-Africanism and African renaissance. While we
remember the great strides that the continent has made
in the economic, political and social areas, we are
also aware that there are still numerous challenges to
peace and development in Africa. We therefore need to
continue to undertake sustained, bold and innovative
initiatives and endeavours, inspired by the ambitions
that led to the birth of the African Union and its
predecessor, the Organization of African Unity.

It is in that context that the theme of today's open
debate resonates well with our vision of ensuring a better
Africa for all our citizens, especially women and youth,
who are particularly affected by the tragic consequences
ofconflicts and often find it hard to access the resources
that will ensure them a better livelihood, as better
livelihoods contribute to nation-building. Experience
has shown that any failure to ensure the consolidation
of peace is to be viewed as a clear threat to peace and
human security, and that is a reality for many countries
in Africa, especially those emerging from conflict. I
wish to underline that the African Union's authoritative
policy framework on post-conflict reconstruction and
development, endorsed 10 years ago by its Executive
Council, outlines six indicative elements that provide
the foundation for achieving sustainable development in
a post-conflict setting, namely, security, humanitarian
and emergency assistance; political governance
and transition; socioeconomic reconstruction and
development; human rights, justice and reconciliation;
and women and gender. That policy requires the
African Union to work with the regional economic
communities, the relevant United Nations agencies
and other institutions and African non-governmental
organizations in a collaborative manner to realize
and consolidate post-conflict reconstruction and
development in post-conflict and conflict-prone States.

Since the adoption of its post-conflict
reconstruction and development policy, the African
Union Commission has taken a number of steps towards
its implementation. They include the identification of
joint activities in support of the implementation of peace
agreements in member States of the African Union
emerging from conflict, conducting needs-assessment
missions, consolidating and scaling up security-sector
reform, pursuing disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration initiatives, and sustained collaboration
with regional groupings, mechanisms and civil-society
organizations. Such engagements have also been
geared towards developing and implementing regional
strategies for women's effective participation in peace
and security frameworks at the regional and national
level, the implementation of quick-impact projects
and peace-strengthening projects in the areas of the
deployment of African Union peace-support operations,
and through the African Union liaison offices.

Secondly, all such post-conflict reconstruction
and development programmes and policies are obliged
to mainstream gender and comply with resolution
1325 (2000) on women and peace and security and
related African Union instruments. In furthering the
advancement of women's empowerment and gender
equality, the African Union Commission has sponsored
initiatives to promote women's participation in
democratic processes and institution-building in post-
conflict settings.

Thirdly, the African Union Commission continues
to engage a number of partners in the implementation
of its post-conflict reconstruction and development
policy. The Peacebuilding Commission and other
United Nations agencies, the African Development
Bank, the Economic Commission for Africa, civil
society organizations and bilateral actors are some of
the key partners that have been engaged thus far. This
year, as we celebrate 10 years of the African Union's
post-conflict reconstruction and development policy,
we need to consider the evolving global peacebuilding
and post-conflict reconstruction discourse and how it
impacts our response in the light of the interconnected
strategic, structural and operational challenges. As a
dynamic organization, the African Union has taken
note of the review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, the report of the Advisory Group of
Experts (see S/2015/490), the report of the High-
level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and the global study on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). I wish to outline several
lessons that we have learned and on which we can build
for more effective peacebuilding in Africa.

First, the most obvious lesson is demonstrated by
the recent relapse of several post-conflict countries
into violence and instability, highlighting the crucial
necessity for coherent post-conflict reconstruction and
development strategies and interventions in Africa.
Secondly, and in View of the magnitude and
complex challenges connected with post-conflict
reconstruction and development, more attention must
be given to the coherence and coordination of all actors
to enhance synergies of action and integrated planning
and operations, which effectively lead to structured
and effective implementation. That will require close
coordination at the strategic, policy and operational
levels with a View to consolidating the implementation
of post-conflict reconstruction and development by
the African Union, regional mechanisms and entities
within the United Nations peacebuilding architecture.
In the light of the two United Nations reports on
peacebuilding and peace-support operations (see S/2015/490, S/2015/446), we look forward to reflecting
on and advancing creative joint modalities so that we
can move forward in addressing the current persisting
reality of disjointed and incoherent peacebuilding and
post-conflict reconstruction implementation, and to
working with other peace and security programmes at
the level of the African Union, regional mechanisms
and Member States in an effort to have a greater
impact. Moreover, if properly calibrated, the African
Union post-conflict reconstruction and development
interventions will be critical to the African Union's
conflict-prevention strategies. That requires taking into
consideration the regional dimensions and transnational
nature of conflicts in Africa, which necessitate the
formulation of post-conflict reconstruction and
development interventions that address those realities.

Furthermore, with a view to addressing the
limited sharing of lessons learned and best practices
across the United Nations and the African Union,
the African Union and the entities within the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture should explore
practical modalities of sharing experiences, focusing
on measures to develop appropriate tools for knowledge
management and information-sharing that can empower
the continent and regional mechanisms to respond to
the initiatives aimed at implementing an adequate post-
conflict reconstruction and development policy. In that
regard, an annual meeting between the African Union
and the United Nations to share experiences, lessons
learned and progress in the implementation of the post-
conflict reconstruction and development policy should
be institutionalized.

There are a number of interconnected challenges
pertaining to financing for which we have had to find
more innovative approaches. First, one such innovation
is the Africa Solidarity Initiative, whose funding
conference was launched in July 2013 in Addis Ababa as
part of the activities marking the fiftieth anniversary of
the Organization of African Unity/African Union. The
aim was to mobilize the help of Africans to Africans.
That includes the sharing of experiences, best practices,
the offering of training facilities, the exchange of
familiarization schemes and capacity-building.

The overall goal is to promote a paradigm shift
that promotes African self-reliance driven by the motto
"Africa helping Africa". Let me emphasize the fact that
that initiative does not seek to overlook the support
from traditional and new partners in any way. Rather, it
seeks to provide an opportunity for Africa to generate
additional "beyond-the-box" ideas for addressing post-
conflict reconstruction and development challenges
and contribute towards a renewed sense of promoting
intra-African solutions to the complex challenges of
post-conflict reconstruction and development.

The implementation of that initiative will also
take into account existing initiatives for post-conflict
reconstruction in Africa, as well as other emerging
initiatives, such as the global dialogue on fragility,
and promote further efforts towards a harmonized
conceptual understanding of the transition-recovery-
development continuum in the African context. We
believe that the Africa Solidarity Initiative will
galvanize the private sector as an important stakeholder
in reconstruction and socioeconomic development. The
contribution made by the private sector to the African
Union's fight against the Ebola virus outbreak provides
invaluable lessons.

At this juncture, I also stress the need for local
perspectives and the empowerment of the marginalized
as the key to sustaining peace. The effort to involve local
communities and convert their in-kind contributions
and indigenous knowledge into coherent plans and
programmes requires patience and greater resources
and involves security risks where conflict persists.
Yet identifying mechanisms for local participation and
empowerment is critical to sustaining peace.

If peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction
in Africa is to move beyond partial success, the
African Union Commission and the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture need to consider developing
a joint 10-year strategy for implementation, with a
robust monitoring and evaluation plan that would
enhance the peace dividends in Africa for many
families, communities and societies.

What we need is for both the African Union and
the United Nations to fully play their roles, which
would consolidate sustainable peace, human rights and
development in Africa. In doing so, we would be better
prepared to anticipate future conflicts and adapt our
interventions accordingly.

