Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French):
My delegation is pleased to see you, Sir, the
Ambassador of Austria, presiding over the Security
Council in November. I endorse the well-deserved
praise that you addressed to your predecessor, the
Ambassador of Vietnam.
At the outset I would like to very warmly thank
the members of the Council for the interest they have

shown in the situation in Guinea-Bissau, all the more
so because, thanks to the efforts that Council members
are making from here in New York and the
recommendations that are being followed to the letter,
we in Guinea-Bissau have been able, on our part -
which is as it should be - to undertake what we must
do. And that is to ensure that we can increasingly
deserve the confidence and assistance of the
international community and also can strengthen
democracy and the rule of law in my country.

I would like to thank the Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Mutaboba, for his briefing,
which certainly complements the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/ 552) before the Council.

As the Council has seen, much remains to be
done in Guinea-Bissau. Nonetheless, thanks to our own
efforts and, of course, to international assistance, we
have been able to undertake and achieve convincing
results. Above all, we were able to organize just,
credible and transparent elections, elections that we
hope will be the crowning achievement of a cycle that
is necessary in building the rule of law.

The new President of the Republic, who took
office on 8 September, wanted to stress in his inaugural
statement the need to set up a new culture of dialogue
in Guinea-Bissau, a culture of inclusion, to ensure that
the people of Guinea-Bissau speak to each other,
understand each other and can work together. I believe
that that bodes well for a new era. We really want to
start a new chapter so that together we can address
what is important, and that is the rebuilding of our
country, to make it, through an ongoing and
constructive dialogue, a country calm and reconciled
with itself.

However, as Mr. Mutaboba said, there
are immense problems, and regardless of our
determination 4 which does exist - and our
willingness to work on what is essential, regardless of
the very accurate understanding that we have of our
responsibility first and foremost to solve our own
problems, we will not be able to resolve every problem
by ourselves, and at the same time. That is why it is
important that the international community continue its
efforts to support us so that we can build upon the
momentum that we have started and that is a great
satisfaction to us.
Yes, we do agree with Mr. Costa, the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and

Crime, that there are still problems in Guinea-Bissau.
There have been results in the fight against
international crime, organized crime and drug
trafficking, but that question still cannot be considered
resolved if we do not take into account the context of
the situation, its subregional or even regional nature.
That is why we are pleased with the efforts of
Mr. Costa's Office. Above all, we are very pleased with
the subregional understanding of the need to ensure
that efforts are made in a concerted and combined
fashion, and that is why we are now seeing results. We
will have to continue that effort, and I can assure the
Council, in the name of my Government, that we are
aware of that fact.

As Mr. Mutaboba has just stated, there is, above
all, a need to take action so as to enable justice to
function in Guinea-Bissau. We will not be able to
establish the rule of law until justice - the
fundamental element on which all democratic systems
are based - is able to function. Those on trial must
have confidence in their justice system, the justice
system must be accessible and justice must be
administered in a transparent and equitable manner.

There is a great deal to be done in this area.
Mr. Costa has just noted that, at present, there are not
even any prisons - at least no prisons deserving of the
name. In this connection, I would like to thank our
partners who are helping us to build prisons equipped
to receive those who are convicted and to allow them
to serve out their sentences in conditions which meet
international standards, especially those relating to the
need to respect the most basic rights in keeping with
human rights obligations.

I would like to thank Ambassador Viotti. As the
Council is aware, in her capacity as Chair of the
country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission for Guinea-Bissau she has devoted great
efforts to ensuring that sustained attention is given to
the situation in Guinea-Bissau and, in particular, to
mobilizing energy and efforts in favour of my country.
I would like to thank Ambassador Viotti on behalf of
my country and to pay tribute, in this forum, to the pre-
eminent role played by Brazil and other member States
of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries in
ensuring that Guinea-Bissau remains on the agenda,
continues to be the subject of sustained attention and
receive the help that it needs.

09-5946]
Finally, I would also like to thank my friend and
colleague, the representative of the African Union, for
the efforts undertaken at the continental level to
ensure that Guinea-Bissau can not only get back on the
path to political stability, but also put an end to the
recurrent conflict that has plagued our country and
mobilize ourselves and our resources - very limited as
they are - in favour of development efforts.

In conclusion, having at the beginning of my
remarks paid a well-earned tribute to the members of
the Council, I would also like to pay a very particular
tribute to the delegation of Burkina Faso - which, as
members are aware, will leave the Council at the end
of December - for the pre-eminent role it, as a
member State of the Economic Community of West
African States, has played within the Council. Council
members know this better than I do. Not only has
Burkina Faso drawn the attention of Council members
to the specifics of the situation in Guinea-Bissau, but it
has also worked to ensure that, through constructive
dialogue with our partners, we will be able to achieve
what really matters - that is, the goals we undertook
to pursue.

I wish therefore to pay tribute to the efforts of
Ambassador Kafando and to thank Burkina Faso,
09-59461
which, as the Council knows, plays a very important
role in the subregion. We have seen this in the context
of Togo, in Cote d'Ivoire and, even more recently, in
the role played by President Compaore as mediator in
the crisis in Guinea-Conakry.

I would therefore like to thank all members of the
Council for their support and to assure them, on behalf
of the Government of Guinea-Bissau, that we will not
cease - we will not cease, I repeat - to deploy our
best efforts to promote dialogue, to realize the
inclusion that Mr. Mutaboba seeks, so that all the sons
and daughters of Guinea-Bissau may participate in
managing the affairs of their country and make their
contributions to constructing the rule of law, to
strengthen democracy and to create the conditions for a
better life for our people. That is our essential goal -
to ensure that the people of Guinea-Bissau can enjoy
peace, stability and development.

