Mr. Grey-Johnson (Gambia): My delegation
intervenes in our capacity as Chair of the Group of
Friends of Guinea-Bissau.

Let me at the outset commend you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting to afford us yet another
opportunity for reflection on the post-conflict
phenomenon that the case of Guinea-Bissau has come
to represent. This is a country that, to all intents and
purposes, is still stuck in the transition to full
democracy, even though some years back it was able to
conduct multiparty elections that were deemed to have
been free and fair. It is a country that is still in
transition, because the structures and institutions that
make for a functioning democracy, though provided for
in law, are in reality extremely weak and unable to
sustain the workings of a democratic system. The
political culture that would allow for meaningful
operation of a multiparty parliamentary system is still
in the making and society finds itself at the
rudimentary stages of maturation, making it difficult
for the workings of a truly democratic system to take
root.

It is to the Security Council's credit that it has
come to realize that in the matter of the transition of
soft States from conflict to democracy there are many
grey areas and phases fraught with all sorts of
difficulty, through which the country in question has to
be assisted, nurtured and guided. Hence the effort to
concert with the Economic and Social Council to work
out appropriate courses of action through the Ad Hoc
Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau to help the country
come out of the woods. Having participated in the work
of the Advisory Group since its inception, I have come
to experience and share the frustration of its members
at the difficulty of bringing our work to a meaningful
conclusion and with positive results in support of
Guinea-Bissau's democratic transition.

Although the temptation is to hastily place the
blame for lack of progress at Guinea-Bissau's feet, we
all know that in certain of our demands, we may be
asking that the country shoulder certain responsibilities
that are clearly beyond its strength to carry. Countries
emerging from conflict are typically countries with
severely reduced capacities - in governance,
economic management, security and social protection.
Guinea-Bissau falls perfectly into that category of
countries. Yet, because the country was able to hold
multi-party elections that were deemed to have been
free and fair, the international system expects it to
demonstrate similar strengths in other key areas in
which it has still to build sufficient capacity. What is
more, we penalize it for failing to perform to our
expectations.

It is in that way that Guinea-Bissau has suffered
under an unofficial regime of sanctions over the last
two to three years. Development support has all but
slowed to a halt in the context of a severe economic
crisis. The social situation remains dire, particularly as
it relates to the plight of the vulnerable - children,
women and the poor, who make up the majority of the
population. The performance of one indicator alone is
sufficient to illustrate the point. The United Nations
Children's Fund has informed the Economic and Social
Council's Ad Hoc Advisory Group that, out of a
population of 1.2 million people, there were 1,000
deaths per month in Guinea-Bissau among children
under five years of age. That is unacceptably high by
any standard, but even more so under peacetime
conditions. Why is the international community
allowing this outrage to continue? Because it seems to
want to punish a country it feels is not playing by the
rules. But could it be that the country is not able to
play by the rules? That is the question that must engage
reflection on Guinea-Bissau. Hopefully, we shall
eventually come to be of one mind on this issue and
then begin the process of empowering a country in
need, showing more of the carrot and less of the stick.
When that happens, I hope that the appropriate
response will be forthcoming in the form of
emergency humanitarian assistance, development
support, capacity-building programmes and so on.

I sincerely hope that the forthcoming Security
Council mission to Guinea-Bissau will afford us all
another opportunity to reconsider the parameters of,
and reassess our approach to, peace-building and
conflict management and countries with severely
weakened capacities.

Let me seize this opportunity to commend the
Representative of the Secretary-General and all the
staff members of the United Nations in Guinea-Bissau
for their commitment and dedication to service under
very difficult conditions.

