Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I would like to take this
opportunity to convey my congratulations to the
Republic of Korea on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month.

Malaysia wishes to align itself with the statement
made by the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Malaysia is concerned over the increasing number
of civilian casualties injured, maimed and displaced
due to armed conflict, and in that regard we join other
nations in underscoring the importance of protecting
civilians from such dangers. Today, even with 15 United
Nations peacekeeping operations being conducted
around the world, and with a continuing emphasis
placed on protecting civilians in conflict areas, the
number of casualties among them remains high.

Malaysia agrees that the Security Council's
provision of civilian protection mandates to
peacekeeping operations is vital to curbing violence
against civilians. On that note, my delegation is of
the view that mission leaders should ensure that their
operations, in particular those with a civilian-protection
mandate, are conducted without undermining that
responsibility. We would also urge a greater emphasis
and focus in the implementation of those mandates on
reporting on and monitoring the protection of civilians
against established benchmarks and key performance
indicators, which could be relayed to this Council on a
regular basis.

While the implementation of such protection
measures is carried out via the various peacekeeping
operations, efforts must continue to educate all
stakeholders on the importance of protecting civilians,
especially women and children, in armed conflict.
My delegation particularly deplores the deliberate use
of sexual violence against women and violations and
abuse of children.

More must also be done to enhance compliance
with international law on the part of all parties involved
in armed conflicts. My delegation also shares the view
that those who violate international law, including
international humanitarian and human rights law, or
who deliberately target civilian population centres
and humanitarian personnel, must be held responsible
and accountable. An absence of accountability allows
violations to thrive with impunity. Malaysia also
believes that secure and unhindered access for United
Nations humanitarian personnel is imperative for the
provision of humanitarian assistance. My delegation
is of the view that the Council should also explore the
possibility of strengthening provisions to ensure the
safety of humanitarian personnel within the framework
of the protection of civilians.

The world cannot turn a blind eye to the issue of
protecting civilians in conflict-affected areas. For
example, we continue to witness some of the worst
attacks on innocent civilians being made today carried
out by the occupying Power in the occupied Palestinian
territory. Israel is proven to have violated article 4 of the
Fourth Geneva Convention, an international law that also
encompasses international humanitarian and human
rights law. Recently, during the universally condemned
Operation Pillar of Defense, hundreds of Palestinians,
including women and children, were murdered in the
Gaza Strip, while thousands more were displaced by
this inhumane, illegal and criminal military operation.
That was just one of the many occasions when Israel
has unleashed disproportionate military power against
the helpless Palestinian population in the occupied
territory. It has been reported that, as a rule, 84 per
cent of casualties resulting from the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas are civilians. As we deplore
the killing of Civilians, the Council should ask if we
have done enough to protect them. The world will judge
us on both counts - that is, what we have done and
what we have not done to protect innocent civilians.

Malaysia continues to be concerned about the loss
of civilian lives in the conflict in Syria. The staggering
number of civilian lives lost is appalling, and we
condemn the indiscriminate attacks by the parties
concerned on population centres in the knowledge that
they would result in civilian casualties. My delegation
holds that there is still a chance of protecting other
Syrian civilians from the scourge of war. I urge the
parties involved to adhere to the spirit of the Action
Group for Syria's Geneva communique of 30 June
2012 (S/2012/522, annex). The communique remains
an important document for all sides to implement.
My delegation underscores that finding a Syrian-led
political solution must be the primary goal of all parties
involved.

Malaysia has been contributing to United Nations
peacekeeping operations since 1960. Currently, the
men and women of the Malaysian armed forces and
the Royal Malaysian Police are deployed in seven such
operations worldwide. In every operation, Malaysian
observers and peacekeepers have always given priority
to the protection of civilians, and that important
pillar of peacekeeping is a very visible part of our
peacekeepers' training. On that note, I wish to assure
the Council that Malaysian personnel in current and
future peacekeeping missions will continue to uphold
those missions' sacred duty. Winning the hearts and
minds of the local population by protecting them during
armed conflict will go a long way to ensuring that the
United Nations will continue to be well received.

In conclusion, Malaysia will continue to insist
that the protection of civilians in armed conflict is as
important as making and keeping peace. We underscore
the significance and importance of Security Council
resolutions 1738 (2006), 1910 (2010) and 1894 (2009)
for ensuring that civilians are protected during armed
conflict. We look forward to contributing further to
developing concepts for the protection of civilians,
initiatives and mandates in peacekeeping operations
and to supporting countries in transition, in order to
ensure sustainable and long-lasting peace in the many
theatres of conflict worldwide.

