Mr. Guehenno (spoke in French): Eleven days
from now, a landmark development in the Bonn peace

process will take place: Afghans will go to the polls to
elect their President for the first time in the history of
Afghanistan. Therefore, I would like to take this
opportunity to update the Council on the preparations
for the presidential election.

The logistical preparations are on track for the
9 October polling date. All regional and provincial
offices have submitted operational plans for the
elections, on the basis of which material and staff have
been allocated to the various field offices of the Joint
Electoral Management Body (JEMB). All ballot boxes
and printed materials have arrived in Afghanistan.
From Kabul, they are now being transported to the
various provincial offices, where they will be secured
until the election date. They will then be transported to
polling centres immediately before the election.
Staffing those offices is currently the focus of a large
and complex effort. The recruitment of some 125,000
people for approximately 5,000 polling centres in the
country has been completed in six out of the eight
regions involved. In the west and in the south,
recruitment will be finished shortly.

The staff already hired in Afghanistan include
some 5,000 site supervisors, who are receiving training
and who in turn are training the staff they will
supervise. The recruitment has been carried out in
close coordination with local communities. During the
voter registration period, the cooperation of those
communities proved how crucial an element it was for
the security and integrity of the electoral process.

Despite the recent episodes of violence in Herat,
which somewhat delayed the operations in western
Afghanistan, the tensions in that part of the country
have now subsided, enabling the electoral preparations
to resume despite the damage caused to the offices of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and of the JEMB during the incidents of
12 September.

Eighteen presidential and 36 vice-presidential
candidates, including three women, representing a
broad spectrum of Afghanistan's various political and
ethnic components, have been campaigning in the
presidential election since the official start of the
campaign, 7 September. Although Kabul is the centre
of political activities - as one would expect - the
various candidates have been campaigning throughout
the country, disseminating their messages both through
the public and private media and via public gatherings.

Meanwhile, the JEMB has adopted several
regulations - on campaign procedures, campaign
financing, electoral offences and the media - which
form a legal framework for the campaign. In addition,
those regulations define the free exercise of voting
rights and the responsibilities and limits of
Government action with respect to the elections. They
also require candidates, their agents and their
supporters to refrain from using language that incites
hatred or violence in any form.

The regulation on campaign financing defines
who can contribute to campaigns and requires
candidates periodically to report contributions and
expenditures to the JEMB. The regulation also
specifies that public resources cannot be used for
campaign purposes except as part of a programme that
benefits all candidates, without exception, under the
oversight of the JEMB. The media regulation
establishes rules concerning the allocation of
advertising time and space in the media for political
campaigns. It is also worth noting that candidates
receive airtime on national radio and television.

(spoke in English)

With a View to improving the political
environment, the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission and UNAMA continue to monitor and
report on the exercise of political rights throughout the
country. The second report, covering the period from
8 July to 24 August, was released on 5 September. The
reports have been distributed to a wide audience in
order to draw the attention of the Government and the
international community to the need for corrective
action in specific areas. They also point to a number of
problems - in areas such as access to media, security
and the behaviour of local officials - and make
recommendations aimed at realizing the democratic
potential of the presidential election. Those
recommendations are addressed to the Government,
political parties, the JEMB and the international
community. A third report, focusing on campaign
issues, will be released by the end of this month.

On the recommendation of the Media
Commission, the JEMB adopted a code of conduct for
the media that provides for, among other things,
accurate, fair and balanced reporting and stipulates that
the media have the duty to inform the public correctly
and to promote democratic values. The regulation also
specifies that all candidates have the right to free
political advertising space or airtime on the State-run
media. The Media Commission has begun monitoring
media compliance with the code of conduct.

As a further guarantee of freedom and fairness,
the presence of national and international monitors will
be important, especially on election day. Security and
other constraints have made it difficult for international
organizations and Governments to deploy a full-
fledged observation mission. It is nevertheless
encouraging that at least a number of international and
national monitors are being deployed to various
regions. The JEMB has accredited 11 national and
international monitoring organizations, and it will
accredit another 14 in the coming days.

Some 3,510 monitors have applied for
accreditation so far: 88 international and 3,422
national. International organizations, including
embassies, have requested accreditation as special
guests for more than 139 international staff, whose
presence at the voting centres will undoubtedly
enhance the confidence of Afghans in the credibility of
the process. Further, more than 12,947 agents of 24
political parties have been accredited so far to monitor
the elections.

Those registered as monitors and special guests
will not provide a formal statement after the elections.
Many groups will provide reports to their respective
Governments or Member States on their findings
during the electoral process. In addition, they will
make recommendations with a view to improving the
process ahead of the parliamentary and local elections
scheduled for next spring. In total, on 9 October, more
than 16,000 domestic observers and monitors and
approximately 227 international monitors, or special
guests, will closely watch voting in the areas where
they are deployed, mainly concentrated in the regional
centres.

I would like to say a word on out-of-country
elections. Afghan refugees in the Islamic Republics of
Iran and Pakistan will also vote in the presidential
elections on 9 October. Despite a slow start,
registration and voting preparations in both countries
are now well under way. Registration of voters in
Pakistan will take place from 1 to 3 October in 400
centres in Islamabad and in the refugee-hosting
provinces of Baluchistan and North-West Frontier,
after which lists will be displayed for exhibition and
challenges. It may be recalled that no registration will
take place in the Islamic Republic of Iran, since
existing refugee identification documents will be used
as voter identification cards. Voting in Iran will occur
in Tehran and the seven largest refugee-hosting
provinces. After the polling, ballot boxes from each
country will be transported to Kabul for counting.
Diplomatic missions in Iran and Pakistan have
expressed interest in being accredited as special guests.
Turning to security of the elections, the election
security plan has been developed by the JEMB
secretariat in close consultation with national security
agencies, the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) and the coalition forces. The plan includes
securing polling sites and counting centres, as well as
the movement of personnel and sensitive material such
as blank and filled ballots. Building on security
arrangements developed during the registration
process, the national police will provide security at the
polling sites, with the national army ensuring security
of the areas around the sites and ISAF or the coalition
providing outer-ring support. The security plan also
identifies secure routes for transport of ballots and
provides that police units will accompany them.
International forces will focus especially on the
sensitive aspects of the process, such as ballot
transportation and counting centres.

Discussions are ongoing with national and
international security partners to further clarify roles
and incident management and responses, including the
utilization of quick reaction forces and communication
channels. Last week, a simulation exercise was
conducted, in which the JEMB and its security partners
rehearsed a series of multiple incidents across the
country. The information was centralized in one
operations centre and fed through analysis groups to a
senior decision-making body, which includes the
Government security agencies, the JEMB secretariat,
representatives of the international security forces and
UNAMA.

Multiple incidents across the country on or
around election day cannot be excluded. All efforts
must be undertaken to be fully prepared to react to
attacks, especially on polling sites, transportation of
ballots and counting centres. To that end, we would
like to thank the coalition for its decision to deploy an
additional battalion and logistical capacity - actually,
air capacity - in support of the process. The
completion of ISAF's deployment in the north-east and
the north-west is a welcome development, although we
had hoped that the second stage of its expansion could
have been finalized prior to the elections in order to
enable the coalition forces to focus on the east and the
south.

Because security forces are thinly spread out, and
based on the experience during the voter registration
process, one key security factor will be the
involvement of local communities in protecting staff,
facilities and material in their respective areas.
Considerable efforts are being made to define with
tribal and community leaders their crucial role in local
security arrangements, particularly in the east,
south-east and south. Tribal elders have been requested
both to provide security and to work with local
councils to ensure that those attempting to disrupt the
process are deterred or discouraged. In most cases,
their response has been extremely positive.

With respect to the security of out-of-country
registration and voting, we are grateful to the
Governments of the Islamic Republics of Iran and
Pakistan for the considerable efforts deployed to
protect electoral operations in their respective
countries. In Pakistan, anonymous attempts to
intimidate both voters and staff of the International
Organization for Migration, our out-of-country
implementing partner, have been made in recent weeks.
Those threats have been brought to the attention of the
relevant authorities, and we are encouraged by the
assurances we have received that they will be rapidly
addressed and promptly responded to.

Last but not least, let me refer to the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
process. It is essential for the creation of an
environment conducive to free and fair elections, as it
will reduce the ability of local power brokers to exert
undue influence during the elections. The DDR process
has gained some momentum over the past few weeks.
That is a result of the renewed commitment by the
Ministry of Defence to implement the programme,
concerted engagement of local commanders by the
central Government and the international community
and efforts by the Ministry of Justice to apply
rigorously the law establishing that political parties can
be registered only if they sever links with militia
forces. As a result, more than 2,000 men have been
disarmed in the past 10 days, with several thousand
more being verified for inclusion in the DDR
programme. Additionally, the cantonment of heavy
weapons has been accelerated - 50 per cent have now
been cantoned - in an attempt to complete this
programme for all operational weapons ahead of the
elections.

In conclusion, the successful outcome of the
ballot on 9 October will represent a significant step
along Afghanistan's path to democracy. In the 11 days
that remain, it is incumbent on all - the Afghans and
international community - to work in concert to
ensure that the process is a success. As the Council has
heard today, the technical arrangements are on track
but are made vulnerable by the prevailing level of
insecurity. The responsibility for security rests
primarily with the Afghan Government. Despite
considerable efforts made thus far to establish, train
and deploy national army and police forces, they are
not yet ready to bear the entire burden. Therefore, they
continue to depend on the support of international
forces.

Beyond the elections, the Afghans and the
international community must remain engaged. We
cannot afford to lose sight of the challenges that
remain: the preparations for the parliamentary
elections, the need for significant development of the
underpinnings of the State and stemming the tide of the
illicit narcotics industry.

