Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would like to thank the President for giving me this
opportunity to inform the Security Council about some of
the activities we have undertaken since 17 January in the
sanctions Committee established by resolution 1267
(1999) relating to the situation in Afghanistan.

The fact that we have been able to make significant
progress is due, among other things, to very effective
coordination with the Secretariat and to excellent
readiness on the part of the members of the Committee.
I must take this opportunity to acknowledge once again
the Secretary of the Committee, Mr. Aleksandar
Martinovic.

It is in this spirit that we adopted the Committee's
guidelines, which provide the necessary basis for the
achievement of the work of the Committee. We have also
sent a letter to Member States, in accordance with
paragraphs 6 (a) and 10 of resolution 1267 (1999),
requesting more information on the measures they have
adopted pursuant to paragraphs 4 (a) and (b). In response
to that letter, in little more than two months we have
received over 50 written communications from various
Member States. Pursuant to paragraph 10 of the
resolution, on 4 April the Committee adopted its first

 

report on this issue, which I submitted to the President of
the Security Council on the same date. That report, which
was circulated under the symbol S/2000/282, will be
updated as more communications are received from
Member States.

I wish to point out that the Committee has received
information from a number of Member States that they are
awaiting the designations referred to in paragraphs 4 (b)
and 6 (e) in order to report on the full implementation of
paragraph 4 of the resolution. I will refer to the issue of
designation, which is presently before the Committee, at a
later stage.

Continuing on the subject of the work undertaken by
the Committee, thanks to information provided by Member
States the Committee has updated the list of aircraft
referred to in paragraph 4 (a) of resolution 1267 (1999),
which was adopted at the end of last year under the interim
chairmanship of the United Kingdom. The Committee
authorized one humanitarian flight, at the request of a
German non-governmental organization, to transport sick
children from Afghanistan for treatment in Germany. In that
endeavour we had the assistance of both of the States on
whose territories the aircraft was to make stopovers, as well
as of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
which have jointly monitored these flights along with
national authorities and which later reported to the
Committee as to compliance.

We have authorized 360 flight segments from the
cities of Kabul and Kandahar in Afghanistan to Jeddah,
Saudi Arabia - with stopovers in Sharjah, United Arab
Emirates - so that 12,000 Afghan pilgrims could comply
with their religious obligation of the haj. In accordance with
the Committee's guidelines, the flights were monitored by
national authorities and by the United Nations Development
Programme, both in Sharjah and in Jeddah. As in the case
of previous flights, those authorities have briefed the
Committee.

Last week, after some technical delays, return flights
began to transport the 12,000 pilgrims back to Afghanistan.
It is hoped that the return flights will be concluded by the
date set, namely, 23 April. I am truly pleased that despite
a number of impediments, these flights took place
successfully.

As I expected, the organization of these flights on
several occasions required the attention of the Committee
on related matters. Those included changes in flight
timetables, technical monitoring and servicing of the
aircraft, the use of one of those flights to transport
essential materials for an aviation security project of the
International Air Transport Association (IATA), the repair
of four turbine engines in Jordan, and even the hiring of
additional aircraft from Air Gulf Falcon due to the
unavailability of one of the authorized planes.

All of this required active participation on the part
of members of the Committee, United Nations staff,
UNDP, national authorities and the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO). I would also like to point
out that with regard to the haj, significant cooperation was
provided by the Taliban authorities, who to date have
provided the Committee with all the information required
of it.

Thanks to contributions from the authorities in Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, UNDP required
only $20,000 for the whole extensive operation of the
monitoring of the haj flights in Sharjah and Jeddah. Faced
with the requirement to monitor those flights, we had
found that there were not sufficient resources within the
Secretariat for such activities. Finally, the members of the
Committee agreed to use funds earmarked for the travel
of the Chairmen of the sanctions Committee for this
purpose, on the understanding that an effort would be
made to recuperate those funds. On the basis of this
experience, I would like to recall the importance of either
establishing as soon as possible a flexible mechanism that
will enable us to solve these kinds of problems, or
directly earmarking resources to enable committees such
as mine to move quickly in these cases.

The Committee also authorized the return from
Stansted in the United Kingdom of an Ariana Airlines
flight that had been hijacked in Afghanistan.

The Committee met with representatives of ICAO
and IATA in order to comply with paragraph 6 (f) of the
resolution, on granting an exemption under paragraph
4 (b) to the IATA regarding payments to be made to the
aeronautical authority of Afghanistan on behalf of
international airlines for air traffic control services. The
exchange that took place with the representatives of those
two institutions was significant. The Committee now
expects the presentation of a report this month from
ICAO and IATA in order to take action on this matter.

As I said earlier, the Committee is now dealing with
paragraph 4 (b), which refers to the freezing of Taliban
funds and other financial resources under its direct or
indirect control. The wording of that paragraph, as well as

 

that of paragraph 6 (e), requires the Committee to designate
these funds and resources in a similar way as was done
with aircraft under paragraph 4 (a).

To that end, the Committee has used as a basis a
series of definitions from the second Interlaken seminar on
targeted financial sanctions, which was held last March
under the auspices of the Swiss Government. We are close
to agreement on a text that will contain the designations
that we feel would help those States that have not yet done
so to comply with paragraph 4 (b) of the resolution. We
would hope that once the Committee formally concludes
this stage on the subject of designations the Secretariat
will - on that basis and pursuant to paragraph 12 of
resolution 1267 (1999) - submit a report containing a
series of proposals to improve monitoring of compliance
with measures provided for in paragraph 4 (b). We
understand that this report is not yet available, as it is
subject to the designation referred to in paragraphs 4 (b)
and 6 (e), which the Committee is now concluding.

Finally, I wish to point out that the effectiveness and,
to some extent, the success of any sanctions regime depend
on the level of implementation and compliance with its
measures. This is particularly true of targeted sanctions
regimes, as is the case with this resolution. As a result, I
appeal to all Member States to implement fully resolution
1267 (1999).
I should now like to make a statement in my capacity
as Permanent Representative of Argentina.

First of all, I wish to express the satisfaction of the
delegation of Argentina at seeing you, Sir, preside over this
meeting of the Security Council. Your presence in this
Chamber is further proof of the commitment of Canada, a
great country of our North American continent, to the
United Nations, which has been made clear by the valuable
and generous support it has provided to this Organization.

Allow me, Mr. President, to join in the condolences
that you expressed on the passing of President Bourguiba,
and we extend our most sincere condolences to the
delegation of Tunisia.

The delegation of Argentina would like to express its
gratitude for the updated information provided by the
Secretariat through the report introduced by Mr. Renninger.
The situation in Afghanistan is very complex and dramatic,
and we feel that it is appropriate to deal with it in the
format of an open briefing.

The delegation of Argentina is concerned that the
parties to the conflict are preparing to launch new
offensives, which would have a negative impact on the
already suffering civilian population. It is intolerable that
these people should continue to be the victims of
violations of human rights and of the most fundamental
norms of humanitarian law. In the context of an ongoing
rejection of arbitrary detentions, summary executions and
forced labour of detainees, we support the deployment of
the Civil Affairs Unit of the United Nations Special
Mission to Afghanistan when security conditions allow,
which does not seem likely any time soon.

The delegation of Argentina therefore condemns the
intimidation tactics used by the armed forces of the
Taliban against United Nations staff in Kandahar. We
appeal to all parties to the conflict to respect international
norms relating to the safety of United Nations personnel,
related staff and humanitarian staff.

We find the food security situation particularly
alarming. It may deteriorate further as a result of the
severe drought that is gripping southern Afghanistan. We
are alarmed also by the information contained in the most
recent report of the Secretary-General regarding the
problem of educating girls, the precarious health
conditions for the population in general and for children
in particular, and the difficult situation of female-headed
households. For this reason we are pleased on this
occasion to note the presence of Ms. Angela King, the
Special Adviser on Gender Issues.
The problem of the manufacturing, stockpiling and
trafficking of narcotic drugs is of great concern, and we
once again express our condemnation of it. We feel that
this scourge fuels the conflict, and we therefore appeal to
the parties to show their determination to put an end to it.

We regret that the failure to comply with resolution
1267 (1999) has forced members of the Security Council
to continue to implement the measures contained in
operative paragraph 4 of that resolution.

For that reason, we urge once again all of the
Afghan parties to intensify their efforts to resume
diplomatic negotiations and to reject a military solution.
We also call urgently on neighbouring countries to stop
providing military resources to the warring parties.

Finally, Argentina wishes to express its gratitude for
the efforts made by the Secretary-General's Personal
Representative, Mr. Francesc Vendrell, and for those

 

being carried out within the framework of the "six plus
two" group, the Organization of the Islamic Conference and
the Rome process.

