Mr. Miyet (spoke in French): First of all, and I
regret that I did not do the same earlier, several
delegations have expressed their satisfaction with, and
gratitude for, the work done by Francis Okelo during the
difficult phase that led to the Lome Agreement.
Subsequently he proved to be a key player for the United
Nations and demonstrated wisdom, intelligence and tact
in carrying out his role.

 

By the same token, Special Representative Adeniji has,
under very trying circumstances, already proved - through
his experience, his authority and his ability to manage a
difficult operation in the Central African Republic - that
in the months ahead he will be up to the challenge posed
by the process. I think that the expressions of gratitude are
well-deserved and that there are now grounds for real hope
that Ambassador Adeniji is someone who will be able to
successfully take over.

(spoke in English)
Maybe, for Mr. van Walsum's benefit, I should say
that perhaps I was influenced with respect to the bad news
and the good news, but considering the way the English
speakers expressed themselves - Ambassador Jagne
himself said at one point "an revers de la medaille" - I
believe that maybe with these good English words I was
drawn into another language. Or maybe it was the French
delegation which, by posing questions that raised a lot of
doubts and uncertainties, influenced my presentation. But I
will see.

With respect to the French presentations, I would like
to apologize to the French-speaking delegations for the fact
that there is a small error in the French version of the
report, in paragraph 6, where reference is made to the
"American national electoral Commission". Perhaps the
translator was influenced by the fact that Ambassador
Holbrooke was there; his reputation is such that maybe he
is also chairing this Commission.

I will now turn to the various questions raised. With
respect to Ambassador Fowler's question on mines, it is
true that we have recently discovered that there is a mine
problem. We did not know of it before because we were
not able to reach the northern part of the country. It is clear
that we do not know the scope of the problem at this
juncture. We will send a technical assessment team very
soon to review with the Government and the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) what the
demining needs are, both to protect the United Nations
troops to be deployed there and to facilitate the provision
of humanitarian assistance and the work of the
humanitarian non-governmental organizations.

The second question was raised by Ambassador J agne
on the possibility of deploying civilian police. Here too I
would say that every mission is different and that the
concept of operations has to be adapted to specific needs.
Mainly, as far as we are concerned, it is under the Lome
Peace Agreement that we are carrying out our activities and
actions. So with respect to the ceasefire and as far as the
civilian police is concerned, actions are already being
carried out with the support of the British
Commonwealth. This task was not directly given to the
United Nations, but we are assisting and supporting this
process and will continue to do so.

Our human rights component is also working very
hard to try to assist the process. One hundred Sierra
Leonean police officers were trained this week by our
human rights experts, and these programmes will develop
later on.
The representative of Namibia also posed some
questions as to the references by the Secretariat to the fact
that the strength of the troops will be reviewed, depending
on the conditions on the ground. This is linked mainly to
the fact that the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Ceasefire Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) troops would remain. This is referred to in
the report of the Secretary-General and was mentioned in
my briefing at the outset of this meeting. We expect the
ECOMOG troops to remain with a robust presence in
both Freetown and Lungi. There is no need to increase
the United Nations troops. The reference in the report was
linked to the level of cooperation with ECOMOG and to
the actions that they could take in this region. Therefore,
for the time being, the conditions are there.

(spoke in French)

I will strive now to answer the questions raised by
the French delegation, to inject some optimism and to
show that to speak in French does not necessarily entail
pessimism.

First, let me touch on the question on the
deployment in the northern part of Sierra Leone and the
conditions under which it will take place, in particular the
security conditions. As has been made clear, the
deployment in the north will consist of two Kenyan and
Indian contingents. That is due in part to the desire of the
Organization and the Secretariat to show clearly that the
United Nations action is a new and impartial action, and
also to show our resolve that United Nations action in this
connection must be vigorous.

This information has been communicated to all the
parties, including Foday Sankoh, Sam Bockarie and
Johnny Paul Karoma. Discussions are ongoing to ensure
that every clarification will be made as to the
deployment - how and when it will be carried out, under

 

what conditions and with what mandate. We believe that in
this way problems can be avoided.

It is clear that the deployment of these troops will give
rise to questions and concerns. It is taking place in a
measured and well-thought-out manner in order to ensure
security.

The second series of questions relates to the fact that
there are some doubts as to the commitment of the
Revolutionary United Front of Sierra Leone (RUF) to
participate in the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme, and as to the possible
explanations. Is it an attempt to raise the stakes? Are there
disagreements between the various rebel leaders? Or is it
simply a refusal to implement the Agreement or a desire to
retain their hold over diamond-rich areas? It is very
difficult at this point to give a clear-cut answer.

I will say, though, as Ambassador Qin Huasun stated,
that even if recently there has been some doubt about the
implementation of the programme, we know that Foday
Sankoh and Johnny Paul Koroma are in Freetown, that they
are actively participating in all the negotiations and that on
several occasions they have made statements. It is clear
that, if they had deliberately wished not to implement it, for
their own safety and security they would doubtless prefer
not to be in Freetown at this stage. That is one element that
should be taken into account.

The second part of my answer is perhaps linked to the
fact that now United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) troops are in the process of being deployed.
That presence - and the arrival of Indian and Kenyan
troops with strong resources - in areas that have been only
under rebel control throughout the entire period, might give
rise to certain questions. As I said earlier, there is a need
for dialogue and clarification so as to create conditions of
confidence with regard to all the rebel leaders. Let us not
forget that they have been isolated for months, even years,
by combat and distrust. The sudden arrival of well-equipped
foreign troops will doubtless give rise here and there to
fears and questions that should be taken into account.

Given the climate of distrust now prevailing, a further
element that might give rise to such doubts and disquiet at
this stage is the disarmament programme. We must make
sure that it progresses in parallel, on the rebel side as well
as that of the other forces - that is to say, the Civil
Defence Forces (CDF) as well as the Kamajors. It is
necessary to show that this disarmament programme
involves all the parties, not only the rebel groups.

A third explanation for the doubts and questions may
also relate to the disarmament programme, in particular
the conditions under which the fighters that have agreed
to demobilize are received in the camps and the payment
of a sum to enable them to provide for the survival of
their families. These factors have created certain
dissatisfaction and anxiety in the camps and led to
expressions of discontent that are perhaps understandable.
Obviously, both Foday Sankoh and Johnny Paul Koroma
are subject to pressures from their former troops, who
want to see a real will to demobilize and tangible signs
that their reintegration will provide them with adequate
financial conditions and dignity. Such reactions affect the
leaders, who are held to account by the troops.

Under such conditions it is important for dialogue to
continue, as is happening, and for the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) to maintain a
consolidated, firm and assured presence in both Freetown
and Lungi. In that context, and given the financial and
human effort being made by the countries that have been
contributing to ECOMOG, the support of donor countries
is essential. I made that point earlier, and I hope that it
will be borne in mind. It is essential to support this effort.

At the same time, the presence of UNAMSIL, as
well as of Indian and Kenyan troops and the ECOMOG
troops that will remain or be replaced by fresh troops,
will no doubt have an impact on the rebels themselves
and on the various groups, showing them that the exercise
is to be taken seriously, and that the force present in the
country has the capacity to deter the various parties from
reneging on the commitments they have undertaken.

In conclusion, inasmuch as this is a public meeting
and will no doubt resonate in the country as a
demonstration of widespread support among African
countries and throughout the international community, I
believe that the Security Council is sending out an
important message to all the parties.

In its last question, the French delegation referred to
the statements made by Mr. Johnny Paul Koroma
regarding the organization of the work of the Commission
for the Consolidation of Peace and asked whether the
issue had been discussed with the United Nations. I
should like to remind the Council that the Commission is
a national one, created under the Agreement. We are not
talking about a Commission that is under the
responsibility of the United Nations Mission. It is
therefore essentially for the Sierra Leoneans themselves

 

to organize and discuss it. The only comment that I can
make is that Mr. Koroma's statement related to the strategy
he envisaged for the Commission. In our view, that is a
demonstration, at least at this stage, of his commitment to
working actively within the institutions that have been set
up under the Lome Agreement. This is therefore a positive
sign. The statements that he made appear to be relatively
pertinent. It is now up to the members of that Commission
themselves to hold discussions and to establish their
guidelines, programme of work and strategy.

