Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): My delegation welcomes
the convening of this open debate by the Security
Council in its continuing efforts to deal with the critical
problems posed by the illicit trade in small arms in
conflict-ridden areas. In recognizing the devastating
consequences of the accumulation and illegal trade of
those weapons, the Council has, to its credit,
undertaken a number of measures in stemming the flow
of arms to the conflict areas under its purview. While
those efforts have led to positive results in some areas
of the world, the problem has persisted in others with
the potential to ignite even greater disasters, and has
therefore become a preoccupation of the international
community.

Such illegal activities have not spared any
country or region. A sizeable number of illegally
possessed weapons flow to our region, fuel violent
crime, give rise to additional conflicts and engender
instability and insecurity at the national and regional
levels. These weapons have become part of the
growing menace of transnational organized crime.

My country has also been an unfortunate victim
of those vicious activities. Because of its long
coastlines and unique geographical attributes,
Indonesia is particularly vulnerable to illegal transfers
of small arms. Organized crime now easily make huge
illegal profits across borders in different countries by
utilizing advanced transportation and communication
technologies.

Hence, for us, the fight against individuals and
organizations that indulge in the illicit trade of
weapons has become a national priority, that must take
into account implications for our territorial integrity
and commitment to maintain national unity. Such an
unsettling state of affairs also hinders the settlement of
separatist tendencies in certain parts of the country that
are detrimental to our national stability and security.

It is against these overriding considerations that
my delegation welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General in document S/2003/12l7 and the
recommendations contained therein to curb and
eliminate the global scourge of small arms. We also
welcome in particular the call for efforts to develop an
international instrument to enable States to identify and
trace illicit arms in a timely and reliable manner. In this
regard, we endorse the finding of the Group of Experts
that it is feasible to develop such an instrument that
would make a significant contribution to eradicate that
menace. The General Assembly's decision to establish
a working group to negotiate its nature and scope is a
step in the right direction and we look forward to
actively participating in its deliberations.

My delegation is gratified to note the Secretary-
General's recommendation for greater interaction
between the General Assembly and the Security
Council within the framework of international efforts at
conflict prevention and peace-building that would
promote, in a coordinated manner, the crucial task of
developing long-term strategies to halt the illicit
proliferation of small arms and could, in particular,
promote the implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Action on Small Arms at national,
regional and global levels. States belonging to the
Association of South-East Asian Nations are active at
those levels, in implementing that programme.

In the post-conflict period in the countries cited
in the report, which are mostly in Africa, commendable
progress has been made in such diverse areas as
consolidating State authority throughout the country,
implementing demobilization, disarmament,
rehabilitation and resettlement programmes for ex-
combatants, fostering human rights and national
reconciliation and promoting socio-economic progress.
These efforts were undertaken within the right of States
to self-defence and security and without prejudice to
their corresponding right for effective control over the
export, import, transit and storage of small weapons.
They are all crucial to the consolidation of peace and
security.

For these reasons, my delegation commends the
Secretary-General's proposal for the maintenance of a
comprehensive approach to address these situations,
including with regard to rendering assistance in
capacity-building and confidence-building measures;
conflict prevention initiatives and peacekeeping
operations; and the establishment of a secure
environment for sustainable development. Thus,
complex challenges involving the political, security,
humanitarian and economic dimensions of conflict in a
region can be taken as a whole to facilitate the
transition from peacekeeping to peace-building, and
from relief to development.

Indonesia supports in principle the existing
mechanism for transparency in armaments under the
United Nations Register of Conventional Arms, which
is included as one of the recommendations. Apart from
the seven major categories of arms included in the
Register, its further development should also entail
bringing in other categories such as stockpiling,
national production and military holdings.

In conclusion, my delegation can go along with
the Secretary-General's assessment that, while
significant progress has been made in numerous areas
through a series of measures in stemming the illicit
trade in small arms, other areas present a mixed
picture. We should continue to resolve old concerns
while identifying new ones, as we look forward to the
Second Biennial Meeting of States to consider the
implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action on Small Arms and Light Weapons, to be held
next year, which will chart a further course of action in
preparing for the review conference in 2006.

