Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): We too thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Haysom and Ambassador Saikal for their briefings,
and commend Spain for its skillful stewardship of the
mandate renewal of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

The first year of Afghanistan's transformation
decade has been a difficult one for the people of
Afghanistan. As we have heard today, the security
situation continues to deteriorate. Intense fighting has
seen record numbers of civilians killed and wounded
and the Taliban has now asserted its authority over
a third of Afghanistan's district centres. Sadly, child
casualties caused by ground engagements continue to
rise, and an estimated 2 million refugees have fled
the country in the past nine months alone. With the
summer fighting season set to commence, prospects for
the year ahead look even more challenging, as a number
of speakers here have mentioned today.

The record of the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces in meeting these challenges has been
mixed. They have displayed considerable courage
and resilience on a number of occasions, scoring
notable victories. At other times, they have displayed
a worrying fragility. The economy remains extremely
weak, with unemployment high and few prospects for
improvement in the year ahead. It is clear that if it is
to meet these challenges, Afghanistan will remain
dependent on assistance from its core international
partners for the foreseeable future. Against that bleak
backdrop, several points merit highlighting.

First, to meet these challenges Afghanistan needs
resolute, unified and effective national leadership
like never before. We urgently need the National
Unity Government to lift its game in providing this.
That means getting serious about tackling rampant
corruption, and it means ensuring strong leadership
in key portfolios, including the security sector. The
international community continues to have an important
role to play in providing support for these efforts. We
commend the work of UNAMA in providing focused,
quality technical assistance, and sustaining funding in
support of the long-term capacity of the Government
of Afghanistan.

But all of this will amount to little without
focused and effective national leadership. We
look to Afghanistan's leadership to deliver on its
obligations - first to the people of Afghanistan and,
secondly, to those countries that have invested so
much to provide them with the opportunity to restore
Afghanistan to a fully functioning State. We recognize
the scale and the complexity of the task, and we
commend the continued resilience and determination
of the Government and security forces of Afghanistan
in the face of these enormous challenges.

The second point we would make is that there can
be no peace in Afghanistan in the long term without a
meaningful peace and reconciliation process.Again, we
do not underestimate the challenges faced in achieving
progress, particularly in the current circumstances, but
we must ensure that we are laying the groundwork now
for a successful process.

Thirdly, we call on regional partners to play their
part in helping to restrict the flow of arms, fighters and
narcotics across Afghanistan's borders that continues
to fuel instability. We welcome the momentum in the
Heart of Asia-Istanbul process, and urge participants
to carry forward the progress made at the most recent
meeting in Islamabad.

Fourthly, we believe that greater use can and should
be made of the Taliban sanctions regime as a tool for
supporting peace and reconciliation and for combating
the efforts ofthose who continue to work against a stable
and prosperous Afghanistan.New Zealand believes that
greater use can be made of the sanctions regime to
incentivize individuals to refrain from activities that
jeopardize prospects for peace, as well as to constrain
the flow of arms and military material into the conflict.

We remain particularly concerned about the
destabilizing effects of the continued flow of improvised
explosive device components to the Taliban. We urge
Member States to act on the call in resolution 2253
(2015) to share information, establish partnerships
and develop national strategies and capabilities to
counter inprovised explosive devices. As Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011), Ambassador Van Bohemen hopes in the coming
months to take forward a discussion on how better use
can be made of the sanctions regime in this regard,
including directly with key Afghan stakeholders.

In conclusion, the year ahead is shaping up to be a
dangerous and uncertain one for the Government and
people of Afghanistan. After our collective investment
and sacrifice over the past 15 years, we cannot afford to
let the country fall once again into chaos.

