Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The vote you have called today, Sir, on a
draft resolution (S/2016/ 1026) on the humanitarian
situation in Syria violates the Security Council's rules
of procedure, since the draft resolution was put into
blue only at 11.20 am. this morning and cannot be
voted on before tomorrow morning, in accordance with
the 24-hour rule. There is no consensus among Council
members to waive that rule. This case is of significant
importance because the additional time would
have allowed Council members to take certain new
circumstances into account and to reach consensus on a
draft resolution that could contribute on a practical level
to improving the humanitarian situation in Syria, and
in particular in eastern Aleppo. Those circumstances
are as follows.

On 2 December, Russian Foreign Minister Srgey
Lavrov and United States Secretary of State John
Kerry held negotiations in Rome. At the proposal of
the American side, the outcome of those talks was an
agreement to convene a meeting of experts in Geneva
to resolve the issue of eastern Aleppo. We expressed
our readiness to begin those discussions immediately
and to hold an initial meeting on Sunday, 4 December.
However, our United States partners suggested that it
be postponed until Wednesday, 7 December, to which
we agreed.

The proposed arrangement anticipates a
full withdrawal of all fighters from the eastern
neighbourhoods of the city, which conforms to the
well-known initiative put forward by Staffan de
Mistura. Initially, it is expected that we would agree on
itineraries and timetables for their withdrawal; as soon
as that takes place, a cessation of hostilities regime
would enter force, allowing the fighters to be evacuated.
In that way, the problem of eastern Aleppo would be
effectively resolved while ensuring the security of
civilians, the unimpeded delivery of humanitarian
assistance and the normalization of the situation as a
whole.

The draft resolution before us refers not to a
withdrawal of fighters from eastern Aleppo but to
an immediate cessation of hostilities, while fighters
would have 10 days to indicate whether or not they
would remain a party to the cessation of hostilities. As
we know, such pauses have been exploited by fighters
every time to replenish their supplies and ranks. Is
strengthening their control over certain quarters of
the city really be worth the suffering of thousands of
people?

The Russian Federation cannot support the draft
resolution submitted by the humanitarian troika. We
shall vote against it against it, as we honestly informed
the Council in advance. Perhaps we should offer our
sympathies to the humanitarian troika, which as know
has been shamelessly pressured by the three Western
permanent members of the Security Council yet again
to put a doomed draft resolution to the vote. We believe
such efforts to be provocations, undermining the efforts
of the International Syria Support Group, especially in
and around Aleppo.

Provocations are taking place not only here in the
Security Council Chamber in New York, but also on
the ground in Syria. Today, fighters shelled a medical
unit of the Russian field hospital in Aleppo. A Russian
nurse was killed as a result of a direct hit and a Russian
pediatric doctor is fighting for his life. These people
were genuinely helping Syrians, while some false
guardians of humanitarian principles have all along
been destroying the country, generously sponsoring
terrorists and continuing to worry about their fate at
any cost in order to implement their plans in the region.
We caution once again that this policy is doomed.

