Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Republic of Chad for its leadership
of the Security Council this month and for having
convened this debate. I thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report on the situation in
Afghanistan (S/2014/876). I also welcome the statement
of Mr. Haysom, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, and congratulate him on his
recent appointment. I would like to thank Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, for his presence here today and for
his briefing. I would also like to take this opportunity
to express my appreciation to Ambassador Quinlan and
the Permanent Mission of Australia for their support
and great efforts as penholder on Afghanistan on the
Council for the past two years.

The international military combat mission in
Afghanistan, authorized under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations 13 years ago in the
aftermath of the 911 attacks, will officially end in 14
days. Just a few days ago, the Council adopted resolution
2189 (2014), which reaffirms the completion of the
mandate of the International Security Assistance Force
and welcomes the Resolute Support Mission, aimed at
training, advising and assisting the Afghan National
Security and Defence Forces on the basis of agreements
between the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, NATO
and the United States. This is a historic step towards
a new beginning in Afghanistan and a key marker of
the country's transition to a new chapter in its relations
with the international community.

This monumental achievement comes on the
heels of another significant moment in the history
of Afghanistan, and another major victory for the
transition agenda: the presidential elections. While
complex and challenging, the elections culminated in
the first peaceful transfer of power from one elected
leader to another in the country. The agreement of
Afghanistan's leaders to put the country's successful
future ahead of political division and establish a
National Unity Government fostered an environment
of hopefulness, inclusivity and political consensus
and cemented the foundation for lasting peace and
prosperity in Afghanistan.

While the people and leadership of Afghanistan
are confident that the country is moving in a positive
direction, the challenges Afghanistan faces are
formidable. Insecurity remains the main impediment to
progress across the country. In the past several months,
terrorists and insurgent groups have intensified attacks
in an attempt to deplete national confidence in the new
Government and to intimidate the Afghan people. As
they commit acts of violence and brutality against
innocent men, women and children, extremist armed
groups should know that the courageous Afghan
security forces stand ready to fight for the future of
Afghan democracy, peace and security. Their resilience,
particularly during the election period and throughout
the past year, demonstrates their commitment to
protecting the lives of Afghans and the future of the
country.

In the months and years ahead, the sustained support
of the international community, including through the
NATO-Afghanistan Enduring Partnership and the
Resolute Support Mission, as well as the commitments
made at the Bonn Conference; the Chicago, Lisbon
and Wales Summits; and the recent NATO ministerial
meeting in Brussels, will continue to be essential to
enhancing the capacity and capabilities of the Afghan
forces in the years ahead. At the same time, the
Government of Afghanistan recognizes that a political
solution is essential to stopping the violence and the
continuing terror campaign. To that end, an extensive
reconciliation process with the armed opposition is
high on the Government's agenda.

As Afghanistan takes steps to overcome security
threats, the country faces immediate economic
challenges, including a looming fiscal crisis. The
protracted election process triggered uncertainty
and negatively impacted revenue collection, donor
confidence and economic growth, making it difficult for
the Government to mobilize adequate revenue to meet
its financing priorities. We call on our international
partners to fulfil their commitments to supporting the
country so that the Government can close the long-
running fiscal gap and deliver on its reform promises.

The National Unity Government has devised a
comprehensive reform agenda aimed at addressing
both the immediate and the long-term challenges
Afghanistan faces and at enabling the country to make
progress towards self-reliance, sustainable growth,
peace and stability. Today, I will highlight a few
key aspects of the new agenda that the leadership of
Afghanistan presented in full to international partners
at the London Conference on Afghanistan earlier this
month.

The first is fighting corruption. By recognizing
the corrosive effects of corruption, the Government
of Afghanistan has already taken steps to tackle that
endemic scourge and its underlying drivers. In its first
days in office, the new Administration reopened the
Kabul Bank case and made plans to reform a number of
key oversight bodies.

The second is advancing good governance. The
Government is committed to strengthening democratic
institutions, promoting the rule of law, enhancing
human rights, particularly the rights of women and
girls, and undertaking comprehensive reforms of
electoral laws and institutions.

The third is promoting economic and fiscal
stability. Afghanistan is committed to enhancing
productivity, mobilizing domestic revenue and
expanding private-sector investment, growth and
employment opportunities with the ultimate aim of
reducing Afghanistan's dependence on donor support
and achieving long-term sustainability and prosperity
in the country. The illicit drug economy is a grave
concern, and to this end the Government is committed
to a comprehensive response to combat this menace,
in collaboration with our regional and international
partners.

The fourth is strengthening regional cooperation,
which will set Afghanistan firmly on the path
towards peace and security and will enhance growth,
prosperity and stability in Afghanistan and across
the region. President Ghani's State visits to China,
Pakistan and Azerbaijan and his engagement with other
neighbouring countries, as well as his attendance at
key regional meetings - such as the seventeenth South
Asian Association for Regional Cooperation summit
in Kathmandu and the fourth Heart of Asia/Istanbul
Process Ministerial Conference in China - indicate
the priority that the new Government is giving to
regional integration. The Government has also taken
steps to increase transit, trade, investment and energy
and power projects, such as the Central Asia South Asia
Electricity Transmission and Trade Project and the
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India Pipeline,
and to utilize Afghanistan's geographical advantage as
a hub connecting Central, South, West and East Asia.

The fifth is enhancing the development partnership.
The Government of Afghanistan is committed to
delivering on its commitments as set out in the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework. At the same time, it
is crucial that donors reaffirm mutual commitments to
aid effectiveness principles, including the importance
of building Afghan capabilities, delivering more
aid on budget, and aligning development initiatives
with Afghan national priorities. We look forward to
deepening these mutual commitments at the senior
officials meeting in 2015 in Kabul and at the next
ministerial meeting in 2016.

The National Unity Government has already taken
significant, positive steps to advance its reform agenda
and to lay the foundation for lasting peace and stability
in the country. Its decisive actions in the areas of
governance, security, economic and social development,
regional and international relations and human rights,
and its successful achievement of key milestones in the
transition process have sent a powerful message to the
people of Afghanistan and the international community
that, as President Ghani has said, a successful
Afghanistan is entirely within our reach. At the same
time, we recognize that a great deal of hard work lies
ahead of us, including the formation of a merit-based
Cabinet, which the leadership of Afghanistan aims to
accomplish in the coming weeks. Moving forward, the
Government is dedicated to sustaining the optimism of
the Afghan people and to building a successful future.

At this critical juncture in the country's history,
the National Unity Government is determined to
build upon the enthusiasm of the Afghan people and
the successes of the past 13 years to take bold steps
towards self-sufficiency, peace and prosperity for all
Afghans. As it does so, the enduring support of the
international community is essential to the success of
the Government's comprehensive reform agenda, to
the country's efforts to achieve the objectives of the
transformation decade, and to enduring peace, stability
and prosperity in the years ahead.

