Ms. Samar (Afghanistan): I am delighted to be
here today in an institution devoted to peace. I
congratulate the United Nations for standing behind its
mandate of supporting global stability by rising to the
responsibility of supporting the peace process in
Afghanistan. That commitment by the United Nations
and its Member States has given the Afghan people the
confidence to stand against the forces of oppression
and evil and to move forward in restoring peace in our
war-torn country.

I am pleased that we have made great progress in
this short period. In the past few months, we have
moved quickly from Bonn to Tokyo to Kabul, putting
in place political processes and a Government
framework for the daunting task of reconstruction and
rebuilding Afghanistan. The Afghan people stand
behind the peace and pledge that they will work to
bring about stability. We look forward to the day when
our national army is prepared and mobilized well
enough to respond to acts of violence and instability in
any part of our country. But one cannot expect a
Government in place for only four months to be able to
respond to the level of challenges that we face after

more than 20 years of destruction and of a culture of
war.
Without the immediate expansion of international
peacekeeping forces, peace, democracy, reconstruction
and the restoration of women's rights and human rights
will not be possible in our country. The rights of
women, in particular, are put at risk by the absence of
security. Women continue to fear Violence and to worry
about the imposition of Taliban-like restrictions.
Unless greater security is provided, the inclusion of
women in the Loya Jirga may be undermined and the
distribution of identification cards to enable women's
participation in future elections imperilled. Women in
Afghanistan are finally beginning to see a little light
after a very long darkness. But the gains that have been
made in the past four months could easily be lost
unless security is greatly improved.

We are told that an expansion of peacekeeping
forces is too expensive. But another cycle of war will
prove an even greater expense to the world: it will be
costly in terms of the loss of human lives. Another
period of violence will also risk the money and support
that have already been invested in the peace process.
Continued instability may also undo all the political
work that has been put in place with so much effort by
the people of Afghanistan and friendly nations
everywhere. It will waste perhaps our last real chance
to reverse the decades of violence and to create peace
and stability in Afghanistan and in the region.

We have heard that Member States are reluctant
to extend the security forces in Afghanistan because of
the fear that the soldiers will face risks of kidnapping
and killing. Yes, those risks may be there, and we must
respond by putting everything possible in place to give
those soldiers the proper support so that they are not
left vulnerable. But if we do not act against the
problems that Afghanistan faces, the risks will be even
greater.

I know that what I am asking for is not easy to
provide. But I ask the leaders of all nations to consider
carefully their responsibilities and to weigh the
political and economic costs of expanding and
extending the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) against the great risks of not taking action and
not strengthening security.

Finally, security means immediate and long-term
funds to strengthen the Government overall. The
amount of aid that the interim Government has
received has been very small compared with the
pledges and, especially, with the tremendous need. We
need financial resources to demonstrate that peace
creates changes in the conditions of people's lives.
Let us not leave the job of restoring peace in
Afghanistan half finished. The international community
must renew its commitment to come together
collectively and decisively to root out the elements of
instability and give sustained support to rebuilding the
peace in Afghanistan and stabilizing the region. We
have learned that violence does not simply stay within
the borders of Afghanistan, but that it grows roots and
extends to areas well beyond the country and the
region. Let us not repeat the mistakes of the past.

Together, we have a chance to change the future
of Afghanistan, to create a model of democracy and
peace in an area that is fragile and to restore women's
rights and human rights. Help us move forward
towards that hope and dream. Help us release the men
and women of Afghanistan from a cycle of oppression,
isolation and war. With the support of the world behind
us, we will step forward confidently, step by step, to
transform the future of Afghanistan, the region and the
whole world.

Once again, I am deeply thankful to you, Sir, and
your colleagues in the Security Council for this
meeting on Afghanistan. I know how fully the Council
has to concentrate its attention on the Middle East
because of the dramatic urgency of the situation in that
region. Let me express the support of the Afghan
people and Government for the action of the Security
Council in favour of peace in the Middle East. We
highly support the necessary and urgent
implementation of all the resolutions of the Security
Council on the Middle East.

We hope for a world without violence and for
peace throughout the planet.

