Mr. Hattrem (Norway): Long-term peace, security
and prosperity for Israelis and Palestinians both can be
achieved only through a negotiated two-State solution.
The political process has been at a standstill for years,
and the situation is becoming increasingly tense and
dangerously fragile. The outstanding final-status issues
must be resolved through direct negotiations between the
parties, with support from the international community.

Norway's objection to settlements is long-standing
and firm. Settlement activity undermines the prospects
for a two-State solution and must stop.

At this critical juncture, with the support of
the parties and other stakeholders, Norway and
the European Union have decided to convene an
extraordinary ministerial session of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee in Brussels on 31 January. The meeting
will address two issues. First, there is an urgent need
to discuss measures that may have a positive impact
on efforts to restart final-status negotiations. Progress
towards realizing the two-State solution must be made.
Secondly, the meeting will also discuss efforts to assist
the Palestinian Authority to reinstate its control in Gaza,
as outlined in the Cairo agreement of 12 October 2017.

The delivery by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) of essential services, especially education
and health services, is crucial to address the basic
needs of the Palestinian refugees. In these efforts,
UNRWA also has a vital role in preserving stability
in the region, particularly in Lebanon and Jordan. The
financial situation of UNRWA is critical, and there is a
risk that the organization will not be able to deliver on
its mandate. Together with UNRWA, the donors must
find a way to address this acute crisis.

The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) has
lost almost all its territory in Iraq and Syria, in great
part due to the efforts of the anti-ISIL coalition and its
local partners. However, to achieve long-term stability
in the liberated areas, inclusive political solutions and
reconciliation are key. We urge the Iraqi Government to
address the underlying factors that led to the emergence
of ISIL.

Norway is concerned about the recent escalation in
north-western Syria. More than 200,000 people have
been displaced since mid-December. We reiterate the
need to respect resolution 2393 (2017) so as to allow
humanitarian access to those in need.

Once again, we underline the need for all parties
involved in the conflict to work through the United
Nations-led negotiations to secure a durable peace.
Norway continues to stand by the Syrian people. We
have provided more than $1 billion in assistance to
the Syria crisis since 2011, and we will contribute an
additional half a billion dollars over the next two years.

