Mr. Alshamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of the Arab Group, I would like
to express my sincere thanks to you, Mr. President,
for convening today's important meeting, and to
congratulate you on your presidency of the Security
Council. I would also like to thank Mr. Nikolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his briefing this morning.

In the interests of saving time I will deliver a
shortened version of my statement, the full text of
which will be available through the Secretariat.

In the aftermath of the Israeli aggression in 1967,
the Security Council adopted resolution 242 (1967),
which reaffirmed the guiding principle of the Charter
of the United Nations on the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force. The resolution also
laid the foundations for an acceptable settlement of
the Arab-Israeli conflict, requiring Israel's withdrawal
from the Arab territories. It remains the only basis for
addressing the question of Palestine, and its reasoning is
what the Arab countries referred to when they adopted
the Arab Peace Initiative, supported by the entire
international community, with the exception of Israel.

Israel has continued to disregard the principles of
international law, and that is why it cannot be a candidate
for non-permanent membership on the Security Council.
Israel takes every opportunity to flout United Nations
resolutions, and the Israeli Government's strategy is
to make a two-State solution within the 1967 borders
impossible in practice by carrying out a systematic
plan that includes the building of illegal settlements
in certain areas so as to prevent the establishment of a
Palestinian State.

The core of this conflict is the Israeli occupation;
we will never resolve this issue unless we address it
directly and decisively, on the basis of the principle
of land for peace. Any plan that is not focused on this
central issue is bound to fail. We need a framework
for reference that is based on international legitimacy,
including Council resolutions. Resolution 2334 (2016)
is the right way forward.

The Arab Group reiterates its condemnation of the
decision of the United States to recognize Jerusalem
as the capital of Israel and relocate its embassy to that
city. That decision represents a flagrant violation of
international law and the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.

Even though this policy does not have any legal
impact that would change the status of Jerusalem, the
Arab Group considers it a clear violation of the rights
of the Palestinian people and an attack on both Arab
and Muslim nations, as well as on Christians around
the world.

The strong international consensus in the Security
Council and in the General Assembly on the importance
of preserving the legal status of Jerusalem is intended
not only to save the peace process but also to protect
international legitimacy, the resolutions of the United
Nations and the role of the Organization in maintaining
international peace and security. It is in this spirit that we
deem it very important for Member States - especially
the members of the Security Council - to meet their
commitments in implementing the Council's resolutions
and respect their obligations thereunder.

We must refer here to resolution 478 (1980), which
stressed that any measures aiming to change Jerusalem's
landmarks or status are invalid and must be repealed,
and invited countries to withdraw their diplomatic
missions from the Holy City. Moreover, the General
Assembly confirmed in its resolution ES-10/19, adopted
on 21 December 2017, the importance ofMember States
maintaining the status quo in Jerusalem, complying
with all Security Council resolutions on Jerusalem and
not recognizing any actions or measures contrary to
past resolutions.

Therefore, based on international law and United
Nations resolutions on the Palestine question and
Jerusalem, the Arab Group demands that the following
measures be taken by the Security Council and
Member States.

First, they should not recognize any unilateral
measures or procedures that target Jerusalem's character
or its demographic composition, stressing that these
procedures are null and void and have no legal impact.

Secondly, they should refrain from establishing
diplomaticmissionsinJerusalem,pursuanttotherelevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.

Thirdly, they should emphasize that the issue of
Jerusalem is a final-status issue that must be decided
through negotiations between the parties, and refrain
from taking any steps that would prejudice the results
of final-status negotiations.

Fourthly, they should demonstrate the seriousness
of unilateral actions that threaten the two-State solution.

And, fifthly, they should intensify and accelerate
their efforts and support activities at the international
and regional levels to achieve a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the Middle East.

In this context, we take this opportunity to express
our sincere thanks and gratitude to all Member States
that voted in favour of General Assembly resolution
ES-10/19 at its most recent emergency session.

We take this opportunity to express our great
appreciation for the noble humanitarian work of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in aiding over 5.5 million
Palestinian refugees, particularly during the critical
times the Agency is facing. We call on the members
of the international community to honour their
commitments to Palestinian refugees. We also express
our sincere appreciation for the efforts of the funding
countries to reduce the Agency's deficit.

It is now more than ever necessary to take all
possible measures in order to put an end to the Arab-
Israeli conflict, which has existed for more than seven
decades. In this context, we reaffirm that stability and
peace in the region will not be achieved so long as Israel
continues to occupy the Palestinian and Arab territories.

