Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran): There is a consensus inside as well as outside
Afghanistan that, after two decades of war, the country
needs peace and stability. All Afghan ethnic groups
agree on the need for understanding and for
maintaining the peace. Moreover, the international
community has unanimously pronounced itself ready to
follow up on the peace process and on the
reconstruction of Afghanistan.

We are delighted that such a consensus exists at
all levels and that steps have already been taken
towards implementing the decisions made last
December in Bonn. We are also delighted that the
Islamic Republic of Iran has been able all along to
actively help the Afghan people further their cause and
has been able to contribute, from the outset, to the
United-Nations-led Afghan peace process and drive for
reconstruction.
My Government is following with great interest
the ongoing - and thus far mostly successful -
process of electing a loya jirga. Iranian officials fully
assisted a delegation dispatched to the Islamic
Republic of Iran by the Special Independent
Commission for the Convening of the Emergency Loya
Jirga, which successfully accomplished its mission of
choosing the representatives of Afghan refugees living
in Iran. We hope that the Commission can complete its
work successfully and in a timely manner, despite any
obstacles that may arise along the way.

At this juncture, the maintenance of peace and
security throughout Afghanistan is of great importance.
Although there are signs that security has improved, we
agree that the situation across the country remains
fragile and unpredictable. The possible regrouping of
Taliban and Al Qaeda elements inside and outside
Afghanistan is still a cause for concern, and continued
suspicion and hostility among some Afghan military
commanders may prove destabilizing. Furthermore, I
would like to caution that careless military operations,
in which innocent Afghan people are killed, only add
to the sense of instability.

At the same time, we understand that an
appropriate amount of international security assistance
is necessary to help maintain peace in Afghanistan. In
the light of Afghan sensitivities and of past experience,
however, we believe that it is in the interest of lasting
peace in Afghanistan that the foreign military presence
in that country remain as minimal and as brief as
possible. In our view, the creation of an indigenous
Afghan security sector should be given priority by all
Afghans and by the international community. The
Iranian Government has undertaken to help in that area
by providing training to the Afghan police.

Drugs in Afghanistan are also a security-related
issue. The continued poppy cultivation in that country
is incompatible with the Afghan drive for peace. It
threatens Afghanistan's neighbouring countries, and it
runs counter to the restoration of stability in the region.
We commend the determination shown by the Afghan
interim Government to eliminate poppy cultivation,
and we commend the foreign countries that are
assisting it in that respect. We encourage the
international community to participate in efforts to
promote crop-substitution projects in Afghanistan and
to create incentives for Afghan farmers to cultivate
food crops instead of opium poppies.

Benefiting from relative peace in the country and
a favourable international and regional climate,
Afghanistan's reconstruction is gradually getting off
the ground. Cultural, historical and linguistic affinities
between Iran and Afghanistan have been strong
incentives to Iran's contribution to the reconstruction
of Afghanistan. In addition, we hope that a successful
rebuilding of that country will reinforce peace and help
alleviate the refugee crisis and drug trafficking in the
region.

Therefore, while we expect that the international
community will actively follow up reconstruction
efforts in Afghanistan, we believe that Afghan
rebuilding plans should be drawn up so that all
interested countries, especially those neighbouring
Afghanistan, will be encouraged to cooperate in the
reconstruction drive. Moreover, Afghan reconstruction
and economic development should be carried out in
line with the social and cultural requirements of
Afghan society and help bring closer the different
ethnic groups of the country.

My Government, determined to participate in the
reconstruction drive, has already started a number of
projects, including the construction of a road from the
Iranian border to Herat. A feasibility study on a railway
leading to Herat is also under way. Both are important,
given the land-locked status of Afghanistan. Moreover,
during the visit of the Iranian Minister for Economic
and Financial Affairs to Kabul in April, the two sides
signed several agreements covering various areas of
economic and commercial cooperation.

Attaching great importance to consensus among
the Afghan neighbours and their meaningful
participation in the construction of Afghanistan, Tehran
hosted, on 18 May, a ministerial meeting of finance
ministers from Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan, held
under the auspices of the United Nations Development
Programme. The meeting was intended to pave the way
for regional participation in promoting economic and
commercial cooperation among the participants. It
focused on the urgent needs of Afghanistan, the
provision of grants and credits for its reconstruction
and rebuilding the infrastructure of the country. A
memorandum of understanding signed by the
participants aims at enhancing cooperation by and
among their private sectors, facilitating trade
transactions and coordinating regional strategies to
expand economic cooperation among the three
countries. It also established a trilateral commission for
coordination.

We attach importance to the coordinating work
that the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan is doing in that country and highly
appreciate the efforts made by Mr. Brahimi and his
colleagues. Our appreciation also goes to the United
Nations agencies that have been doing their best to
avert a humanitarian catastrophe in Afghanistan.

