Mr. Grant (Canada): Today we awoke to news of
the Afghan Parliament, the seat of Afghan democracy,
being under assault by gunmen. Those terrorists killed
Afghan civilians but were denied the ability to murder
Afghan legislators thanks to the brave efforts of Afghan
security forces. On this day, when Afghanistan was to
confirm its newest Defence Minister through its own
elected Parliament, the militants continued to wage their
war against the Afghan people. Yet they were not alone.

They came from somewhere. They were sheltered,
trained, sponsored and deployed. In the face of such
violence, Canada continues to stand with the Afghan
people, the vast majority of whom choose modernity
and progress and reject terrorism and corruption.

With the appointment of a full Cabinet, save for
one minister, the formation of the Afghan National
Unity Government of President Ashraf Ghani and
ChiefExecutive Abdullah Abdullah is almost complete.
Attention can now turn to securing Afghanistan's
stability and sustainability. We understand the
complexities of working within the national unity
structure, but a Government must govern and provide
basic services to its citizenry within its territory.
While many issues must wait for security conditions to
improve, others can and should be addressed without
delay. Central to that, we encourage the President
and the Chief Executive to work together and ensure
effective implementation of vital reforms aimed
at eradicating corruption, improving governance,
reducing poverty, strengthening the economy,
protecting human rights - especially the rights of
women and girls - and improving participation in
politics and society, particularly as they concern women
and minority groups.

We also urge the National Unity Government
to embark on meaningful electoral reform in order
to restore the people's faith in democracy and
representational government. The absence of reform
is what has caused the delay in the parliamentary
elections. We welcome the fact that the term length for
the lower house of Parliament will be prolonged so as to
maintain its legitimacy and constitutionality.

(spoke in French)

Canada is encouraged by certain signals that the
anti-corruption efforts of the Afghan Government
are beginning to take hold. The 26 April report of the
Independent Joint Anti-Corruption Monitoring and
Evaluation Committee demonstrates that progress
is being made in response to 323 recommendations.
Indeed, 53 recommendations have already been
implemented, and work has started on 149 others. We
encourage further work in that area, as it will assist
the international community in remaining engaged in
Afghanistan.

The law on the elimination of violence against
women was first enacted in 2009, but it is clear that
it falls short of providing the intended protections and
assistance to Afghan women and girls. The April 2015
report by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights entitled
"Justice through the Eyes of Women" demonstrates
that much work still remains to be done in order to
implement that law fully. Once final, and with the full
political will of the Afghan Government, the national
action plan for women and peace and security will
become another key piece that will require full and
effective implementation.
The rule of law and accountability must be applied
in Afghanistan. The Government can choose no better
goal than to focus on protecting the human rights of
the most vulnerable in the country. Afghan women and
girls must feel safe in their homes and empowered to
participate fully in their communities. That is especially
true when their rights are violated by Afghan security
forces, Government-affiliated militias or Government
officials.

(spoke in English)

Canada remains committed to Afghanistan. We
are contributing $330 million over three years, starting
in 2015, to help sustain the Afghan National Security
Forces in order to further the aims of stability and
security. Afghanistan remains a country of focus for
Canada's international development efforts. Between
2014 and 2017, our $227 million investment in the future
of Afghanistan will consolidate and expand the gains
made in maternal, newborn and child health, assist in
providing access to high-quality basic education for
children and youth and embolden women's civil and
political participation, human rights and economic
empowerment. It will also provide much-needed support
for mine-action activities and for efforts to help Afghan
actors better manage natural and man-made disasters.

We have expressed confidence in the Government's
reform agenda by investing $20 million towards its fiscal
gap in 2014, of which $10 million were new funds and
$10 million had been re-profiled from the World Bank's
Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund. We appreciate
the resolve and leadership taken by the National Unity
Government, in line with aid-effectiveness principles,
to prioritize a significant number of short-term reforms.
Canada looks forward to refreshing the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework, based on the reform
programme and the priorities of the National Unity
Government announced at the London Conference on
Afghanistan in December 2014.

(spoke in French)

Canada also welcomed, on 1 January, the start of the
NATO-led Resolute Support Mission and endorsed the
principles of NATO's enhanced Enduring Partnership
with Afghanistan aimed at extending our cooperation
further during Afghanistan's Transformation Decade.

I must note, on behalf ofForeign Minister Nicholson
and the Government of Canada, the crucial need to put
an end to violations of Afghanistan's sovereignty and
to the interference by foreign armed groups - directly
or through proxies, including through the support
of terrorist groups such as the Taliban, the Haqqani
Network, Al-Qaida or Daesh. It is foolish to claim
that the material support for those subversive elements
could ever be justified as a matter of legitimate policy.
Ultimately, in Afghanistan, it is the Afghans who are
paying the ultimate price for that folly.

In the last year we have witnessed the tragic
consequences that occur when a country, operating
behind a thin and flimsy smokescreen of denial, flouts
international law and interferes in the sovereignty of
another to annex territory and foment instability. The
safeguarding of Afghanistan's sovereignty is no less
important.

(spoke in English)

Without rules, chaos will ensue. Without a
repudiation of the worst practices in foreign policy,
instability will prevail. Absent an end to interference
and violations of sovereignty, the economies of
Afghanistan and the region will remain shackled to
their self-perpetuating poverty.

(spoke in French)

India's Prime Minister noted during his statement
to the General Assembly (see A/69/PV.15) that there was
no difference between "good terror" and "bad terror".
Indeed, there is no place in the civilized world for
resorting to terror as a political tool and no cause that
justifies terror as a legitimate means. The promotion
of terror, which is encouraged by some States or that
is deeply rooted there, is a betrayal of our international
order. The centres in Quetta, Peshawar and Chitral
where terrorist elements plan, train and deploy terrorist
attacks in Afghanistan cannot continue to be tolerated.

With regard to the region, the neighbouring
countries of Afghanistan must stop using terror for
questionable purposes. We must confront the threat of
terrorism and all its accomplices. Indeed, the countries
that support those groups are not friends ofAfghanistan,
of the Afghan people or of those who have gathered in
this Chamber today to renew their efforts to enable the
Afghan people to experience freedom and prosperity.

(spoke in English)

Canada echoes UNAMA's observation that
Afghans desperately want respite from the ever-present
violence that has such a damaging impact on their lives.
The Government of Afghanistan has committed itself
to achieving peace. We are encouraged by the steps that
the Afghan National Unity Government has taken to
include women in the peace process.

Terrorists can no longer claim to be fighting
foreigners in Afghanistan - instead they are fighting
and murdering Afghans and innocent civilians, like
those at the Afghan Parliament today. They are the main
victims of this conflict. The Taliban and its sponsors
must cease their armed opposition andjoin the Afghan-
led and Afghan-owned peace process without further
delay.

Canadians from all walks oflife continue to support
Afghans in their aspiration for peace and security.
Canada takes this opportunity to assure the United
Nations that we will work with the Afghan National
Unity Government and the international community
to face the numerous challenges that continue to beset
Afghanistan.

