Archbishop Auza: The Holy See thanks the
presidency of the People's Republic of China for
convening this open debate on the important and
timely topic of multilateralism and the role of the
United Nations.

This theme has acquired new urgency today as the
international community is suffering from what the
Secretary-General has defined as trust deficit disorder.
People are losing faith in political establishments within
their own countries. Unilateral foreign policies backed
by economic and military might are undermining trust
between nations. There is a weakening in multilateral
trust, seen, for example, in how the disarmament agenda
is experiencing paralysis, as well as other worrisome
developments in the multilateral negotiating bodies.

The Holy See believes that multilateralism cannot
be grounded in a false sense of security, such as the
threat of mutual destruction or annihilation, or in
simply maintaining a balance of power. A healthy,
universally beneficial multilateralism is built onjustice,
integral human development, respect for fundamental
human rights, care for our planet, the participation of
all in public life, trust between peoples, the support of
institutions that promote peace, access to education and
health care and solidarity and dialogue. In that regard,
the recent high-level dialogue of the Presidents of the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Security Council was an important step towards
renewing the commitment of the United Nations to
multilateralism, not only in terms of its multiple actors
but also for its multifaceted approach to the challenges
of our time. That is a confirmation of the crucial role
that the United Nations can and should play in order to
rebuild trust among its Members.

In considering multilateralism, we have before us
two opposing perspectives: the first is based on the
conviction that conflicts can be resolved through a
determined and broad-based willingness to negotiate
effectively in the light of the ways and wisdom of law;
the second perspective maintains that, in the face of
threats to peace and security, force is more efficacious
and direct. The latter, however, seriously compromises
international cooperation rather than enhancing
it, leading inexorably to negative repercussions on
multilateralism. One of the outcomes emerging from
this open debate must therefore be a clear message in
favour of the force of law rather than the law of force.

Interdependence among nations and the risks of
reciprocal destruction require renewed emphasis on
multilateralism, which, rather than placing excessive
importance on force or practicing selective treaty-
enforcement, demands all States and individuals to
enforce decisively the laws and procedures that have
been established to mitigate and eliminate threats.
Aware of the gravity of the present situation, in which
law must be chosen to prevail over force, every member
of the international community must be animated by a
profound sense of responsibility.

Besides guaranteeing peace and security, the noble
vocation of the United Nations as the pre-eminent
multilateral institution consists in promoting integral
development and defending human rights. With
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the
international community committed itself to ending
poverty in all its forms and dimensions and pledged
that no one will be left behind. It did so based on
an approach that recognizes the centrality of the
human person. Integral human development and the
full exercise of human dignity, however, cannot be
imposed, but rather must be allowed to flourish for
each individual and for every nation in relation with
others. We must affirm the common conviction that
everything is interconnected and that genuine care for
our own lives and our relationship with nature should
be reflected in fraternity and fairness among nations.
We cannot rebuild broken trust unless we begin to walk
together in solidarity with our less fortunate brothers
and sisters and so help free them from oppressive
poverty and enable them to become dignified agents of
their own destiny.

That common vision must draw strength from a
renewed understanding of multilateralism, founded
on the idea of the international community as a family
of nations committed to pursuing the good of all.
It requires the exercise of solidarity on the part of
Governments, international organizations and all men
and women. Its strong foundation is the collective and
shared responsibility for the common good and the
development of those who are poorest so that every
human being may truly feel that we are a member of
the global family.

