Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this briefing. We would also like to congratulate the
Permanent Representative of Bangladesh and former
Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
on the outstanding work that he did during his mandate.
We would like also to congratulate Ambassador Vilovie
on his assumption of the chairmanship of the PBC,
and we wish him every success in the discharge of his
mandate.

Since its creation, the PBC has played a pivotal
role. Its composition, with its members representing
various United Nations bodies, must continue to be used
effectively so as to increase its value added. The new
format of the report (S/2013/63), which we welcome,
makes it possible to highlight both the progress made
and existing gaps where the Commission should focus
its efforts. The progress made in 2012, which is based
mostly on the 2010 recommendations, is undeniable.

With regard to the mobilization of resources,
the success of the Burundi donors conference and
the work done by the Guinea configuration with the
help of the Working Group should serve as a basis
for a best-practices model that could be duplicated
elsewhere, adapting it, of course, to the specific needs
of each configuration. In addition, the strengthening of
partnerships with international and regional financial
institutions, including the World Bank and the African
Development Bank, is encouraging and should be
further developed.

As part of that strengthening, we welcome
the upcoming participation of the Peacebuilding
Support Office in the annual meeting of the African
Development Bank, to be held next May in Marrakesh.
Among the successes achieved, I would cite the
achievements made with respect to hubs for access to
regional security and justice in Liberia, in supporting
the electoral process in Sierra Leone, and in providing
support to the planning process for the new poverty-
reduction strategy in Burundi.

All of those examples are an illustration of the
political support provided by the PBC to the countries
on its agenda. Of course, gaps remain in terms of the
political accompaniment of the Commission, as was
shown by the institutional crises affecting Guinea-
Bissau and, more recently, the Central African
Republic. The situation in those countries reminds us
of the need to attack the root causes of instability and
should encourage us to start an in-depth reflection on
the measures to take in similar situations. Of course, we
must keep in mind that it is when political instability
prevails that those countries most need the attention
and support of the international community the most.

On another topic, we note that national ownership,
a principle that is widely accepted and supported by
all, is closely linked to the strengthening of civilian
capacity. In September 2012, Morocco hosted a regional
consultation on the strengthening of civilian capacities
in the Arab world in Rabat, and we attach particular
importance to this issue for a number of reasons.
The strengthening of South-South and triangular
cooperation is a diplomatic priority for Morocco, and
over the past few years my country has developed,
in this respect, a proactive policy on the sharing of
expertise in a number of areas. However, we are aware
that there is a need to clarify how the initiatives on this
issue are to be implemented. In that respect, we support
the idea of a new paradigm under which South-South
and triangular cooperation would be able, under the
Peacebuilding Commission, to respond to the priorities
identified by the countries concerned and strengthen
national ownership.

Another crucial issue is the relationship between
the Peacebuilding Commission and the other United
Nations organs, in particular the Security Council.
Significant progress has been made in that regard.
Indeed, resolution 2097 (2013), which provides for the
progressive drawdown of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone, spells out in a
detailed manner the role of the Commission in that
sensitive process. The Commission will also be called
upon to contribute to the upcoming adaptation of the
mandate of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in the Central African Republic.

During Morocco's presidency of the Council in
December 2012, we convened a debate on post-conflict
peacebuilding (S/PV.6897) that culminated in the
adoption of a presidential statement (S/PRST/20l2/29).
That statement noted in particular the important role
played by the Commission in prioritizing an integrated
and coherent to peacebuilding and the relationship
between the two bodies. In the same vein, with respect
to the discussion on the situation in countries on the
Commission's agenda, we welcome the participation
by the Chairs of the country-specific configurations
of those countries. It is clear that those configurations
provide undeniable added value and a specific
perspective that helps the Council in its consideration
of and decision-making concerning issues that are also
under consideration by the Commission.

With respect to the Peacebuilding Fund, we have
taken note of the report of the Secretary-General
(A/67/7ll), and we welcome the significant increase
in contributions to the Fund. As a result, we call on
the Fund to increase its support to the countries on the
agenda of the Commission and to countries that are still
fragile that request it.

Finally, we have taken particular note of the
programme of work for the future, and we reiterate
Morocco's willingness to participate actively in the
ongoing reflection aimed at refining the work and
approach of the Peacebuilding Commission.

