Mr. Milanovie (Serbia): Bilateral cooperation with
neighbours has always been the linchpin of Serbia's
approach to foreign policy. It has considered it catalytic
for a new type of relations of a higher quality in the
Western Balkans and the whole of South-East Europe.
That is particularly true of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
our next-door neighbour and one of my country's
closest partners. The endeavour has been motivated
not only by immediate and practical needs but also
by larger considerations, such as restoring confidence
and achieving reconciliation, both inside and outside
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and promoting the aspirations
of both countries to join the European Union.

Serbia is a guarantor of the Dayton Peace
Agreement, which was instrumental in putting an
end to the tragic conflicts in Bosnia and Herzegovina
more than 20 years ago. The Agreement also laid the
foundation for the peaceful and stable future of its
peoples and, very important, for their reconciliation. It
is our firm belief that that Agreement also continues to
be the basis of Bosnia and Herzegovina's progress in
the future.

As a staunch advocate of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States in the conduct of
international relations, my country has also been guided
by that principle in its respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
development and stability of that country within the
framework defined by the Dayton Agreement has
always been of the utmost importance to Serbia, given
that Bosnia and Herzegovina is also home to 1.5 million
Serbs. After all, it is only through political stability and
economic development that the country can ensure
progress to all of its constituent peoples and become a
prosperous country and reliable partner of the region.

More than two decades after the signing of the
Dayton Agreement and the establishment of Bosnia
and Herzegovina as a sovereign independent State, the
key role of dialogue and consensus has been paramount
in addressing all of the issues among the country's
three constituent peoples and two entities. Those are
just as important now - at a time of reforms, the
pursuit of European Union membership criteria and the
implementation of the required standards in the process
of European integration - as they have ever been.
We trust and believe that Bosnia and Herzegovina's
political leaders have the will and resolve to address
those issues through dialogue and that they will reach
consensus to the benefit of all its peoples, who have a
great stake in the well-being of the country.

Different opinions have been bandied about of late
on Bosnia and Herzegovina vis-a-vis various questions,
one of which pertains to the election law and its possible
amendment. Serbia considers that those are internal
questions that are best resolved through agreements
among political actors within the existing legal system,
in a constructive atmosphere and with mutual respect.
On 7 October, however, general elections were held in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is expected that Government
institutions will soon be established and that they will
assume their responsibilities in the interests of all of
Bosnia and Herzegovina's citizens.

Serbia will remain an eager and reliable partner
in achieving ever-more dynamic cooperation in the
interests of both countries. We continue to invite
dialogue at all levels and promote bilateral relations.
Regular contacts have also been maintained at the
working level and concrete questions requiring joint
efforts have been identified. Those questions are
also expected to be addressed upon the completion
of the electoral process and the establishment of new
institutions. In that connection, Serbia stands ready
not only to maintain its level of cooperation but also
improve it, together with the central authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to intensify its relations
with the Republika of Srpska and conduct those
relations in a transparent way, in accordance with the
Dayton Agreement, and to expand cooperation with the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Serbia continues to be interested in furthering
economic cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina,
especially in the fields of investment, joint ventures,
energy and infrastructure, among others. The trade
exchange between the two countries is robust and
increasing; it is expected to reach the €2 billion
mark by the end of this year. Having invested over €l
billion, Serbia is one of the largest investors in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Consolidation rather than enlargement may be the
ongoing priority of the European Union. We in the
Western Balkans, however, have been emboldened
by the messages from Brussels that the continuation
of the policy of enlargement in our region is a stable
process and that new regional memberships are even
being envisaged before 2025. Serbia is ready to share
its experience on the integration process and with
respect to the negotiation chapters available to Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We wish our neighbour and partner
success in its reform and accession processes.

Serbia is one of the strongest proponents of
regional cooperation. Political and economic stability
is in the common interests of all of us in South-East
Europe. Relentless in its efforts to create even better
conditions to bring about economic growth and
increase the living standards of the population of the
region, my country will not be deterred by occasional
divergent and disruptive messages, which we believed
belonged to the past. Instead, we shall continue to
work hard towards promoting stability, development
and good-neighbourliness in the region, particularly
with Bosnia and Herzegovina, with the aim of bringing
about prosperity and a better future on both sides of the
Drina River.

