Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): At the outset, let me
thank the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE),
Mr. Leonid Kozhara, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Ukraine, for his work at the helm of the OSCE and for
his briefing today. We value our regular interactions
with regional and subregional organizations, as Rwanda
strongly believes in strengthened cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations.

We welcome the priorities for action set forth by
Ukraine for its 2013 chairmanship of the OSCE, which
are in line with the "Helsinki+40" process. We approve
its common vision, goals and actions, which we hope
will ensure security, stability and prosperity in the
OSCE area. We commend the comprehensive approach
of the OSCE, which focuses on peace and security
issues, including conflict prevention, but which also
strives to foster economic development while ensuring
the sustainable use of natural resources and promoting
full respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.

We stress the importance ofcooperation between the
OSCE and other stakeholders at all stages of conflicts,
namely, conflict prevention, conflict management
and resolution, and post-conflict peacebuilding. In
that regard, we commend the work of the OSCE in
mediating conflicts and monitoring elections on the
European continent. I highlight OSCE cooperation
with the European Union (EU) in Kosovo in promoting
the rule of law, which is paramount to stability and
progress there.

On election monitoring, Rwanda supports OSCE
efforts aimed at facilitating municipal elections in 2013
in northern Kosovo, in accordance with applicable law
and international standards. We commend the continued
cooperation of the OSCE Mission in Kosovo with other
regional actors, particularly the EU. We believe that
such cooperation on region-wide issues will support
reconciliation efforts in Kosovo and the region.

On another conflict, we welcome the continued
efforts of the co-Chairs of the OSCE Minsk Group to
mediate on the Nagorno Karabakh conflict between
Armenia and Azerbaijan. We reiterate Rwanda's belief
that only a negotiated settlement complying with
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, respecting
internationally recognized borders and ensuring the
protection of minorities will bring a lasting resolution
to the crisis.

Finally, let me conclude by saying that past and
current experience has shown that strengthened
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
actors can play a key role in the maintenance of
international peace and security. Therefore, Rwanda
looks forward to continued fruitful cooperation with
the OSCE under Ukraine's able leadership.

