The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of the United
States.

Iwishto thankUnder-Secretary-GeneralFeltman forhis
informative briefing. I also thank Ministers Timmermans,
Bishop and Asselborn for being here and signalling the
importance of this issue with their presence.

First, on behalf of the United States, let us once
again convey our condolences to the loved ones of the
victims of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17. We do not
presume to grasp the depth of their grief, but we mourn
the lives of those they lost.

We convene today for an update on the investigation
into a crime that abruptly ended too many lives. The
purpose of the investigation is to determine the truth
about what brought down that plane.

For any investigation to be credible, we all agree
that it must be thorough, impartial and professional.
Ukraine and the whole international community turned
to the Dutch Safety Board because we believed it was
more than capable of meeting those standards. The
Board's preliminary findings reflect its independence
and its expertise. Those findings, submitted to the
Security Council on 9 September, include the following.

First, the aircraft was brought down by "a large
number of high-energy objects that penetrated the
aircraft from the outside." Secondly, there were no
engine warnings, aircraft system warnings or distress
messages detected. Thirdly, the damage to the aircraft
is "not consistent with any known failure mode of the
aircraft, its engines or systems." Fourthly, the only
planes identified in the report that were in the vicinity
of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-l7 were commercial
aircraft.

Based on those preliminary findings one can rule
out that Flight MH-l7 was brought down by a bomb on
board. It was not. Russian claims that the flight was
brought down by a Ukrainian fighter jet are also not
supported by evidence in the report. Moreover, ground
photography is consistent with the expected damage
from a surface-to-air missile, but does not correspond
with the damage that a short-range air-to-air missile
from a smaller warhead would produce.

Those facts are important because they contradict
the fiction that has been propagated by Russia. The
Dutch Safety Board's findings are consistent, however,
with evidence gathered by a group of countries,
including the United States, pointing to the fact that
Flight MH-17 was shot down by a surface-to-air missile
fired from territory controlled by Russian-backed
separatists.

Russia called for today's meeting under the pretence
of being briefed on the status of the investigation. The
representative of the Russian Federation today has
appealed for what he calls "an objective and transparent
investigation." But in its intervention today Russia

made clear that its real intention is not to learn about
the investigation, but to discredit it. Russia is seeking
to play the role of forensic aviation investigator, but
cannot do so in an impartial and objective manner.
Russian-backed separatists denied access to the crash
site for days after Flight MH-17 was downed. Russian-
backed separatists then restricted access after initially
letting outside officials in. That is not consistent with
an objective and transparent investigation.

The representative of the Russian Federation today
complained about the timeliness of the voice recordings
being processed. Yet telephone conversations
intercepted by the Ukrainian Government indicate that
the commander of a pro-Russian separatist unit told
local state emergency service employees that Moscow
wanted to find the black boxes, and he enlisted the
support of those local officials to help recover the
boxes. That is not consistent with the desire to ensure
the sanctity of the recordings, which today the Russian
representative professes a desire to protect.

The Russian representative says that the report
does not contain "convincing information." In order
to be convinced of facts one must acknowledge them.
In order to be convinced of truth one must allow it to
surface. One can be convinced if one confronts the
facts as they are established and proven, not as one
may wish they were. It is time to allow facts, however
inconvenient, to be uncovered, and it is time to stop
all attempts to undermine the credibility of a thorough,
impartial and independent investigation that the
international community has no reason to doubt.

Russia does not have the track record to play the
credible investigator here. Russia has repeatedly misled
the Council, its own people and the world about its
support for illegal armed groups and its own military
incursions into Ukraine. Just read the records of the
previous 24 Security Council meetings on Russia's
actions in Ukraine. Read Russia's denials that it was
arming and training separatists in Crimea, and later
its denials that it had deployed troops to Crimea.
Read Russia's denials that it was arming and training
separatists in eastern Ukraine, and later its denials that
it had deployed troops to eastern Ukraine.

The Dutch Safety Board has been delegated the
authority by Ukraine, in line with the International
Civil Aviation Authority standards, to investigate
this crash. If Russia has evidence that it believes can
help identify who shot down Flight MH-17 it has
a responsibility to share that information with the
independent investigators. Too many lives have been
lost, and this conflict has gone on for too long. It is
time for Russia to bring its intervention to an end. That
is why we fully support the ceasefire and agreements
signed in Minsk, which aim to de-escalate the conflict
that has taken approximately 3,000 lives. We fully
support a negotiated political solution to this crisis, as
we have asserted since Russia's incitements created the
conflict.
We welcome reports that Russia is decreasing its
troop levels in eastern Ukraine, even ifRussia continues
to deny that its troops were there in the first place. We
also welcome Russia's recent statements expressing
support for the ceasefire. However, we cannot lose sight
of the fact that the crisis in eastern Ukraine, just like
the occupation and annexation of Crimea before it, was
manufactured by Moscow. No country should support
carving off pieces of sovereign Ukraine and handing
them to the aggressors. The territorial integrity of
Ukraine is non-negotiable.

Ukraine has demonstrated remarkably good faith in
meeting its commitments. This week, notwithstanding
the aggression against the State by the separatists
and by Russian forces, Ukraine's Parliament passed
legislation granting certain districts in eastern Ukraine
special status, which includes greater self-governance,
economic control and Russian-language rights. Now it
is Russia's turn. Russia must immediately withdraw all
of its forces and equipment from Ukraine, including
Crimea, and cease all forms of support and training for
separatist groups. Russia and the separatists it backs
must release all of their hostages and prisoners. Russia
must finally close its borders to the flow of soldiers,
separatists, tanks, artillery and other machinery
of war. It must grant Ukraine control over its own
border. Russia and the groups it backs must create an
environment that allows the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe to fulfil its monitoring and
verification mandate.

There is one very important imperative we must
remember, which brings us back as to why we convened
today - truth. Two hundred and ninety-eight innocent
people were killed on 17 July. The international
community has identified an independent investigative
body to uncover the truth about what happened to Flight
MH-l7. Today we join the chorus of Member States in
reiterating our full support for the Dutch Safety Board's
investigation, and we reject Russia's efforts to disparage
it or to hinder its progress.

The next step is the pursuit of justice, and when
those responsible for this horrific crime are eventually
identified, they will be punished.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Dato Sri Anifah Aman, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Malaysia.

