Mr. Pascoe: Three days ago, the most significant
breakthrough in the peace process in several years was
achieved. Israeli Prime Minister Olmert and Palestinian
President Abbas reached a joint understanding, read
out by President Bush at the opening of the Annapolis
conference. That agreement had three important
elements.

First, the leaders agreed to immediately launch
good-faith bilateral negotiations in order to conclude a
peace treaty, resolving all outstanding issues, including
all core issues without exception, as specified in
previous agreements. They agreed to make every effort
to conclude an agreement before the end of 2008.

Secondly, they agreed that a joint steering
committee is to meet continuously. The committee will
oversee the work of negotiations teams, and its first
meeting will be held on 12 December 2007. The two
leaders also agreed that they will meet together on a
biweekly basis.

Thirdly, they committed to immediately
implement their respective obligations under the Road
Map and agreed to form an American, Palestinian and
Israeli mechanism, led by the United States, to follow
up on implementation. The leaders further committed
to continue the implementation of the ongoing
2

obligations under the Road Map until they reach a
peace treaty. The United States will monitor and judge
the fulfilment of the commitment by both sides. Unless
otherwise agreed by the parties, implementation of the
future peace treaty will be subject to the
implementation of the Road Map.

In addition to the joint understanding, the Israeli
and Palestinian leaders individually addressed each
other, the conference participants and the world.
President Abbas said that "on this day, we stretch our
hands to you as equal partners in peace", stating that it
was not impossible to achieve peace if there was will
and good faith. He also spoke about his determination
to fight terrorism "under all circumstances and from
any source", saying, "We do this for our own people
because we must, not because it is a political
requirement".

Prime Minister Olmert underlined his
acknowledgement of Palestinian suffering, including
that of the refugees. He stated that he knew that that
pain and deprivation were one of the deepest
foundations that had fomented the ethos of hatred. He
added that he had no doubt that the reality created in
the region in 1967 would change significantly, and he
acknowledged that this would be an extremely difficult
process and that many of his people knew that but were
ready for it.

The joint understanding was given added
significance by the context in which it was presented.
President Bush opened the conference and pledged to
devote his efforts during his time as President to doing
all that he could to help the parties achieve their
ambitious goal. He gave his personal commitment to
support their work with the resources and the resolve
of the American Government.

In addition to the host and the parties, other
participants in the Annapolis conference included the
Secretary-General and other Quartet members, the five
permanent members of the Security Council, the Group
of Eight industrialized nations, other significant donors
and supporters of the process and, importantly, the
representatives of the League of Arab States. Their
participation signalled Arab support for the efforts of
President Abbas and the determination of the Arab
League to participate actively in the search for peace.
Arab League members underlined their continued,
united support for the Arab Peace Initiative and their
07-62028
belief in the need to achieve comprehensive peace in
the region.

On the evening before the opening of the
conference, the Quartet principals met in Washington
and expressed their strong support for the conference.
They welcomed the commitment of the Israeli and
Palestinian leaders to launch bilateral negotiations
towards the establishment of a Palestinian State in the
West Bank and Gaza and, ultimately, of a
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. The statement
noted that that achievement reflected

"the results of months of work by the parties and
by the Quartet, including the Quartet's
engagement with members of the Arab League
Follow-Up Committee to expand the circle of
support for peace".

As part of the continuing process, the Quartet will meet
next month, on the sidelines of the Paris Conference,
and looks forward to meeting once again with members
of the Arab League.

The Annapolis conference also included
extensive discussion of international support for
building the institutional capacity of the Palestinian
Authority, setting the stage for the upcoming donor
conference to be held in Paris. The Paris conference
will provide an opportunity for the international
community to demonstrate its determination to
improve the situation on the ground. Economic
recovery and the creation of a secure environment will
be key to gaining popular confidence in the renewed
process.

The Palestinian Authority has been working hard
on preparations for Paris. Earlier this month, Prime
Minister Fayyad circulated a summary of the
Palestinian reform and development plan for 2008-
2010. The plan, which will form the basis of the
Palestinian Authority's presentation to the donor
community, demonstrates fiscal responsibility and
political commitment to reform. It also lays out what
Israel and the international community should do in
parallel to help the Palestinian Authority to meet its
economic and institutional priorities over the next three
years. We trust that the plan will prove to be a solid
basis for securing new financial commitments from
international partners, including those in the region.
We urge Council members to give it their early
consideration.
07-62028

During his recent trip to the region, Quartet
Representative Tony Blair joined Palestinian Prime
Minister Fayyad and Israeli Defence Minister Barak to
highlight several initiatives that will have a substantial
economic impact on the ground. If carried through, this
trilateral partnership for economic recovery and growth
will serve to build the confidence of Israelis and
Palestinians in a peaceful settlement.

In the lead-up to the Annapolis conference, a
number of developments provided important building
blocks. The Palestinian Authority took steps on phase I
Road Map obligations through the deployment of 300
security forces in Nablus in a bid to crack down on
militants and impose law and order. That has led to a
significant improvement in the security environment in
Nablus. The Israeli Government has facilitated this
deployment by allowing the transfer of weapons,
ammunition and equipment. However, night raids by
the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) into Nablus continue,
posing a challenge to the goal of ensuring Palestinian
Authority security control.

The Israeli Government announced a further
release of 441 Palestinian prisoners - a decision that
has yet to be implemented. Settlement activity
continues, and no outposts have yet been dismantled.
We encourage both parties to make every effort to
implement all commitments and build mutual trust.

I also wish to stress the active Arab diplomacy in
the lead-up to the conference. A number of regional
meetings were held ahead of the Annapolis conference,
with Egypt taking the lead in hosting Arab leaders and
Quartet Representative Blair. President Mubarak of
Egypt also met Israeli Prime Minister Olmert on
20 November in Sharm el-Sheikh. In addition to a
discussion on the Annapolis conference, there was a
positive agreement to intensify cooperation to stop
smuggling into the Gaza Strip. Also, on 18 November,
King Abdullah of Jordan paid his first visit to
Damascus since February 2004.

We have reason to be hopeful in the light of those
developments, but we must not close our eyes to the
difficulties on the ground. Violence continues to plague
Palestinians and Israelis. During the reporting period,
42 Palestinians were killed and more than 133 injured,
among them four children killed during Israeli military
operations in Gaza and the West Bank. More than 346
Palestinians have been detained by the IDF. Two
Israelis have been killed and six injured. IDF Corporal
3
Gilad Shalit is in his eighteenth month of captivity in
Gaza. Rockets and mortars continue to be fired by
Palestinian militants on crossing points between Israel
and Gaza as well as at Israeli population centres.
During the period, rocket attacks by militants from
Gaza have increased to more than 116 rockets and
121 mortars. The Secretary-General continues to
condemn all acts of terrorism and all acts that target
civilians or endanger them owing to the
disproportionate or indiscriminate character of such
acts.

Factional fighting among Palestinians
intensified - mostly in Gaza - resulting in 18 deaths,
among them three children. In one particular incident,
on 12 November, Hamas policemen fired on a rally of
over 250,000 participants held to commemorate the
death of President Arafat. The rally degenerated into
rioting, and seven Fatah members were killed and some
100 were wounded. Approximately 400 Fatah
supporters were arrested.

The humanitarian situation on the ground,
particularly in Gaza, continues to be a source of acute
concern - and one that the Secretary-General has
raised strongly in public statements, in writing to his
Quartet colleagues and with all interlocutors at
Annapolis. Karni, the principal crossing for
commercial goods into and out of Gaza, remains
closed. A recent food security study conducted by the
World Food Programme found that although critical
United Nations humanitarian food supplies are being
allowed in, only 41 per cent of basic commercial food
needs have been met in the past six weeks. The market
has continued to witness significant price rises and
shortages of commodities such as wheat grain,
vegetable oil, dairy products and baby milk. In one
positive development, on Wednesday, the Israeli
Government permitted the export of strawberries and
flowers from Gaza through the Kerem Shalom
crossing.

Rafah, the principal passenger crossing to Egypt
for 1.5 million Gazans, also remains closed.
Approximately 6,400 Gazans with foreign citizenship,
permanent residency, work permits, student visas or
university admissions have not been able to exit Gaza
since June, including 670 students who are being
prevented from pursuing higher education abroad.
Access to specialized medical care for Gazan patients
requiring treatment in Israel, the West Bank and Egypt
continues to be affected, with 10 Gazans, including two
women and an infant, dying since August after being
prevented from leaving Gaza to receive emergency
care. Spare parts are not allowed entry into Gaza,
leaving medical and water sanitation equipment in
disrepair.

The political divide among Palestinians
continued. Hamas continues to establish structures in
parallel to the Palestinian Authority and convened an
illegal session of the Palestinian Legislative Council to
cancel all decrees taken by President Abbas since June.
In the West Bank, Palestinian Authority security forces
have continued to arrest Hamas militants, and Hamas
security forces have continued to arrest Fatah members
in the Gaza Strip. Hamas has denounced the Annapolis
conference, and held protest demonstrations in both
Gaza and the West Bank.

Let me turn now to Lebanon. The term of
President Lahoud came to an end on 23 November at
midnight. The constitutional deadline to select a new
President for Lebanon by 24 November passed without
the election taking place. The parliamentary session
scheduled then for 30 November has been postponed to
7 December. That marked the sixth postponement of a
parliamentary session to elect the new President in the
past two months. Extensive diplomatic efforts aimed at
mediating between the parties in Lebanon and beyond
are ongoing, with the purpose of bridging the political
divide. The majority and the opposition have indicated
that they will continue the negotiations.

The Secretary-General visited Lebanon on 15 and
16 November, with the aim of promoting the election
of a new President within the constitutional time frame
and provisions and with the broadest possible support.
The Secretary-General met with the Speaker of the
Parliament, the Prime Minister, majority leader Hariri,
the Maronite Patriarch and a wide range of leaders
from across the political spectrum. He urged Lebanese
leaders, including presidential hopefuls, to place the
national interest above their personal and sectarian
interests at this crucial time in Lebanon's history.

During the reporting period, the Special
Coordinator for Lebanon and the Commissioner-
General of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) visited the Palestinian refugee camp of Nahr
el-Bared in order to examine the UNRWA-led
emergency assistance and recovery effort. The
recovery and reconstruction process of the camp is an
07-62028
extremely complex undertaking that will require very
close cooperation between the Lebanese Government
and UNRWA. The current estimated cost of the
reconstruction of Nahr el-Bared is $200 million. Of the
$54 million that UNRWA requested for the flash appeal
only $28 million has been received so far.

UNRWA is working with affected refugees, the
parties on the ground, the Lebanese Government, the
army, donors and local communities to ensure that
immediate and longer-term needs can be met. In the
face of the enormous devastation of the camp,
UNRWA's efforts to address immediate needs and
restore some semblance of normal life for refugees
have led to the return of nearly 1,000 families in an
area on the periphery of the camp known as the "new
camp".

Israeli air violations of the Blue Line and
Lebanese airspace continued throughout the reporting
period. For a part of the month, the number of
overflights increased significantly, and these were
sometimes undertaken at low altitudes, breaking the
sound barrier in populated areas, which caused
considerable stress and frustration to the local
population. We note the security concerns that Israel
says compel it to continue those overflights,
specifically allegations of violations of the arms
embargo established pursuant to resolution 1701
(2006). However, overflights nevertheless also remain
violations of resolution 1701 (2006) and also continue
to undermine the credibility of both the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon and the Lebanese Armed
Forces.

In a letter to you, Mr. President, dated
28 November, the Secretary-General informed the
Security Council of his intention to appoint Robert
Serry of the Netherlands as the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and his
Personal Representative to the Palestine Liberation
Organization and the Palestinian Authority. The
Secretary-General looks forward to Mr. Serry working
07-62028

to consolidate the efforts of the United Nations to
support the political process that was announced in
Annapolis and to coordinate the work of the United
Nations country team. In the meantime, Mr. Maxwell
Gaylard, currently the Director of the Mine Action
Service in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
has been appointed to serve as Deputy Special
Coordinator ad interim.

We come away from Annapolis with a clear way
forward. In his remarks at the conference, the
Secretary-General pledged the full support of the
United Nations family for the renewed effort. He
stressed the need for the joint understanding to be
implemented through the beginning of final status
negotiations, support to the Palestinian Authority and
action to meet commitments on the ground. He noted,
"Success depends not on what we say today, but on
what we do tomorrow". The Secretary-General also
emphasized his continuing concern for the
humanitarian suffering of the population of Gaza and
called for concrete initiatives to ease their suffering.
He underlined the need to restore the unity of Gaza and
the West Bank under the legitimate Palestinian
Authority, and he lent his support to efforts to explore
the possibilities for comprehensive peace.

For 60 years the Israeli State has feared for its
survival and the survival of its people. For 60 years the
Palestinian people have wandered and suffered in
search of a State. It is time for the Palestinians to have
a home of their own. It is time for the Israelis to feel at
peace in their home. The time to act is now. Let us go
forward and each play our part.

