At the outset, I should like to express my sincere gratitude to Ms. Stephanie Williams, Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya, for her enlightening briefing as well as her personal efforts for the stabilization of Libya. I also welcome the Permanent Representative of Libya to this meeting. Our meeting today takes place against the backdrop of the recent positive political and security developments in Libya, in particular the signing of the ceasefire agreement on 23 October. The Niger welcomes that progress, which illustrates the willingness of Libyans to move forward. The agreement is also the culmination of the shared and complementary commitments of several actors, including the United Nations. My delegation would like to reiterate its appreciation for the tangible efforts of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya and its Head, Ms. Stephanie Williams, as well as neighbouring countries and regional organizations, in particular the African Union, the League of Arab States and the European Union, in promoting peaceful dialogue. The rounds of talks held in Morocco between the Libyan delegations of the High Council of State based in Tripoli and the Parliament based in Tobruk, as well as the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum convened in Tunis, are to be welcomed, as they have contributed greatly to instigating the current positive momentum. We are encouraged by the efforts and determination shown by Libyans during the recent consultations of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission in Ghadames regarding the implementation of the 23 October ceasefire agreement. That is a decisive step towards the stabilization of Libya, but one that will be a genuine sign of progress only if accompanied by the departure of foreign forces and the cessation of external interference. The Niger welcomes the creation by the Secretariat of an inter-agency planning team for Libya with a view to supporting the implementation of the prospective ceasefire monitoring mechanism in an integrated and timely manner. We call on the Libyan parties concerned to fully implement the ceasefire agreement, respect international humanitarian law and continue efforts to achieve concrete results through political, economic and military dialogues, in line with resolution 2510 (2020). The Niger is also encouraged by the announcement regarding the organization of elections in December 2021. We call on the international community, and the United Nations in particular, to take early measures to support the electoral process, which will undoubtedly constitute an important milestone on the path to normalizing the situation in Libya. In respect of the belligerents, we believe that true legitimacy is obtained through the ballot box and not through external alliances, which cannot replace the dialogue among the daughters and sons of Libya. At the economic level, the serious consequences of the conflict have led to a deterioration in living conditions and reduced Libya's once-legendary ability to provide other aspects, beyond basic social services, that foster the development of its population. The fall in oil production has been a major contribution to that issue. We therefore welcome the fact that all petroleum facilities have reopened and that according to the National Oil Corporation, production has increased and now stands at 1 million barrels a day. We hope that the resumption of normal oil production will serve to meet the urgent needs of Libyans across the country. We remain concerned about the humanitarian situation in Libya. The coronavirus disease pandemic continues to wreak havoc across a country where the violence has also damaged the health-care infrastructure. What is even more worrying is that there are currently more than 70,885 confirmed cases, including 970 deaths. In that context, special attention should be given to the situation of African migrants in detention camps, who are often used as fighters or human shields by the various armed groups in the country. It is regrettable that despite that real danger, more than 11,000 people have been returned to Libya and are at risk of being exposed to human rights violations, detention, abuse, trafficking and exploitation, as has been documented by the United Nations. I would like to end with an expression of hope. Today we sense that Libyans, like their supporters, have realized that military options will not work. That is certainly why notable progress is being made on the political front, with the launch of discussions, on the military front, with a ceasefire agreement that is more or less holding up and on the economic front, with the collegial management of revenues from oil, whose production has been significantly ramped up. It is high time that we left it up to Libyans to discuss their country's destiny among themselves. We should let them stop fighting and start debating.
