Mr. Bianchi: I would like to thank the Security
Council and the Italian presidency for the possibility of
sharing some reflections on the present tendencies and
conditions in the protection of cultural heritage under
threat by terrorist groups or in armed conflict.

During the past 25 years, in my capacity as Project
Leader on behalf of the Italian Ministry of Culture,
I have taken part in a number of initiatives in crisis
areas, from Bosnia and Kosovo in the early 1990s and
post-crisis Algeria, in collaboration with UNESCO,
to Iraq after the 2003 war. Some of our interventions
also require the promotion and supervision of technical
collaboration among the administrations of different
States. Given those long years of experience in the
field, we attach great importance to resolution 2347
(2017), since it updates the framework of international
action in defense of heritage at risk, on the basis of
changes that have occurred in conflict situations in
recent decades.

Today, monuments in conflict areas are in the
crosshairs of the enemy, considered to be symbols of
identity and therefore deserving of desecration and
destruction. Looting and illegal excavations are sources
of income for criminal gangs and terrorist groups.
Countless destruction has occurred over the past 25
years; churches, mosques and archaeological sites have
been violated, while looted items have helped to feed a
flourishing illegal market.

It is important to reiterate that terrorists are not
pursuing financial gains alone. They want much more.
They want to destroy the identities of peoples and to
dismantle legitimate systems with violence. We could
consider, for example, the destruction perpetrated by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in the centre of
Mosul, where soon after the June 2014 occupation 36 of
80 notable buildings were completely demolished. Why?
Because they were legacies of the Shia community.

Given those experiences, resolution 2347 (2017)
outlines the growing importance of three fields
of action.

The first is the collection and circulation oftechnical
data on monuments and archaeological sites and the
increased use of modern technology, such as satellite
remote control of the territory, for the systematic
and rational assessment of possible damages. One
example is the enquiry into the heritage of the Nineveh
governorate under occupation in Iraq that was carried
out not only through satellite photos, but also on the
basis of a valuable archaeological atlas that was drafted
by the Iraqi Administration in the 19705.

The second is the improvement of coordination
between law enforcement and judicial bodies dedicated
to fighting international crime, preventing illegal
excavations, coordinating customs procedures and
inspecting the trade in artifacts.

The third is support for the administrations of
affected territories by facilitating the rapid recovery
of their pre-crisis capacities. More importantly, there
must be a constant and careful respect for sensitivities
and identities. Every country has its own laws and
administrative structures that are tailored to their
respective traditions. In fact, resolution 2347 (2017)
properly calls on the international community to
provide assistance to Member States in implementing
the protection of cultural heritage, while respecting the
sovereignty of all States.

