Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Special Coordinator
Mladenov for his briefing today and for his tireless
efforts, which we very much appreciate. The United
Nations and its agencies deserve to be commended
for the work that he is doing on the ground in what
we understand to be a challenging and sometimes
explosive environment.

This is the last time that Sweden will speak on this
issue in the Chamber, as we come to the end of our
two years as a member of the Security Council. I would
therefore like to begin with some broader reflections,
in the same vein as Ambassador Haley, whom I want
to thank for providing us with insights into the current
thinking in the United States on how to pursue peace in

the Middle East, and to say that for us the United States
remains a key partner in that pursuit.
When Sweden joined the Council, there was a
moment of hope for Middle East peace. The Council
had just adopted resolution 2334 (2016), France was
organizing its international conference on the two-State
solution, and the new United States Administration had
announced its commitment to resolving the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict.

Today it is with heavy hearts that we conclude
that hopes are evaporating, with no peace process in
sight. The two-State solution is rapidly moving beyond
our reach as realities on the ground trend towards
an expansion of Israeli settlements. The desperate
situation for the people in Gaza has further deteriorated
into a humanitarian crisis, making Gaza increasingly
unliveable and on the verge of social and economic
collapse. The spread of violence on the ground is
leading to a tragic loss of life on both sides, instilling
fear among Israelis and Palestinians and destroying
hopes for peace for young people, the so-called post-
Oslo generation.

The idea behind resolution 2334 (2016) was for
the Security Council to shoulder its responsibility
and reverse this negative trend. Two years on, the
resolution remains as relevant as ever. Its core
components - demands for ceasing all settlement
activities and an end to the violence - reflect the
gravity of the situation on the ground.

We are deeply concerned over the deteriorating
security situation and escalation of violence in the West
Bank and Jerusalem. We strongly condemn the acts of
violence against civilians that have led to a tragic loss
oflife in recent days. Terrorism can never be tolerated.
We call on all actors to de-escalate and stop attacks
against civilians. Security forces on both sides must
exercise restraint so as to avoid escalation and further
loss of life.

We reiterate our grave concern over the continued
Israeli settlement expansion. Israel's settlement policy
is illegal under international law. We condemn the
Israeli decisions to advance additional settlement units,
including in Hebron and East Jerusalem. The illegal
settlement expansion seriously undermines the two-
State solution and clouds all hope for peace.

We are also concerned about the demolition of
Palestinian homes and at the fact that the Palestinian
population is at risk of forcible transfers in Area C.
We urge the Israeli authorities not to proceed with the
demolition of the Bedouin village of Khan Al-Ahmar,
as that would have serious consequences for its
residents, including children. The village is located in
Area E1, a location of strategic interest for preserving
the contiguity of the Palestinian State.

Against this dismal backdrop, the international
community must act, otherwise we risk ending up with
perpetual occupation and a one-State reality. Resolution
2334 (2016) was a milestone, and its implementation is
key to the return to a path of peace.

We are therefore disappointed that no written report
on the implementation of the resolution was circulated
prior to this meeting, as is standard practice for any
other issue. This is a question of the credibility of the
Council on how we conduct our work, and neglecting its
reporting serves only to distance the Council from its
responsibilities. Resolution 2334 (2016) was adopted by
the Council and cannot be disregarded. The oral report
we just heard is a long list of events and incidents, each
leading to personal calamity and despair. Along with
many others, we wish to see regular written reports
from the Secretary-General in future, so that these
meetings can be properly prepared and focus on the
direst realities on the ground and how to improve them.

Individually, we as Member States also need to step
up our implementation of the resolution, which calls
on all of us to distinguish, in our relevant dealings,
between the territory of the State of Israel and the
territories occupied since 1967. The European Union
has clear policies with regard to such differentiation.
Settlement products cannot be promoted as Israeli
products, and all agreements between the State of
Israel and the European Union must explicitly indicate
inapplicability to the occupied territories. This does not
constitute a boycott and is fully in line with resolution
2334 (2016). We encourage other Member States to
adopt similar policies.

We are as committed as anyone to peace in the
Middle East. During our two years as a member of
the Council, we have witnessed challenges to the
international consensus on peace as well as attempts to
take final-status issues off the table. We therefore wish
to reiterate once more our support for a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace, based on international
law, the relevant United Nations resolutions and
previous agreements. Our position and that of the
whole European Union reflect the continued broad
international consensus on a two-State solution, as
expressed in the recently adopted General Assembly
resolution 73/89, submitted by Ireland.

Any peace plan that fails to recognize these
internationally agreed parameters would have little
chance of succeeding and would run counter to the
fundamental positions of the European Union. There
cannot be any clean slate. Final-status issues can
be taken off the table only when resolved through
negotiations between the parties.

Implementing resolution 2334 (2016) is not a matter
of taking sides. Sweden has a long-standing friendship
with the peoples of Israel and with the peoples of
Palestine. This is about the responsibility of the
international community to save yet another generation
of young Israelis and Palestinians from growing up in a
reality of constant tension, mistrust and conflict.

This is about making sure that the objective of two
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security, with Jerusalem as the future capital of
both States and home of three world religions, is kept
within reach. And this is about keeping hope of peace
in the Middle East alive.

