Mr. Toure (Guinea) (spoke in French): I should
first of all like to express the regret of His Excellency
Mr. Mamady Conde, Minister of State and Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation, who, for
reasons beyond his control, was unable to make this
trip. He, therefore, entrusted me with extending his
greetings and best wishes for every success.

Mr. President, I should also like to congratulate
you for the excellent work done in the Security Council
since your country has assumed the presidency. I can
assure you of our full cooperation.
I am also pleased to express our full appreciation
to the French delegation, for the way in which it
conducted the work of the Council last month.

Your important initiative, Sir, of inviting us to
New York to discuss and exchange views on the
pertinent international matter of peace consolidation in
West Africa, as well as on the efforts of our
Governments to prevent and manage conflict, clearly
demonstrates the Council's resolve to become more
involved in the definitive settlement of conflicts in the
subregion.

My delegation welcomes that initiative and notes
that hotbeds of tension in West Africa over the past 15
years have been perpetuated, inter alia, by the lack of a
relevant framework for peace consolidation based on
such elements as the establishment of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes; the
restructuring of security forces; the effective
implementation of national reconciliation programmes;
national and international governance; the adoption
and implementation of development plans; and a
lasting settlement of cross-border problems.

That is why the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), conscious of its leading
role, has become involved in the search for lasting
solutions to the problems of peace, security and
development, as clearly demonstrated by its technical
meetings and the summit of subregional leaders.

While we welcome the successes achieved in
Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea-Bissau, we must note
that the equilibrium in those States remains precarious
and fragile. In Cote d'Ivoire, we have seen encouraging
overall developments, but the peace process is entering
a decisive phase with the upcoming elections and the
settlement of related sensitive issues.

In that context, my delegation wishes once again
to reaffirm the fact that, despite the willingness and
determination of the subregion's leaders, our objectives
will be achieved only when the international
community, and the United Nations and donors in
particular, heed our concerns and appeals for a lasting
solution to the conflicts undermining our countries. It
is also important to reinforce the active participation of
non-governmental organizations and civil society,
which play an important role in the prevention and
settlement of conflicts and the consolidation of peace.
Thus, the outstanding actions of, inter alia, the West
African Network for Peacebuilding, the Mano River

06-4607]
Union Women's Network for Peace and traditional
interlocutors deserve our congratulations and active
support.

I cannot fail to mention the role played over the
past 15 years by my country, the Republic of Guinea,
in conflict prevention and in maintaining and
consolidating peace in West Africa, especially in the
Mano River basin, notwithstanding our own difficult
national circumstances. The Republic of Guinea is not
considered to be a country emerging from conflict, but
it has suffered enormously from the various
consequences of the troubles affecting four of the six
countries with which we share borders, including a
significant presence of refugees, environmental
degradation, wear and tear on our social buildings,
insecurity, the dissemination of diseases and so on.

It must also be noted that, from September 2000
through 2001, rebel attacks led not only to considerable
loss of life and material damage, but also to the
displacement of hundreds of thousands of people
throughout our national territory. All of this has had a
negative impact on our national development
programmes and has slowed growth. Moreover, for 16
years Guinea has not fully enjoyed the assistance it
needs, despite numerous appeals and the enormous
sacrifices it has made for regional peace and stability.

Nonetheless, my delegation welcomes the
establishment within the United Nations of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the transformation of
the Central Emergency Revolving Fund into the
Central Emergency Response Fund. We also welcome
the United States' recent allocation of $32 million for
underfinanced and forgotten crises, of which $1 is
earmarked for my country. We also welcome the efforts
of the African Development Bank to mobilize
considerable resources for the ECOWAS Peace and
Security Fund, recently launched in Guinea. While we
extend our gratitude to our bilateral and multilateral
partners, we appeal to the international community,
through the Security Council, for greater assistance to
my country, which, during the worst moments of crisis
in the subregion, has made every effort to meet the
challenges it has faced.

Conflict prevention and settlement, as well as
peacebuilding, must be at the heart of our collective
action. Without peace, stability and security, no
development objective can be achieved. That is why
the Government of Guinea, in cooperation with the

06-4607]

United Nations Office for West Africa, intends to
organize a subregional conference on strengthening
good-neighbourliness and consolidating peace and
security. This represents a comprehensive political
approach that is necessary to allow us jointly to
integrate the human dimension into our reflections on
security. That meeting could spur participants to adopt
mutual confidence-building measures to strengthen
solidarity, peace and security within and among States
members of the Union by signing a covenant of good-
neighbourliness. In calling for the participation of
ECOWAS, I know I can count on the material and
financial support of the United Nations system to
guarantee the success of the conference.

I also wish once again to express the readiness of
the Republic of Guinea to continue to respect its
African tradition of hospitality by providing
humanitarian assistance to the distressed peoples of the
subregion and by working tirelessly for the
consolidation of peace.

In conclusion, my delegation hopes that our work
will lead to tangible results commensurate with the
expectations of our peoples.

