I thank Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General Stephanie Williams for her briefing. We hope that we will be able to agree on a permanent successor for her before too long. Through Ms. Williams, I would now like to thank her staff and all who are working so hard to try to end the conflict in Libya, in what are not always the most promising of circumstances or contexts. Let me start by sharing the deep concern Ms. William's expressed about the significant escalation in hostilities in Libya. I think she described an unprecedented increase in direct fire in civilian areas, which is extremely worrying. The cost in civilian lives and the damage to civilian infrastructure is totally unacceptable. Attacks in civilian areas, particularly on health-care facilities, show a complete disregard for international law, and they must cease. At a time when countries around the world are coming together in the face of a shared threat from coronavirus disease (COVID-19), it is unconscionable that health-care facilities are among the civilian infrastructure targeted. I also wish to reiterate our continuing concern with respect to the deteriorating human rights and humanitarian situation in Libya. Ms. Williams highlighted a situation in which a million people are now in need of humanitarian assistance. The report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/360) makes clear that the situation - including the death, injury and displacement of significant numbers of civilians - is not acceptable, and that civilians, including migrants and refugees, remain at risk. The intentional cutting of electricity, fuel, water or food supplies is a potential violation of international humanitarian law. We remain particularly concerned by further reports that external parties continue to provide materiel, equipment and mercenaries. All Member States must abide by their international obligations, including Security Council resolutions. In this regard, we note further reports of activity by the Wagner Group in Libya. Wagner Group activities continue to exacerbate the conflict and prolong the suffering of the Libyan people. I want to urge all Security Council members to abide by the resolutions of the Security Council, for which they themselves have voted. We condemn the blockade of oil facilities, which is harming the Libyan people and has led today to a loss of over $4 billion. Efforts to illicitly import aviation fuel into Libya are also unacceptable, and all parties must uphold the integrity and unity of the National Oil Corporation. There will not be a military victory, not least because the foreign actors involved in this war will not permit it. Therefore, an inclusive political solution, as set out at the Berlin Conference, offers the best hope for the stability and future prosperity that the Libyan people need and deserve. We call on the Libyan National Army to engage substantively with the United Nations-drafted ceasefire document of 23 February, as the Government of National Accord has recently done. The United Kingdom reaffirms its support for Libya's legitimate and internationally recognized institutions, as agreed in the 2015 Libyan Political Agreement and recognized by the Security Council. The United Kingdom is consistent in its belief that if the warring parties and their backers had the interests of the Libyan people at heart, they would cease fighting, halt attacks on civilians, and stop private or unilateral initiatives, and instead get behind the United Nations and the inclusive political solution. It is the only hope, and it is what the Libyan people need and deserve after all these years of conflict. Let me just ask one question, if I may, of Ms. Williams. I wonder if she could say whether there has been any change since the COVID-19 outbreak in the public mood, specifically in terms of public support for or in public attitudes towards the conflict, and whether there are any signs that the calculations of any of the parties to the conflict are being affected by that public view.
