Mr. Rastam (Malaysia): Malaysia fully subscribes to
the fundamental principle of the paramount need to
preserve the sanctity of the Charter of the United Nations.
The Charter confers upon the Security Council the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security. Malaysia underlined clearly, when the Council met
on Wednesday, that any conflict should be resolved through
dialogue and political negotiations and not by the use of
force. Force, if at all necessary, should be a recourse of last
resort and it should be sanctioned by the Security Council.

It is to our great disappointment that serious efforts at
finding a peaceful resolution to the conflict in Kosovo have
failed. The Yugoslav leadership bears full responsibility for
the failure of those efforts, since it continues to reject the
Rambouillet accords and chooses to carry out massive
military offensives against the people of Kosovo, even at
this very hour. We take serious note of the information
provided through the letter of the Secretary-General, dated
25 March 1999 in document S/1999/338, in which the
Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) states that

"Following the withdrawal of the Kosovo
Verification Mission of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) on 20 March,
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has increased its
military activities and is using excessive and wholly
disproportionate force, thereby creating a further
humanitarian catastrophe". (S/1999/338, p. 2)

The draft resolution has completely ignored this reality.

Malaysia remains gravely concerned at the
worsening situation on the ground in Kosovo. The violent
repression by the Serbian and Yugoslav security forces
against the population in Kosovo has increased
dramatically in the past few days. The current Serbian
military offensive has resulted in further deaths and
destruction. Large numbers of civilians, especially women
and children, have been forcibly displaced from their
homes and villages. The present action by Serb forces
against the Kosovar Albanians is certainly creating an
immense humanitarian catastrophe. Such a tragic situation
calls for appropriate and prompt action by the
international community.

Security Council resolutions 1199 (1998) and 1203
(1998) both invoke Chapter VII of the Charter and
recognize that the situation in Kosovo constitutes a threat
to international peace and security in the region. In
resolution 1199 (1998), the Council had demanded that
the Yugoslav authorities take immediate steps to improve
the humanitarian situation and avert the impending
humanitarian catastrophe. The Council had also, in
resolution 1203 (1998), demanded that the same
authorities implement fully and promptly the ceasefire
agreements signed with NATO on 15 October 1998 and
with the OSCE on 16 October 1998.
In its presidential statement of 29 January 1999, the
Council welcomed and supported the peace process
initiated by the Contact Group, culminating in the
Rambouillet accords, which the Kosovar Albanians signed
on 18 March 1999. Unfortunately, the Yugoslav
leadership not only has failed to comply with the
resolutions of the Council, but also continues to reject the
Rambouillet accords and rebuff all efforts at finding a
political solution to the conflict.

 

In light of the foregoing, Malaysia had no other option
but to vote against the draft resolution, as we have just done.

As we also stated during the meeting last Wednesday,
Malaysia would have wished that the crisis in Kosovo could
have been dealt with directly and in an effective manner by
the Security Council. The outcome of the action that the
Council has just taken today, however, demonstrates clearly
the serious and irreconcilable differences in the Council.
Malaysia therefore regrets that in the absence of Council
action on the issue it has been necessary for measures to be
taken outside of the Council.

