Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): Ukraine is deeply
concerned over the situation in the region, which has
now reached a most critical point. Dramatically
escalating since September 2000, it burst into the wide-
scale confrontation that has claimed the lives of
hundreds of people on both sides. It is particularly
disturbing that the new outbreaks of violence in the
Palestinian territories and within Israel almost every
day claim numerous additional victims and
increasingly aggravate the situation in the entire
region. We have been shocked by the series of recent
bloody acts of Violence, which have shattered the slim
hopes for the resumption of peace negotiations between
the parties.

The current situation requires urgent steps to be
undertaken. Ukraine calls on the parties to the conflict
to take resolute and immediate actions to achieve a
ceasefire, to stop the bloodshed, to prevent a further
escalation of violence and to create the necessary
preconditions for returning to the negotiating table. At
this crucial stage, both the Israelis and Palestinian
leaders have to display courage, flexibility and realism.
The two parties have to refrain from any unilateral
actions that might lead to further complications or
prejudge the outcome of the final status talks.

Ukraine categorically rejects any act of terrorism
as a means of reaching political goals, regardless of
who commits it or for what reason. We call on the
Palestinian leadership to take urgent and decisive steps
to ensure that effective control be exercised over the
radical elements, to stop the abhorrent practice of
suicide bombings and terrorist attacks and to reduce
incitements and provocations against the Israelis.

There can be no excuse for the excessive use of
force against Palestinian civilians or for the
reoccupation of the Palestinian-controlled territories. It
is our firm conviction that the practice of extrajudicial
killings and devastating raids into the Palestinian-
controlled territories must stop. Any settlement
activities of Israel on the Palestinian territories, as well
as closures and economic sanctions against the
Palestinians, should also be stopped.

We believe that the recommendations of the
Sharm El-Sheikh Fact-Finding Committee and Tenet
work plan constitute a solid basis for finding the way
out of the ongoing crisis in the Middle East. Full and
immediate implementation by the parties of the steps
envisaged therein would provide an impetus to bring
the violence to an end, restore mutual trust and
confidence and create necessary conditions for the
resumption of the Israeli-Palestinian negotiation
process. In order to achieve a lasting solution, this
process should be based on relevant Security Council
resolutions, particularly resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), and the principle of land for peace, as well as
other principles laid down at the Madrid Conference
and in the Oslo Agreements.

Peace in the Middle East can be achieved only
through negotiations aimed at both the establishment of
a viable Palestinian State and ensuring the right of
Israel to live within secure and internationally
recognized borders.

Ukraine welcomes the efforts of the
representatives of the United States, the Russian
Federation, the European Union in the region and the
United Nations Special Coordinator, as well as the
position statements made recently by United States
President George Bush and Secretary of State Colin
Powell. Much to our regret, these efforts have not yet
stopped the violence.

Ukraine favours a more active role for the
Security Council, which is entrusted with the primary
responsibility for international peace and security, in
searching for ways to resolve the current Israeli-
Palestinian confrontation. Ukraine stands ready to
continue making a practical contribution to
complement the international diplomatic efforts under
way. In this context, I would like to mention that
Ukraine has recently offered the Israeli and Palestinian
parties its good offices, offering to provide the venue
for the resumed negotiations on its territory at any
appropriate time.

Finally, I would like to express our fervent hope
that through the joint efforts of the two parties, assisted
by the international community, the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict will be ultimately resolved so that peace will
return to the entire Middle East region and the peoples
of Palestine and Israel will enjoy living side by side in
their own countries, secure in peace, prosperity and
dignity. Ukraine remains fully committed to helping
them achieve this long-sought goal.

