Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me, Madam President, to thank you for
your efforts in presiding over the Security Council this
month. We wish you and the delegation of Luxembourg
every success. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon; the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui; and the Executive
Director of UNICEF, Mr. Anthony Lake, for their
valuable briefings. Furthermore, I thank Mr. Alhaji
Babah Sawaneh for his very moving statement.

I would like to take this opportunity to express
our appreciation for the role of Luxembourg in
mainstreaming the prespective of children and armed
conflicts in the Council's deliberations through its
chairmanship of the Working Group dedicated to this
goal and by raising awareness of the six grave violations
of the rights of the child, as defined by the Secretary-
General and explained in in the monitoring and
reporting mechanism. It is also evident in Luxembourg's
leadership of the efforts of the Council and the adoption
of resolution 2143 (2014) today, which is one of the
most advanced Security Council resolutions in terms
of protecting the rights of children and reflects the
political will of the Council ms to promote action on
this issue.

Despite the noticeable progress in international
humanitarian law and human rights instruments in
recent years, the rights of the child are still subject to
continued violations in armed conflict, especially in
fragile areas and environments where children live.
Children are subject to recruitment, killing, kidnapping,
violence torture, threats caused by arbitrary attacks on
populated areas, as well as the dangers of landmines
and unexploded ordinance. Attacks on schools and
their use as detention camps, weapons depots, training
grounds and bases for launching military operations
are also grave violations that deprive children of their
rights, and reduce the the possibility for ensuring their
rehabilitation.
Jordan is of the view that we should adopt concrete
short-term measures to guarantee the commitment of
all parties concerned to human rights and international
humanitarian law through eandevours aimed at
activating or establishing mechanisms to ensure that
instruments and conventions, especially the four Geneva
Conventions and their Protocols, are implemented,
integrated into national legislation, and subject to
monitoring and control. Parties to armed conflicts in
the most fragile areas must also be compelled to develop
and implement time-bound action plans to stop grave
violations against children. In this context, we believe
it is important to support a strategies to promote efforts
aimed at ending the recruitment and use of children by
Government armed forces, as contained in the concept
paper (S/2014/144, annex), by the end of 2016. We look
forward to promoting the efforts of Member States and
the United Nations system in that respect.

Combating grave violations ofthe rights of children
also requires supporting long-term programmes to
reintegrate children who were previously associated
with armed groups and mainstreaming child protection
issues in the training programmes for peacekeepers
and in the work of peacebuilding commissions. It also
requires promoting the presence of child protection
advisers in peacekeeping operations in order to support
the implementation of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism, and to participate in dialogue with parties to
conflict. In that regard, we urge international bodies to
continue closely monitoring violations and developing
the instruments, guidelines, training materials and
information management systems necessary to
strengthen the monitoring and reporting mechanism,
as well as strengthening the capacities of relevant
States by providing them with technical assistance,
in cooperation with non-governmental organizations,
civil society, and the donor community.

Ensuring the protection of the rights of children
in armed conflict requires us to use all available tools
in order to provide a complete child protection system
by activating mechanisms to guarantee that those who
commit crimes against children in armed conflict will
not enjoy impunity, and by emphasizing the need to
implement relevant Security Council resolutions with
regard to pursuing children with the aim of forcing
them into military action.

In addition to reaffirming the ban against using
schools for military purposes, we affirm the need
for the Council to implement punitive, deterrent
and effective measures against those who violate the
rights of children in armed conflict and to hold them
accountable.

The Council can take further measures by
supporting sanctions regimes against the perpetrators
of gross violations against children, based on its
resolutions and strengthened cooperation among its
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and
Sanctions Committees.

Jordan urges the development of a mechanism to
monitor the recruitment of children in armed forces, as
well as concerted measures to guarantee accountability
and an end to impunity for those responsible for gross
violations against children. As the prosecution of
perpetrators is the primary responsibility of the States
concerned, there is a need to adopt the necessary
legislation, thereby requiring implementation and
compliance mechanisms as well as cooperation
among States and the Council and the mainstreaming
of international efforts to guarantee justice. In that
vein, the international legal system, including the
International Criminal Court, has an important
role to play in promoting justice by prosecuting the
perpetrators of grave violations against children.

Jordan was among the leading Middle East States
to ratify the relevant international commitments on the
protection of children, which we have implemented.
In 2006, we ratified the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement
of children in armed conflict, the provisions of which
were widely distributed to all relevant States.

Jordan's legislation now includes provisions
specifying that individuals under 18 years of age are
prohibited from involvement in military actions. Jordan
has also ratified the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of
Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction,
including its Optional Protocol, as evidence of our
commitment to providing children with comprehensive
protection.

Clearly, the Middle East suffers from a vacuum in
the area of the protection of children in armed conflict
and under foreign occupation. Israel's construction of
the separation wall in the occupied Palestinian territory,
its refusal to provide permits for the construction
of schools and its placing of obstacles to providing
educational services for the Arab population of East
Jerusalem, along with its continued illegal blockade,
have all led to depriving Palestinian children access
to educational services. Nearly 30,000 Palestinian
children have been deprived of the opportunity to take
part in the official education system.

Resolution 2139 (2014) addressed the humanitarian
catastrophe inside and beyond Syria, where the victims
are mostly children. Implementing the resolution will
alleviate the catastrophe involving children. We call
upon all parties to implement the resolution, as well as
for enhanced efforts by the international community in
that regard.

Jordan takes this opportunity to mention specifically
paragraph 15 of the resolution, which "[e]mphasizes that
the humanitarian situation will continue to deteriorate
in the absence ofa political solution". That has increased
the humanitarian and economic challenges confronting
the States of the region, including in particular Jordan,
which has received continuous flows of Syrian refugees,
a large number of whom are children.

Jordan has opened its education system to Syrian
refugee children, which has led to overcrowded
classrooms and a 41 per cent increase in the attendance
rate. It has also led 80 per cent ofthe Kingdom's schools
to provide two sessions per day. Estimates indicate that
86,000 Syrian students have enrolled in public schools
in the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan throughout the
various governorates, and that 21,000 Syrian students
have enrolled in schools in the refugee camps since
the Syrian crisis started in March 2011. As a result, the
Government of Jordan is now shouldering the financial,
economic and social burdens of hosting the refugees.
The cost ofhosting a refugee child now exceeds $3,500
annually, the large portion of which is borne by the
Jordanian treasury.

In cooperation with UNICEF, Jordan has provided
social and psychological support programmes to
more than 111,000 Syrian students. The programmes
aim to alleviate the stress of being a refugee and to
rehabilitate them. In addition, Jordan hosts more than
42 per cent of the total number of Palestinian refugees
worldwide - more than 2 million refugees - yet
Jordan receives only approximately 20 per cent of the
budget of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).

We note that, in the past 65 years, Jordan has
provided direct and indirect services to refugees,
despite its limited resources, including education.
Estimates indicate that nearly 150,000 children are
enrolled in UNICEF's schools, as compared to the more
than 491,000 refugee children enrolled in public schools
throughout the Kingdom. That has cost the country's
treasury over $190 million annuallly, over and above
the education services provided by UNRWA.

Jordan will continue its cooperation with the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict. My country
commends the role of the United Nations and its efforts
to alleviate the suffering of the refugee children in the
Kingdom. However, the international community must
assume its responsibility with regard to children and
continue to play a leading role in protecting their rights.

