Mr. Cabral (Portugal): Let me start by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing
and for outlining the main aspects of the report of the
assessment mission (see S/2012/42). The report is in
our opinion a very good basis for a serious reflection
on the nature and scope of the problems affecting the
Sahel region, as well as on how to ensure multisectoral
and integrated responses from the international
community.

As the report clearly states, problems in the Sahel
pre-date the Libyan crisis and have, for some time now,
deserved the attention of the international community.
As a clear example of the linkage between security and
development, the situation in Libya has not altered the
nature of the crisis in the Sahel, even though it has
exacerbated existing challenges in States with limited
response capacities, mainly through the sudden influx
of large numbers of returnees and the proliferation of
weapons and ammunition.

Out of its concern over the risk that proliferation
of weapons and ammunitions presents to the stability
and security of both Libya and the Sahel, the Security
Council adopted resolution 2017 (2011), which tasks
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) to submit a report to the Council on the
proposals to counter this threat. The report is expected
in March.

In resolution 2022 (2011), the Security Council
reinforced the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) mandate in this field. We believe that
the integrated concept that guided the assessment
mission should also apply to these various initiatives
and ensure that they complement each other in the
most effective way.

The report identifies a number of national and
regional measures that could improve the situation
throughout the region and address a number of
concerns. Libya is still in a post-revolutionary transition
phase. We hope that the stabilization of the country, its
economic recovery and regional reintegration will have
a positive impact throughout the Sahel.

Therefore, it is essential that the international
community and the Council support the Libyan
authorities in successfully addressing a number of
pressing concerns and challenges. Among those are the
adoption of a migration law that also tackles the many
issues afflicting African migrant workers in Libya; the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
armed groups, together with the creation of professional
security and military forces; and the establishment of
an effective border management system. Another
important step would be for Libya to participate in the
various regional initiatives dealing with cross-border
and transversal problems in the Sahel region.

On the specific case of organized crime and
terrorism networks, the report already includes useful
data on existing trends. However, we must further
develop our understanding of the linkages and overlaps
between different forms of organized crime, and
between organized crime networks and terrorist groups
operating in the region. Are they necessarily
juxtaposed? Are there conflicts over resources? How
have the recruitment strategies of terrorist groups
evolved recently? We believe that these and other
questions call for integrated threat analysis, linking
concerns related to conflict prevention, State-building
and terrorism-prevention efforts.

The United Nations system should, in our
opinion, take a more proactive, rather than reactive,
approach to extremism and terrorism issues, making a
more creative use of existing tools, including the
special political missions. We very much endorse the
approach chosen to link the various dimensions of the
problem and to address the root causes of instability in
the Sahel region. Some of those problems require quick
responses, as they may potentially expand beyond the
region or aggravate an already serious humanitarian
and security situation, but others require long-term
strategies and instruments.
We think, therefore, that any follow-up to the
report should clearly identify which measures may have
an immediate effect - for instance, on humanitarian
assistance, arms proliferation or border control - and
which ones work essentially in the long run, especially
those aimed at economic recovery, youth employment
and capacity-building. Such measures will help us in
understanding how the different types of measures can
best be employed and combined to promote sustainable
development and security in the region.

The problems identified here are also cross-
border and therefore cannot be tackled by national
responses alone. We value the efforts of individual
countries, but the emphasis should be clearly placed on
the development of regional capacities. There are
already regional action plans approved by regional
organizations - namely, the African Union and
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) - which should be put into practice to
deal with the problems affecting the Sahel. We should
also encourage bilateral and multilateral ad hoc
arrangements between Sahel countries for pooling
resources of border control and combating terrorism
and organized crime. In this respect, we believe that
United Nations regional offices - the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa - and the relevant United
Nations missions in the region can play a key role in
bringing together the relevant actors and promoting
concrete initiatives.

Coherence among the various initiatives of
international support for the Sahel region should also
be among our central concerns. I would mention, in
particular, the European Union Strategy for the Sahel,
which seeks to link the security and development
dimensions through a number of measures that, to a
large extent, coincide with those mentioned in the
report. Creating mechanisms of coordination that
encompass this and other international initiatives
would certainly contribute to avoiding duplication and
to a more efficient use of international support.

Continued instability in the Sahel has
implications that go far beyond the countries most
directly affected. Therefore, from the perspective of the
United Nations continued involvement in monitoring
the situation and the impact of these challenges in the
Sahel and in the wider region that stretches from the
Atlantic to the Indian Oceans, we look forward to the
Council debate on transnational challenges in the Sahel

and the wider West African region, scheduled for
February under the Togolese presidency. On our side,
Portugal stands ready to continue to contribute to
international efforts, here in New York and in other
forums in which Portugal participates, aimed at
promoting a more collaborative and integrated
approach to the challenges faced in the Sahel region.

