Ms. Kuret (Slovenia): Let me begin by thanking
France for organizing this open debate ,and the
Secretary-General for his annual report (S/2017/821).
We wish to congratulate Ms. Gamba on her appointment
as Special Representative, and we express Slovenia's
strong support for her mandate. My delegation would
like to particularly thank Mr. Shaikh for his testimony
this morning.

Slovenia aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union, the statement
delivered by the representative of Panama on behalf
of the Human Security Network and the statement
delivered by the representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
We would like to make some additional remarks in our
national capacity.

Progress has been made since the issue of children
and armed conflict was put on the United Nations agenda.
However, the situation of children is still alarming.
Reports on the plight of children affected by different
armed conflicts around the world must serve as a
call to action. We share concerns about the scale and
severity of the violations committed against children
in the period covered by the report. The alarming level
of killing and maiming, recruitment, sexual Violence,
abduction and denial of humanitarian access is highly
disturbing. We agree with the recommendations of the
Secretary-General that any engagement in hostilities
and responses to threats to peace and security must
be conducted in full compliance with international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law.
In that regard, we join in calling on all Member States
that have not yet done so to endorse the Safe Schools
Declaration and the Lucens Guidelines for Protecting
Schools and Universities from Military Use during
Armed Conflict.

Stronger steps should be taken to address
accountability and end impunity for such Violations.
Monitoring an accurate and timely reporting in that
respect is crucial to ensure that the perpetrators can
be held accountable. The monitoring and reporting
mechanism on children and armed conflict, established
in accordance with resolution 1612 (2005), is therefore
a key mechanism of the United Nations child
protection mandate.

Children in armed conflict should primarily be
treated as victims. It is important to efficiently and
sustainably address the short-, medium- and long-term
impacts of armed conflict on children in an effective
and comprehensive manner. It is therefore essential to
address their well-being as a whole and to ensure their
development and future.

Slovenia has always been very active in assisting
victims of armed conflict and remains committed
to easing the pain of children affected by armed
conflict, including by providing medical assistance and
rehabilitation. In recent years, well over 500 children
were rehabilitated in Slovenia. Social rehabilitation
training for preschool and school counsellors and the
mine-risk education programme are just two examples
shown to be of great importance in strengthening the
overall well-being and development of children affected
by conflict. Our commitment was reaffirmed a month
ago when the Slovenian Parliament adopted a new
resolution on international development cooperation
and humanitarian assistance, with assistance in armed
conflict, especially for children, being one of the
priority areas.
Finally, the issue of children and armed conflict is a
cross-cutting one that needs a comprehensive approach
where human rights, security and development go hand
in hand. It is our common duty to do our utmost to
prevent children from suffering. In that regard, we urge
the Security Council to continue addressing the issue
of children and armed conflict and to seek the most
effective means to improve their situation.

