Mr. Bassole (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): It
is a tremendous privilege for us to take the floor before
this gathering to deliver a message on behalf of His
Excellency Mr. Blaise Compaore, President of Burkina
Faso, current Chairman of the Conference of Heads of
State and Government of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and facilitator of the
inter-Ivorian dialogue.

We take this opportunity to address our warm and
sincere congratulations to the representative of the
United States of America on his assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May and for the brilliant work already completed.

Since the beginning of direct dialogue, the
facilitator has demonstrated his commitment to the role
played by the United Nations in the settlement of the
Ivorian crisis through ongoing consultation with
representatives of the Secretary-General and the High
Representative for the elections prior to, during and
after the conclusion of the political agreement of
Ouagadougou. He received the multidisciplinary
technical evaluation mission headed by Mr. Hedi
Annabi, with whom fruitful exchanges were held. More
recently, he submitted the report of the first meeting of
the Evaluation and Monitoring Committee to Mr. Abou
Moussa, whom he wishes to salute here for his
effectiveness, efforts and availability in facilitating the
process of finding a solution to the crisis in Cote
d'Ivoire.

Furthermore, we would like to repeat here the
facilitator's satisfaction, as Chairman of ECOWAS, at
the Security Council's endorsement of the political
agreement of Ouagadougou through a statement by its
President issued on 28 March 2007 (S/PRST/2007/8).
By doing so, the Security Council provides every
opportunity for effective application of the agreement
07-34816
and opens a new era of hope in the peace process in
Cote d'Ivoire.

The political agreement of Ouagadougou, which
has given rise to direct dialogue, marks, it must be
recognized, a real turning point in the process of
emerging from the crisis in Cote d'Ivoire. The
agreement, reached between two former principal
belligerent forces following an open and fruitful
dialogue between the President of the Republic,
Mr. Laurent Gbagbo, and the Secretary-General of the
Forces nouvelles, Mr. Guillaume Soro, attempts to
bring practical and appropriate solutions to the
different concerns of the two parties most closely
involved. They include the identification of
individuals, mobile court hearings, organization of
elections, the process of disarmament and
demobilization, the dismantling of armed militias, the
abolition of the zone of confidence, restoration of the
authority of the State, and redeployment of the
administration throughout the national territory.

This agreement is valuable because it has
emphasized the prime concerns of the parties that had
caused stumbling blocks in the past. It constitutes an
acceptable and balanced compromise for the two
parties and draws useful lessons from earlier
agreements, namely those of Linas-Marcoussis, Accra
and Pretoria. Its originality resides, we feel, in the fact
that it is the outcome of the free and shared will of the
two main military forces in the country. That is why it
was welcomed by the Ivorian political class as a whole
and by all the Ivorian people.

In fact, the decision of the two parties to
implement their commitments arising from this
agreement has made a major contribution to relaxing
the general political climate in Cote d'Ivoire, as was
noted by the United Nations multidisciplinary technical
assessment mission in its report to the Secretary-
General. The rationale of confrontation that previously
prevailed has given way to a rationale of useful
partnership.

With regard to the agreement, the Evaluation and
Monitoring Committee, which met in Ouagadougou on
11 May 2007 under the chairmanship of the facilitator,
welcomed the real progress that is being made on the
ground, particularly with regard to the new institutional
framework for implementation of the agreement, the
establishment of the integrated command centre, the
07-34816
abolition of the zone of confidence and the
improvements in the general atmosphere.

Of course, it must be acknowledged that there
have been delays in the implementation of the
agreement with regard to the adoption of some
essential legal instruments and the initiation of
important operations such as mobile court hearings, the
electoral registration process, dismantling of armed
militia and the deployment of the administration
throughout the national territory. However, it should be
recognized that this situation is explained by the
complexity of the operations involved and the high
cost triggered by the bad faith of both parties.

In addition, the implementation of this agreement
has been facing a number of challenges inherent in the
very nature of the crisis and which are particularly tied
to the financing of the operations. Aware of the
magnitude of the task and the myriad difficulties that
could, unless we take care, compromise the
achievement of the goals of the agreement, the
facilitator has fully undertaken to support the parties
throughout the process of ending the crisis.

To that end, he has agreed with them to appoint a
special representative in Abidjan. He also is
considering the establishment, within the framework of
the Evaluation and Monitoring Committee, of two
advisory bodies. One would be national in nature and
would make it possible to provide information and hear
the views and suggestions of other components of
Ivorian society. The other would be of an international
nature, enabling all partners involved in the process of
ending the crisis to carry out follow-up and support for
the follow-up.

The facilitator is convinced that the parties to the
political agreement of Ouagadougou will not be able to
carry this process to its conclusion without the
assistance of the international community, particularly
the United Nations. Moreover, the agreement calls
upon the United Nations in different paragraphs to
support the parties in their commitment to restore
peace in Cote d'Ivoire, particularly with respect to the
process of identification, the electoral process, the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
and the abolition of the zone of confidence, as well as
dismantling the armed militias.

The facilitator reiterates his call for consistent
United Nations support to parties and to facilitation,
both technically and financially, until the process of
3
ending the crisis is completed. He supports the
consensus between the parties with respect to the role
of certification to be played by the United Nations in
the electoral process. This certification, at every point
in the process, continues clearly to be the best way at
present to build trust among the different Ivorian forces
and to restore peace to Cote d'Ivoire. This role of
certification will benefit if it is carried out under an
integrated institutional approach under the
responsibility of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.

Furthermore, the facilitator hopes that the
Security Council will support the two planned advisory
bodies. He would also appreciate any assistance that
the Council might provide to the parties to contribute
to transparency in the varying operations and to the
establishment of a peaceful climate, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Ouagadougou political
agreement.

From this standpoint, an approach of ongoing
cooperation among the parties, facilitation and the
international community needs to be highlighted, in
order to enable anticipation of any difficulties that
might arise and to ensure a successful end to the crisis.
The peace process in Cote d'Ivoire is well under
way, but it could prove vulnerable, given the electoral
stakes involved. It is thus imperative that the facilitator
enjoy the support of the international community so
that he can assist the process until its conclusion: free,
democratic, open and transparent presidential elections.

We cannot conclude our statement without once
again paying a well-deserved tribute, on behalf of the
facilitator, Mr. Blaise Compaore, to the Security
Council for its ceaseless efforts in favour of peace in
Cote d'Ivoire. We also welcome the daily activities of
the impartial forces - the forces of the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire and those of Operation
Licorne - which are working together to bring about
the gradual restoration of peace. We remain convinced
that restoring peace in Cote d'Ivoire will guarantee
stability and peace for the West African subregion as a
whole.

