Mr. Oshima: I would first like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to address the
Council once again on the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

I am aware of concerns relating to the number of
thematic issues brought to the Council's attention in
recent years. Given the daily threat to civilians in many
conflicts around the world, however, I believe that it is
critical to keep this important issue high - and
firmly - on the Council's agenda. It is important that
decisive and timely action be taken to end the suffering
of millions of innocent victims of warfare, including
many women and children.

Take the Middle East, for example, where the
escalation of violence has resulted in many civilian
casualties over the past few days alone. In his
statement to the Council on 12 March, the Secretary-
General indicated that "the toll of the dead and
wounded, particularly among innocent civilians, has
risen to levels that can be described, without
exaggeration, as appalling" (S/PV.4488, p. 2). He
specifically emphasized that the use of heavy weaponry
by Israel in civilian areas has made life even more
difficult and precarious for Palestinian civilians, who
were already subjected to severe physical and
economic hardships, and that it must stop. Also, he told
the Palestinians that the deliberate and indiscriminate
targeting of Israeli civilians is morally repugnant. He
said that acts of terror and suicide bombings must stop.
Against this backdrop, Security Council resolution
1397 (2002) represents a crucial step in reconfirming
the need to ensure the safety of civilians and to ensure
respect for universally accepted norms of international
humanitarian law in the context of the Middle East.
Our concerns, however, remain.

Or take the Sudan, where we have collectively
been dismayed by the recent pattern of attacks on
civilians, humanitarian workers and facilities,
including the shameful attacks on civilians gathered at
or near food distribution sites. The United Nations has
voiced its serious concern about these attacks, and one
of the key donors to that country - the United
States - subsequently put on hold the implementation
of the Danforth plan, aimed at increasing humanitarian
access in the Sudan, until such time as the Government
of Sudan demonstrates its commitment to investigate
the incidents and put remedial measures in place.
Therefore, we welcome the 10 March agreement
between the Government of Sudan and the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement to establish an
international verification mission to investigate reports
of attacks on unarmed civilians. We await concrete
results.

In Angola, more than a third of the population -
approximately 4.6 million people currently - is
displaced as a result of a conflict which has lasted for
more than 30 years. Further displacement has occurred
over the past few weeks since my last briefing to the
Council, in part due to the military strategy of the
Government. The declaration of a ceasefire by the
Government on 13 March, therefore, is ground-
breaking news. We are monitoring its implementation,
and I call upon the Council's commitment and support
in that respect.

In this context, I would like to comment on the
serious allegations of sexual exploitation of children in
refugee camps in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea.
Like the Secretary-General, I am deeply disturbed by
these allegations. As members are aware, the
Secretary-General has directed that these allegations be
investigated as thoroughly and urgently as possible and
that remedial action aimed at strengthening the
protection of women and children be taken as
necessary. He has also reiterated a policy of zero
tolerance for any such acts perpetrated by anyone
employed by or affiliated with the United Nations. As a
result, the Office of Internal Oversight Services
immediately launched an investigation into the
allegations with the aim of recommending remedial
action against any individuals found to have
perpetrated any such act. The result of the investigation
will be made public in a report to the General
Assembly. Also, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), protection
personnel and senior field managers have been tasked
to undertake immediate measure to enhance the
protection of children in refugee camps in West Africa
and other places.

Additionally, in my capacity as the Emergency
Relief Coordinator, I have urged the development by
relevant agencies of measures and policies to prevent
transgressions against the very women and children
they are serving, in close collaboration with the Inter-
Agency Standing Committee and with the humanitarian
coordinators in the field. As a first step, the Inter-
Agency Standing Committee, on Wednesday of this
week, created a task force aimed at developing quick
proposals to enhance immediately the protection of
children in refugee camps from sexual abuse.

While these problems and situations, among
others, continue to demand our most pressing attention,
it is important not to lose sight of the progress that has
been made in enhancing the protection of civilians in
recent years, both by the Council and by the
international community more widely, including
numerous non-governmental organizations.

First, on the progress side, the Security Council's
past consideration of the issue has in many cases
resulted in a tangible mitigation of human suffering.
For example, child and gender advisors have been
incorporated into peacekeeping missions. Recent
Council resolutions have increasingly advocated safe
and unimpeded humanitarian access to vulnerable
populations. The Council is also considering sanctions
that are more targeted, and are designed to limit their
unintended humanitarian impact. It should be noted
that the Council's consideration of the issue of
protection has increased awareness within and outside
the United Nations system of the many different steps
and initiatives that can be taken to alleviate human
suffering and, thereby, has expanded its "toolbox"
when responding to conflicts around the world. Indeed,
the principles and standards advocated and set by the
United Nations system have contributed in many places
to directly enhancing the protection of civilians.

Secondly, in the spirit at least of the 54
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
two reports on the subject matter, many positive
initiatives have been undertaken to enhance the
protection of vulnerable populations on the ground. I
would just like to note a few of them.

In Sierra Leone, some 46,500 combatants have
been demobilized and disarmed, in recognition of the
importance of improved security conditions for
building a lasting peace. They are now ready to be
reintegrated into their communities. Together with the
establishment of a Special Court to try serious crimes
committed in the past and of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, this initiative constitutes a
significant signal towards peace and stability in the
region.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
UNHCR and the United Nations Observer Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo have jointly
separated more than 1,000 former combatants and their
families from the larger civilian refugee population and
have transferred them to a new location. These efforts
are essential to preserving the civilian nature of refugee
camps and to ensuring the safety and security of
refugees and surrounding populations.

As the third point on the positive side, I would
like to note that the increased dialogue and partnerships
among agencies, through coordinated efforts, are
producing encouraging results. My own Office, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), has convened a working group of United
Nations humanitarian agencies that is developing
guidelines for aid workers on the terms of their
engagement with armed groups in providing
humanitarian assistance and protection. The guidelines
will based on best practices and international
humanitarian and human rights law. The goal is to
ensure common standards for humanitarian workers
when engaging in a structured dialogue with these
groups to gain access to vulnerable populations and the
necessary space for humanitarian operations.

Similarly, the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF), the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and the Department of Political
Affairs have set up an inter-agency working group that
is looking into child protection issues within United
Nations peacemaking, peacekeeping and peace-
building processes. An informal working group on
training for peacekeepers has also been convened by
UNICEF, the Office of the Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict and a Swedish non-
governmental organization to produce a training
package on child protection issues, which will be used
by all United Nations peace operations.

Finally, we are gratified that progress has been
made in the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. The
International Criminal Court is only five more
ratifications away from its entry into force.

All of these initiatives highlight the progress that
has been made in our efforts to improve the protection
of civilians, but they also demonstrate the continuing
need to keep this issue on the Council's agenda.

We realize that progress in implementing the
measures referred to in the Secretary-General's
recommendations depends on the extent to which the
issue is being mainstreamed into the daily work of the
Organization - within both the Council and the
Secretariat. In this regard, I am pleased to inform the
Council about the progress made on two significant
initiatives: first, the development of the aide-memoire;
and secondly, the agreement on standard operating
procedures between OCHA and DPKO to facilitate
closer cooperation on issues related to the protection of
civilians in the design of peacekeeping operations.
Both measures were, of course, requested by the
President of the Council in his letter addressed to the
Secretary-General dated 21 June 2001.

First, in an unprecedented example of interactive
cooperation between the Council and the Secretariat,
an aide-memoire has been developed that will serve as
a checklist to Council members when considering the
establishment, change or close of a peacekeeping
operation. The aide-memoire represents the
accumulated expertise of many entities within and
outside the United Nations system, most notably
DPKO, OCHA, UNHCR, UNICEF, the World Food
Programme and other key humanitarian and human
rights partners.

It was the subject of extensive consultations, at
the expert level, with the members of the Council. In
this respect, I would like to commend Norway for its
wise leadership and hospitality when guiding the
informal discussions. I am also gratified by the strong
working relationship and collaborative spirit that were
fostered by the Secretariat and the Security Council
throughout this process.

Jointly, we have striven to create a document that
is both concise and informative, while at the same time
remaining practical and applicable to the wide range of
situations and requirements emerging in the course of
an armed conflict. It is intended as a "living" document
that will be regularly updated in a continuing,
collaborative effort between the Council and the
Secretariat.

The aide-memoire identifies 13 core objectives
for protecting civilians in armed conflict and the
corresponding key issues for consideration in meeting
those objectives. It also contains a list of references to
previous country-specific and thematic Security
Council resolutions and presidential statements
pertaining to each of those objectives. This is intended
to serve as a quick and easy reference guide for
Council members when developing a peacekeeping
mandate. It may also serve as a piece of institutional
memory for Council members. For the Secretariat, it
will also serve as a relevant checklist and guide us as
we undertake our daily work and report on the
protection of civilians, both in the field and at
Headquarters.

The aide-memoire also addresses another request
by the Council. I recall that, during my briefing last
November, some Council members asked me to
consider ways of integrating four interrelated thematic
discussions, namely, the protection of civilians in
armed conflict; women, peace and security; children in
armed conflict; and conflict prevention. In my View,
the aide-memoire will provide, at least in part, a useful
framework for the consideration of these interrelated,
complementary issues.

Lastly, we intend to hold workshops and training
sessions on the issue of the protection of civilians -
including on the practical application of the aide-
memoire - for our field staff, mid-level government
officials, academic institutions and practitioners in
various parts of Asia, Africa and Latin America in the
coming months in order to move protection issues
further into the mainstream of decision-making and
policy development. We look forward to the active
participation of the Council in making the aide-
memoire a practical, lasting and effective decision-
making tool of the Council.

As I stated earlier, promoting the protection of
civilians in the design, planning and implementation of
peacekeeping operations requires closer cooperation
between all parts of the United Nations, in particular
DPKO and OCHA. To this end, we have reached an
understanding with our colleagues from DPKO on how
to ensure that protection issues are given sufficient and
regular attention in briefings or reports pertaining to
peacekeeping operations.

OCHA will ensure, through its focal point on the
protection of civilians, that its own expertise and
analytical capacities and those of relevant partners -
including those from the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee framework - are paired with DPKO's
long-standing expertise and experience in the design
and operation of peacekeeping missions. In this regard,
we hope that this reinforced cooperation will assist the
Council, providing, where appropriate, complementary
briefings on specific protection concerns during its
deliberations on the establishment, change or close of a
peacekeeping operation.

Before concluding, I would like to update the
Council briefly on the progress made in the
reorganization of those recommendations of the
Secretary-General where a consensus exists, as
reflected in resolutions 1265 (1999) and 1296 (2000).
For the sake of convenience, I will refer to this exercise
as a "road map" - it reorganizes the Secretary-
General's recommendations into different themes,
identifying institutions responsible for implementation
and defining the necessary steps to be taken for such
implementation, including those for cooperation and
coordination.

To assist in the preparation of the road map, my
Office has continued the round-table discussions
initiated last fall, adding two more, which took place
recently - in February and March - with the
participation of all interested Council members. In this
respect, I would like to express my gratitude to the
Governments of Norway and of Canada for providing
the necessary financial support for these events. As
before, the round tables have contributed to raising the
awareness of the importance for matters of peace and
security of issues related to the protection of civilians,
and have generated invaluable recommendations and
food for thought. The rapporteurs' reports from these
meeting will be made available to members of the
Council shortly.

In the meantime, I would like to highlight just a
few key points that emerged from those round-table
meetings. Participants emphasized the challenges posed
to humanitarian operations by the increasingly blurred
distinctions between civilians and combatants in
conflict zones, especially in the areas of access and
safety. They noted the growing toll of civilian deaths in
recent years and the frequency and severity of assaults
on humanitarian personnel and property. Several
participants worried that this may indicate an
increasing disregard for the standards of international
humanitarian law. Lastly, it was emphasized that, faced
with the realities of today's conflicts and despite
serious challenges to the peace and security of their
countries, Member States must adhere to, and continue
to promote, the humanitarian and legal standards
established over the last 50 years.

While all the activities I have described reflect
progress in our joint endeavour, they cannot substitute
for the willingness of the Council to act decisively on
each of the concerns brought to its attention. Although
ultimately the primary responsibility for the protection
of civilians falls on the Governments and armed groups
involved in conflict situations, swift action by the
Council is indispensable where Governments do not
honour those responsibilities or deliberately act in
violation thereof.

In conclusion, I look forward to working closely
with the Council on the finalization of the road map in
the coming months and on the regular updating of the
aide-memoire. I hope that the understanding on closer
cooperation between OCHA and DPKO, together with
continued collaboration with our humanitarian partners
in the Inter-Agency Standing Committee, will
contribute further to enhancing the protection of the
millions of civilians caught in conflict areas around the
world. In that respect, I hope that in the next briefing to
the Council on this issue, we can record even more
examples of progress, and I look forward to the next
report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, in November 2002.

