Mr. Delattre (France): I thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her twenty-second report and her
briefing. Ms. Bensouda reminds us again, more than
10 years after the adoption of resolution 1593 (2005),
that civilians in Darfur remain the targets of violence,
in particular at the hand of the Government, and that
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) is not fully able to exercise its
mandate to protect civilians.

We share the concerns highlighted once again in the
Prosecutor's report, which reflect those expressed by
the Council in resolutions 2173 (2014) and 2228 (2015).
Those include the ongoing deterioration of the security
situation in Darfur; the ongoing aerial bombing carried
out by the Sudanese Air Force, resulting in direct and
indirect civilian casualties; the ongoing clashes among
tribes caused by obstructed access to natural resources;
the prosecution of the crimes of rape and sexual
violence in which the Government's armed forces might
be involved; the ongoing forced displacement resulting
from the continued violence and military escalation;
the arrest of political opponents and threats and
attacks against humanitarian personnel; the numerous
obstacles to the delivery of assistance to civilians by
humanitarian organizations and to the implementation
of the UNAMID mandate; and lastly, the apparently new
factor of a mass influx of non-Sudanese populations.

As Ms. Bensouda has also recalled, the arrest
warrants issued by the International Criminal Court
over 10 years ago have still not been executed. Five
individuals have been indicted for war crimes, crimes
against humanity and, in one case, the crime ofgenocide,
and continue to evade the jurisdiction of the Court. For
the most part, they continue to occupy senior positions
in the State apparatus of the Sudan. Such a situation of
impunity only encourages the continuation of atrocities
and, as Ms. Bensouda reminds us, undermines the
credibility of international criminal justice.

The Council has long known how to respond to the
situation. Halting those numerous forms of violence
and crime involves, in particular, the following
five components. First, it involves concluding and
implementing a political solution that involves the
Government and the rebel groups. On that account,
we regret that the latest national pre-dialogue meeting,
held in Addis Ababa several weeks ago, did not lead
to substantial progress. Efforts must be pursued to end
the hostilities, which must facilitate a comprehensive
political solution, as envisaged by the African Union
Peace and Security Council. That is a precondition for
a lasting settlement to the crises in the Sudan.

Secondly, it involves the effective protection of
civilians and full cooperation on the part ofthe Sudanese
authorities in allowing UNAMID to implement its
mandate. The ongoing violence and absence of security
prevent any prospect of stabilization and long-term
reconstruction. The human consequences of the crisis
remain exceptionally serious, while the Sudan has more
than 2.6 million long-term internally displaced persons
and violence against civilians - especially against
women - and looting persist.

Thirdly, it requires unhindered humanitarian
access to civilian and displaced populations. In that
regard, we regret that UNAMID remains subject to
restrictions in its access and the ongoing target of
attacks and harassment. It is essential that it be ensured
free and unrestricted access throughout all of Darfur.

Fourthly, it involves prosecuting the perpetrators
of crimes and an effective campaign against impunity.
As the Prosecutor noted, the Sudan, which is bound
to cooperate with the Court and fight impunity, has
taken no action to prosecute the responsible parties
for crimes committed in Darfur. On 19 November, the
Court issued a new decision on non-cooperation on
the part of the Sudan with regard to the Banda case.
That is the eleventh time that the Court has noted a lack
of cooperation. It is also appropriate to recall that the
States parties to the Rome Statute have a key role to
play with regard to their obligation to cooperate with
the ICC and to execute its arrest warrants when the
individuals subject to them are within their territory.

Fifthly, it requies limited contacts between persons
subject to arrest warrants and those who are deemed
to be essential, in line with the Secretary-General's
policy. France calls upon the United Nations as a whole
to apply those directives and implement the relevant
provisions of resolution 1593 (2005). In that context, the
Council must act on two fronts. First, it must encourage
parties to end all violence against civilians. That means
that all members of the Council must acknowledge the
ongoing deterioration of the situation of civilians, noted
once again in the Prosecutor's report. It also requires
UNAMID to be fully able to carry out its mandate,
including by ensuring its complete and unhindered
freedom of movement.

We also need to make cooperation with the
International Criminal Court effective and ensure that
it is able to execute arrest warrants, which is necessary
in order for the Court to carry out its mandate. It is
the Council's responsibility to respond to cases of
non-cooperation that the Court brings to its attention
and to that of the Assembly of States Parties, as
recalled in its resolution of 26 November. International
organizations must also remain mobilized with regard
to cases of non-cooperation with the International
Criminal Court.

