Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): May I begin
by thanking Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
briefing. I also warmly welcome Palestinian Foreign
Minister Al-Malki here today and thank him for his
statement. I am also grateful for the statement and kind
remarks made by the Israeli Permanent Representative.

The three months since the Council's most recent
debate on the situation in the Middle East have seen
further intense efforts to launch negotiations to deliver
the peace, security and justice that Palestinians and
Israelis so desire. Our goal remains to engage not
simply in another process, but in genuine negotiations
that have a real prospect of reaching a lasting solution.
President Obama of the United States made his
commitment clear when he spoke to the General
Assembly, and we continue to offer him, his team and
all those genuinely seeking peace our full support.

The parameters of a solution are well known: two
States, with an independent, democratic, contiguous
and viable Palestinian State based on the 1967 borders
living side by side in peace and security with the State
of Israel, Jerusalem as the capital of both States, and a
just settlement for refugees. Delivering that goal will
not be easy. All sides will have to meet their
obligations and commitments. We need to see an Israeli
freeze on settlement-building; we need to see
continued Palestinian efforts on security and
institution-building; and we would warmly welcome
Arab moves to normalize relationships.

A genuinely viable Palestinian State will be key
to securing a successful settlement. The Palestinian
National Authority's two-year plan, launched in
August, represents a determination to deliver such a
Palestinian State and the institutions to underpin it, not
in some distant future but soon. President Abbas and
Prime Minister Fayyad will have our continued
backing as they work to implement this vision.

The situation in Jerusalem increasingly has the
potential to threaten the progress we all desire. There is
absolutely no room for inflammatory gestures or
actions, in Jerusalem above all, because extremists will
take advantage of them. We have followed with great
concern the disturbing incidents of violence around the
Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif. We are also deeply
concerned at ongoing settlement activity in East
Jerusalem, which can only make it more difficult to
achieve our common goal. All sides must act to calm
the situation and avoid provocation.

The situation in Gaza also continues to concern
us. The lives of Gazans will only become harder as the
winter sets in. Despite repeated representations from
the international community, the Israeli Government
has not eased border restrictions sufficiently to allow
for the passage of all essential humanitarian aid or
significant reconstruction materials. I repeat our call on
the Israeli Government to relax those restrictions.

I also repeat our call on Hamas to release Gilad
Shalit without further delay or conditions. We note the
videotape evidence provided by Hamas on 2 October in
exchange for 20 prisoners, but it is simply
unacceptable that Gilad Shalit should remain in
detention without Red Cross access three years after he
was first seized.

We must also address the conclusions of the
United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza
Conflict. They raise important issues that are of serious
concern. We believe that the Goldstone report
(A/HRC/ 12/48) itself does not adequately recognize
Israel's right to protect its citizens or pay sufficient
attention to Hamas's actions.

But the concerns raised in the report cannot be
ignored. Rocket attacks by Palestinian militants
targeted at innocent civilians in southern Israel
constitute a breach of international humanitarian law. It

09-5573]
is deplorable that these acts continue. They must cease
immediately. Israel has the right to defend its citizens
from such attacks, but must do so in accordance with
international law. The Goldstone report makes serious
allegations about Israeli conduct during Operation Cast
Lead. There are reports of incidents where individual
soldiers are alleged to have acted unlawfully, for
example, allegations of the shooting of civilians as
well as overall Israeli tactics that included the targeting
of police stations and infrastructure.

My Government regrets that Israel did not
cooperate with the Mission, which, therefore, lacks an
authoritative Israeli perspective on the events in
question, which would be so crucial in order to
determine the legality of the actions. We note that the
Israeli Defence Forces have already conducted and are
continuing to conduct a number of investigations.
However, concerns remain. We urge the Israeli
Government to carry out full, credible and impartial
investigations into the allegations reported in the
Goldstone Report.

The United Kingdom is committed to ensuring
accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
wherever they occur. We look forward to further
discussion of this issue in the Human Rights Council.

Turning briefly to Lebanon, we would like to say
we welcome the undertaking by the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon and the Lebanese Armed
Forces to investigate the explosion that, reportedly,
took place earlier in the week in Tayr Felsay. We
underline our call for all parties to implement Security
Council resolution 1701 (2006) in full.

In conclusion, I will say that there is little doubt
that prospects for a lasting peace in the Middle East
have been tested. Reactions to the Goldstone Report
and the events in East Jerusalem, for example, have
dampened the cautious optimism generated by the
increased diplomatic efforts to relaunch the peace
process, but we urge the parties in the region, and the
international community as a whole, to maintain and
increase momentum towards a solution.

All peace processes are tested by events. What
separates the successful processes from the
unsuccessful is the political will to push forward
despite events or setbacks.
