Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): We
are pleased to participate in today's open debate on the
topic of reconciliation - a topic that, despite having
been rarely addressed in this format by the Council, is
a concept and practice inherent to the maintenance of
peace and understood to be an objective and a process
of building a common vision of society, ensuring that
the needs of all sectors of the population are taken into
account, as defined in Council resolutions.

"Since wars begin in the minds of men, it is in
the minds of men that the defences of peace must be
constructed", states the UNESCO Constitution and
the preamble of the Declaration on a Culture of Peace.
Some 20 years after the adoption of the Declaration,
that maxim remains as valid as ever before. In myriad
cases and national contexts, history has shown us that
peace is not automatically achieved in the absence of
conflicts, and that reconciliation is not a mere shift
from conflict towards non-violent coexistence. Both
peace and reconciliation must be nurtured, promoted
and facilitated constantly and in a lasting manner.
Reconciliation is a process; it is not a state of being.
There is no magic formula or unique recipe for peace,
inasmuch as it is people who are called upon to build
their own history.

Seventy years ago in Costa Rica, following a
conflict that, despite its brief duration, had profound
impacts on the unity of the Costa Rican people and the
fracturing of its social fabric, the Founding Junta of
the Second Republic took one of the most momentous
decisions to abolish the army as a permanent institution,
on 1 December 1948. That was not a decision born solely
in the mind ofa single person or those of a few, but was
already part of a political culture in which the bayonet
seldom shone brighter than words in defending ideas.

Above all, that decision was rooted in a deep
conviction, best expressed by the Costa Rican educator
Joaquin Garcia Monge:

"The only way to prevail and bring men together is

the love that is born from a mutual understanding

of the qualities of understanding and of the heart."
Years later, when Jose' Figueres Ferrer, who had
abolished the army in 1948, was asked about the reasons
for doing so, he replied simply:
"After a short but gruelling fraternal war, I found
myself before two armies - one victor and another
defeated. But both were comprised of young Costa
Ricans who had only one desire: to return to their
homes. I understood then that it was time to dissolve
both armies."

But it was not the decree abolishing the armed
forces that healed the wounds of a fractured nation, but
the process by which the State placed people, their well-
being and their dignity at the centre of its action, by
means of creating effective, inclusive and transparent
institutions with a mission and vision of their raison
d'etre that went beyond the political pendulum. The
stability of our democracy and political system was
not born of that decree or of the holding of regular
elections, transparent though they may have been. It
was born of a sustained and progressive investment in
universal health care, public and free education and an
environment that is healthy and ecologically balanced.

Reconciliation, like peace, is not a political project
but the conviction and capacity of men and women to
resort to dialogue and understanding as the tools for
resolving any dispute. For that reason, the responsibility
of all States in promoting and sustaining a culture
of peace is not only in the prevention of conflicts or
threats to peace, but in the fulfilment of human rights
for all, without distinction of any kind, in compliance
with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
its Sustainable Development Goals, in particular Goal
16; in the creation of robust and inclusive institutions
that respond and adapt to the needs and demands of
people; and through national and global narratives that
build collective meaning and inclusion.

We are living in times of mistrust and division
among peoples, communities and institutions. The
peoples of the world are expressing with greater
vehemence the lack of response to their demands, the
inequality of their societies and the wealth of the elite.
In that context, reconciliation ceases to be a process
anchored in societies torn apart by war and violent
conflict, becoming instead the legitimate demand of
peoples that they be recognized as equal, and the State
is no longer a Leviathan but a channel for inclusion,
education, justice and dignity. If we want peace, we
should prepare not for war but for peace.

