Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to express my
gratitude to Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura, Under-
Secretary-General Stephen O'Brien and UNICEF
Regional Director Geert Cappelaere.

Less than ten days ago, at the monthly briefing
here in the Chamber on the humanitarian situation in
Syria (see S/PV.7817), I said that our meetings must
not simply be venues for expressing our concern about
the devastating circumstances, but rather we must take
action and achieve concrete results. Unfortunately,
the Security Council has not achieved concrete results
since that time.

Today the briefers described the disastrous results
of the escalation of the recent fighting in Aleppo.
Japan commends all humanitarian workers for their
invaluable, courageous efforts to seek every opportunity
to ensure protection and access. But the severe shortage
of food rations, health essentials and other lifesaving
supplies in eastern Aleppo is posing a grave threat to
the population as winter approaches.

We have repeatedly called on the relevant States
to exert the strongest possible influence on the
fighting parties. We must do absolutely everything
possible to alleviate the humanitarian crisis in Aleppo,
so as to protect civilians and medical personnel,
undertake urgent medical evacuations and rehabilitate
medical services. Japan reiterates its support for
the co-penholders - Egypt, New Zealand and
Spain - in their efforts to arrive at a draft resolution.
We also support the initiative to unify the voice of the
international community in the General Assembly. The
Security Council must take action and should not be
viewed as incapable of responding to a humanitarian
crisis of such magnitude.

I heard with keen interest what Special Envoy
De Mistura had to say. He affirmed his view that
military logic is prevailing on both sides. I agree with
the Special Envoy that a stable and durable solution,
one that ensures non-recurrence of terrorist threats,
cannot be achieved through military means. We
must be persistent in seeking a negotiated settlement.
Special Envoy De Mistura told us that, when he meets
the Council on 8 December, he would like to explain
some options that exist. I look forward to listening to
him. In the meantime, we must deal with the urgent
humanitarian crisis. We must unite to uphold the
strategy and take action.

