Ms. Viotti: I thank the Polish presidency for
convening this timely discussion.

The situation in the Middle East remains troubling
and complex, characterized by protracted conflicts,
geopolitical tensions that play out at the regional level,
governance issues and severe deficits in socioeconomic
development in a number of countries. Yet, as the
Secretary-General noted to the Security Council
last year,

"The mechanisms and the safeguards to manage
the risks of escalation that existed in the past no
longer seem to be present." (S/PV8231, p. 2)

Our shared aspiration must be to find ways for a region
so rich in human capital and natural resources to fully
realize its potential for the benefit of all. We must never
lose sight of this aspiration.

In recent weeks alone, we have seen some of the
challenges on full display. The series of incidents in
the Strait of Hormuz and adjacent waterways have
raised tensions to dangerous levels. It is crucial that the
rights and duties related to navigation be respected in
accordance with international law. Restraint and genuine
dialogue are urgently needed in order to avoid the risk
that a minor miscalculation might inadvertently lead to
a major confrontation, with disastrous consequences
even well beyond the region. Deep disagreements about
Iran's nuclear programme are further exacerbating
differences in the Gulf. Notwithstanding the concerns
about it, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
remains the only agreed international framework to
address Iran's nuclear programme.

In Syria, Special Envoy Geir Pedersen is sparing
no effort to finalize the arrangements for the launch
of the constitutional committee as a door-opener to a
broader United Nations-facilitated political process
in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and to implement
confidence-building measures, including on detainees.
However, the United Nations is concerned that the
ongoing hostilities in north-west Syria might risk
undermining the Special Envoy's efforts to revive the
political process.

In Yemen, the United Nations continues to provide
desperately needed, life-saving humanitarian assistance,
while Special Envoy Martin Griffiths remains engaged
in efforts to implement the Al-Hudaydah Agreement.
We hope that will lead to broader and fully inclusive
discussions on ending the conflict.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains the most
long-standing issue on the United Nations peace and
security agenda. A just solution acceptable to both
sides is essential for the future of the whole region.
The United Nations remains ready to support efforts
towards allowing Palestinians and Israelis to live in
two democratic States, side by side in peace and within
secure and recognized borders, based on relevant
United Nations resolutions.

As in other regions, realizing the promise of full
respect for human rights, fundamental freedoms and
international humanitarian law requires commitment
and bold action, especially with aview to ending conflict,
addressing the root causes of violence and sustaining
peace. In the same vein, tackling the threat of terrorism
and violent extremism must simultaneously address
security concerns and uphold international human
rights obligations. Accelerating the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is
intrinsically linked to conflict resolution and prevention.
Inclusive growth, environmental sustainability, gender
equality and opportunities for young people are all key
aspects of durable solutions.

There have been some notable gains in gender
equality in recent years, including substantial increases
in literacy and education and access to health services.
Yet equal opportunities remain limited, and gender-
based violence is still widespread. Greater participation
by women in governance and economic activities would
not only improve family income and national economies,
but also reduce vulnerabilities to socioeconomic shocks
and liberate enormous potential.

While equality before the law is gradually gaining
ground, there is still a long way to go in a number of
situations in amending discriminatory laws and ensuring
more representative participation in parliaments and
leadership in political and public life more generally.
We know how crucial it is in conflict-affected countries
that women be able to play a meaningful role in peace
processes; indeed, women's equal participation is
directly correlated with more sustainable peace. Yet
women continue to be marginalized. Moreover, with
a push-back on women's and girls' rights at the core
of terrorist and extremist agendas, it is all the more
important that efforts to strengthen gender equality be
central to our work in prevention, resilience and peace.

The power ofyouth is equally critical, as recognized
by the Security Council in its landmark resolution on
youth, peace and security (resolution 2250 (2015)).
Children and young people make up nearly half the
region's population. Job creation is an imperative, as
is investing in education, training and skills that match
the needs of today's societies and markets.

The list of challenges is long, but that should not
deter us. The first order of business must be preventing
the most acute flashpoints in the region from boiling
over. Keeping the channels of communication
open needs to be priority number one, followed by
confidence-building measures to move parties away
from confrontation towards dialogue.

The United Nations is addressing the numerous
challenges on multiple fronts: from supporting
preventive diplomacy to mediating ongoing conflicts;
from providing humanitarian assistance to millions of
people to addressing the human rights dimension; and
from supporting sustainable development initiatives
to nurturing capacities to tackle climate change,
including through the region's ample alternative
sources of energy. The Special Envoys and Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General in the region
are working extensively with a wide range of regional
and subregional organizations and national and regional
stakeholders, including civil society and women's and
youth groups, in close cooperation with the United
Nations country teams. The role of the Security Council
in the maintenance of international peace and security
remains indispensable.

The Middle East region has many fault lines
and divisions. Yet within those challenges lies the
opportunity to build on the words and intentions of the
United Nations Charter towards action that will bring
real change and a bright future to the peoples of the
region. The United Nations remains strongly committed
to that endeavour.

