Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I would first like to
welcome President Thabo Mbeki, Chairperson of the
African Union High-Level Panel on Darfur, Mr. Haile
Menkerios, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Sudan, Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, Joint
African Union-United Nations Special Representative
for Darfur, and Mr. Djibril Bassole, Joint African
Union-United Nations Chief Mediator for Darfur, and
to thank them for their presence here today and for
their presentations. Let me commend them and their
staffs for their tireless efforts. This high-level presence
is a strong signal of our common commitment to work
with the Sudanese people in addressing the challenges
they face. Today's meeting is also an important symbol
of collaboration between the African Union and the
United Nations. We thank the United Kingdom and
Lebanon for this important initiative.

The year 2010 is a crucial one for the Sudan.
When the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) was
signed, the two parties pledged to do their utmost to
make unity attractive. The CPA provides that the
people of Southern Sudan can choose unity or
secession in a referendum in January 2011. We expect
both parties to fulfil their commitments to implement
the CPA, which includes undertaking a credible
referendum and abiding by its outcome.

This will also be a major challenge for the
African Union and, in a complementary way, for the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development. It will
be important that they establish and maintain smooth
working relations with both sides and that we extend
full support to these efforts.
Without prejudging the outcome of the
referendum, the international community has to step up
support and diplomatic efforts in the run-up to it.
Lessons learned from the election process have to be
applied. The outstanding issues in the implementation
of the CPA have to be resolved by the parties. These
include preparation of the two referendums and public
consultations, Abyei, wealth-sharing, oil-sharing and
border demarcation. Contingency planning will
logically also have to include the scenario of a vote in
favour of the independence of Southern Sudan and
support good governance under all possible outcomes.

We must work to avert conflict, protect lives and
ensure regional stability. The protection and security of
civilians has to be fully guaranteed under all
circumstances. In those regards, support by the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) is important,
and I appreciate what Special Representative
Menkerios told us today about the efforts of UNMIS to
develop a mission-wide protection strategy.

Austria is concerned about the recent rise in
violence in Southern Sudan. While the main
responsibility for containing this violence and curbing
the proliferation of weapons lies with the Government
of Southern Sudan, the international community needs
to increase its support, including through effective
security sector reform.

While CPA implementation and referendum and
post-referendum planning are of the utmost urgency,
we must not lose sight of simultaneously coordinating
initiates to address the conflict in Darfur. Major
progress has been achieved in the improvement of
relations between Sudan and Chad. However, the
security situation in Darfur, as others have already
said, has recently worsened, with the highest number
of casualties having been logged in the month of May
since the inception of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
Recent fighting between rebel and Government forces
has overshadowed progress in the Darfur peace talks in
Doha. We urge all parties to refrain from hostilities and
to fulfil their obligations under international
humanitarian and human rights law. The solution of the
Darfur crisis can only be peaceful, and all parties must
join the peace process.

We strongly support the efforts of both the Joint
African Union-United Nations Chief Mediator for
Darfur, Mr. Djibril Bassole, and Joint Special
Representative for the African Union and UNAMID,
Mr. Ibrahim Gambari. At the same time, the
international community cannot wait for a peace
agreement in Doha in order to take action to stabilize
and improve the living conditions of the people of
Darfur. We must reach consensus on moving forward
with an approach that complements the Doha efforts on
the ground to improve security and stabilize
communities with meaningful development. There
needs to be a transition from emergency relief to early
recovery. We must work for durable solutions, and
Austria supports a role for UNAMID in this regard.

We should also not forget about Sudanese
refugees in Chad. Options for their safe and voluntary
return must be explored, and they must have a stake in
the peace process. Weak rule of law and human rights
institutions contribute to significant gaps in the
protection of civilians. Violence against civilians,
especially women, remains unaddressed and the
perpetrators go unpunished. These shortcomings must
be urgently addressed in a comprehensive and effective
manner by the Government of the Sudan. Continued
attacks and obstruction of UNAMID movement and
activities, as well as attacks on and the kidnapping of
civilians, could be significant causes of alarm, and the
Government of the Sudan must do all it can to improve
security in Darfur and stop the culture of impunity.

Any sustainable peace process must also address
the issue of justice and accountability, and redress for
victims of human rights and humanitarian law
violations. The African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel on Darfur, under the leadership
of President Mbeki, has our full support for its
activities in achieving this goal and its role in
democratically transforming the Sudan. In particular,
we support the recommendation made by the Panel on
ensuring accountability for the legacy of past abuses in
order to ensure a peaceful future in the Sudan. We
encourage the Government of the Sudan to implement
the recommendations of the Panel led by President
Mbeki, in particular in the justice sector.

Austria has taken note with concern of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) Pre-Trial
Chamber's decision of 25 May 2010 and the briefing of
Chief Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo on this subject to
the Council last Friday (see S/PV.6336). We wish to
underline the need for the Government of the Sudan
and all other parties to the conflict in Darfur to
cooperate fully with the ICC. The international
community, together with the Government of the
Sudan, must continue to work to promote respect for
human rights and democracy throughout the entire
country.

My country is firmly convinced that seeking
peace and securing justice are mutually reinforcing
processes. It is true that, in the final outcome, justice
can thrive best in an atmosphere of peace, but at the
same time it is also clear that there can be no lasting
peace without justice.

My delegation thanks the United Kingdom for the
draft presidential statement, which we support.

