Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Russia has always advocated the speedy
attainment of a comprehensive political settlement and
national reconciliation in Somalia, and the maintenance
of a unified Somali State. As the Council knows, the
plight of the Somali people is not the result of religious
or ethnic antagonism, but of deep-seated inter-clan
fragmentation and the ambitions of certain leaders.
These are the main obstacles to the restoration of the
unity of the country.

Experience over many years has shown that,
despite the fact that there has been no lack of peace
initiatives for Somalia, to a large extent, the viability of
such initiatives has depended on the level of support
for them within Somali society. In this context, as
always, the main issue is whether or not it will be
possible to include as broad a spectrum of Somali
society and political forces as possible in the talks on
the future of Somalia. Furthermore, the success of the
peace process will continue to depend on the
involvement of the leaders of the clan-based armed
groups, who really control the situation in most regions
of Somalia.

It is also in this context that we View the
negotiating process that is taking place within the
Somalia National Peace Conference being held in
Djibouti, and we hope that it will achieve positive
results. Comparing Djibouti's initiative to a ship over
which the Somalis themselves should assume control is
a very accurate way of describing the essence of what
remains to be attained. It is also important that, at the
international level, interested States continue to ensure
favourable, non-confrontational conditions for a pan-
Somali reconciliation based on principles that do not
run counter to the territorial integrity and unity of
Somalia.

We share the concern of the international
community regarding the dire humanitarian situation in
Somalia. Russia believes that the active work of the
humanitarian organizations in the country should
continue, given their key role in providing assistance to
the population. Like other members of the Security
Council, we are deeply concerned about the constant
attacks on humanitarian personnel in various parts of
Somalia, which impede their work and also make it
difficult to implement plans for a gradual transfer to
the country of the offices of United Nations
programmes and specialized agencies.

Russia's participation as an observer in the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
Partners Forum is proof of our desire to contribute to
the settlement of conflict situations in the vast region
of Eastern Africa and to ensure peace and stability
there. Russia is involved on a regular basis in the work
of the IGAD Partners Forum, within both the
Committee on Somalia and the Committee on the
Sudan. As a member of the Security Council and an old
friend of the Somali people, Russia will continue to
support the cause of restoring statehood to Somalia
based on conditions that are in the interests of Somali
society and of stability in the region as a whole.

