Mr. Amorim (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I feel
honoured, Sir, to be here under your presidency.
Although I know the Council is facing difficult times, I
am glad to be here and to see so many friends in the
Secretariat and in delegations with whom I worked
here for many years. We worked with great dedication,
although perhaps not always successfully, towards
achieving peaceful results.

I wish to congratulate you, Foreign Minister
Moratinos Cuyaube, my friend, for promoting this very
timely debate on the civilian aspects of conflict
management and peace-building.

President Lula opened the general debate of the
fifty-ninth session of the General Assembly (see A/59/PV.3) with a wide-ranging presentation of
Brazil's perception of the most pressing challenges
facing the world today. The key element in this vision
is the idea that the foundation of peace is social justice.
As President Lula has said, a world in which hunger
and poverty prevail cannot be a peaceful world.

I also wish to express Brazil's firm support for
the Secretary-General's words yesterday in the General
Assembly about the importance of the rule of law. Law,
not power, should be the regulator of coexistence both
domestically and internationally.

Recent experience has given us a number of
examples of conflicts in countries with very low levels
of development, illustrating the limitations of a purely
or primarily military approach to peace-building.
Without a broader perspective, without considering
economic and social variables and without focusing on
the well-being of civilians, we will fail in seeking
lasting solutions. I heard from other speakers that this
is a broadly shared vision. The question, really, is how
to achieve it.

In Brazil's opinion, the United Nations should
develop instruments and mechanisms that translate this
awareness into real strategies. Article 65 of the Charter
of the United Nations offers us an opportunity to
enhance cooperation between the Security Council and
the Economic and Social Council, thereby broadening
the scope of multilateral cooperation in conflict
management and peace-building. Let us not forget that
the Economic and Social Council, and not the Security
Council, is the Charter organ with responsibility for
matters relating to social development. And of what do
we speak when we talk of efforts to build lasting peace
or of reconstruction if not social and economic
development? That was the focus when the World
Bank was created for the reconstruction of Europe. It
was a bank for reconstruction; development came later.
Still, reconstruction and development go together, but
they are matters that relate also to the Economic and
Social Council. I think it is part of the work of the
Security Council to promote the work of the Economic
and Social Council in fulfilling its tasks, so as to ease
the work of the Security Council and prevent it from
interfering in its own work. I am well aware of the
working methods of the Security Council, so I will not
propose anything concrete, but I would have liked to
see a reference to Article 65 of the Charter in the very
specific context that the President has set for our
discussion. I put this forward as food for thought for
the future.

In the past, we have tried to use that provision of
the Charter as a basis in situations such as Burundi and
Guinea-Bissau. However, while those endeavours
proved to be useful experiments, they have not yet
represented a sufficiently well-defined response to the
demands we face in many parts of Africa, in the
Middle East, in Timor-Leste, in Haiti with its chronic
violence and elsewhere.

Since I am referring to Haiti, I would like to say
that Brazil has accepted the responsibility of
commanding the forces of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, with strong participation
from other Latin American countries, including Chile,
on the clear understanding that peace in that
marginalized sister nation of our continent, will require
a long-term commitment from the international
community - a commitment not only to security, but
also to socio-economic progress.

The United Nations has failed the people of Haiti
in the past by interpreting its role too strictly and
focusing it excessively on security issues. This time, in
parallel with efforts to establish a more secure
environment, we need to launch a sustained programme
to assist Haitian society in the political, social and
economic areas. Those are tasks that go beyond the
purview of the Security Council. They need to be
coordinated with it, but they require the participation
of other agencies and organs.

We need to take advantage of the present
atmosphere, which is favourable to United Nations
reform, in order to begin to formulate new ways of
addressing these situations. We need to ensure
continuity among preventive action, peacekeeping
efforts and the post-conflict peace-building phase. We
also need to tackle the question of the duration and
intensity of these efforts, as I believe was just
mentioned by my colleague from the Philippines.

Of course, we must rapidly deploy all the troops
required by Security Council resolutions. We are facing
this need in Haiti at this very moment. But it is
particularly important to provide all of the human,
financial and material resources needed for physical
and institutional reconstruction. We appreciate the
generosity of donor countries and international
financial institutions, but these need to be coordinated
with the multilateral agencies, whose primary authority
to define the general framework needs to be
recognized.

Speaking of civilian aspects of peace-keeping
means focusing attention on the fundamental
importance of restoring human dignity, which is
generally the first victim of conflict situations. I can
easily foresee that some of today's discussions will
explore certain specific technical aspects of
peacekeeping operations and how they dovetail with
the humanitarian agenda, the role of regional
organizations and other matters. Those are all relevant
aspects deserving of our consideration.

For my part, I wish to emphasize the need to
develop new and better tools for addressing the
structural problems at the root of tensions that lead to
violence and conflict. Poverty, disease, lack of
opportunity and inequality are some of the causes of
conflicts, particularly those within countries, which,
regrettably, are becoming ever more prevalent on our
agenda.

In accordance with prevailing practice, once
members of the Security Council have determined that
a certain agenda item no longer represents a threat to
the peace, that situation is sent into limbo, without any
intergovernmental follow-up of the reconciliation and
reconstruction processes. That flaw in our methods of
work may allow a conflict to reignite, as the tragic
example of Haiti underscores.

No matter how sophisticated our military
peacekeeping actions may be, we will be able to meet
the security challenges effectively only if we integrate
the political, social and economic elements into our
strategies. To that end, we can base our action on the
wise provision of Article 65, drafted in 1945, which
reminds us of the absolute need to address security
issues in their socio-economic context and even
provides guidance on how to do so from the
institutional and multilateral standpoints.

