Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and the delegation
of the People's Republic of China, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
June. We wish you success, Sir, and assure you of my
delegation's full support and cooperation. I would also
like to thank the Permanent Representative of Azerbaij an
and his delegation for their successful stewardship of
the Council during the month of May.

I also want to thank the Prosecutor, Mr. Luis
Moreno-Ocampo, for his briefing today. We have taken
note of his fifteenth report on the situation in the Sudan
submitted pursuant to paragraph 8 of resolution 1593
(2005), of 31 March 2005.

India is neither a signatory to the Rome Statute nor
a member of the International Criminal Court (ICC) for
reasons that are well known. I will not reiterate them.

India strongly condemns all acts of violence
committed against civilians. We believe that the right to
life is one of the fundamental rights and the foundation
of any social order. It is the obligation of all States to
take appropriate measures to protect the lives of their
citizens while maintaining social order. The States
concerned must also bring to justice those responsible
for violations of that right.

The continuing conflict in Darfur is one of serious
concern. We support all efforts to bring the conflict to
an end. We also support the activities of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) aimed at protecting civilians and the
efforts made, in cooperation with the African Union's
High-level Implementation Panel led by President Thabo
Mbeki, to restore an enduring environment of peace and
stability in Darfur. An inclusive political process to
address the legitimate aspirations of all sectors of the
Darfuri population will go a long way towards resolving
the conflict.

All parties have to accept that there is no military
solution to the conflict in Darfur. We call upon all parties
to join the political process without preconditions
and without any further delay. In that connection, it is
necessary that the Council seriously consider measures
against those who have so far refused to join the peace
process.

It is also important that the proceedings at the ICC
be undertaken in a manner consistent with its obligations
and that they contribute to the efforts aimed at ending
the conflict in Darfur. Any suggestion that has the effect
of creating new obligations for States and regional
organizations that are not parties to the Rome Statute
will not be legally sound. Nor will such suggestions
serve the purpose ofpeace in Darfur. As such, we cannot
support them.

In conclusion, India will continue to support all
diplomatic efforts for an early establishment of peace
and security in Darfur that will afford all sectors of the
Darfuri population opportunities for socio-economic
development and peaceful coexistence through an
inclusive political process.

