Mr. Sidikou (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the situation in the Democratic Republic of
Congo. I will brief the Council in person next March
but, given the prevailing situation in the country, it
seemed appropriate that I remain in the Mission area
for today's briefing.

My briefing will focus on three issues, namely,
the evolution of the political situation in relation to the
national elections scheduled for later this year, recent
trends in security in the east of the country, and the
planned withdrawal of some of the troops of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo (MONUSCO). I will
try to make recommendations to the Council on each of
those issues.
(spoke in English)

The presidential and legislative elections scheduled
for November of this year are a deeply divisive issue,
particularly given the continued absence of an agreed
electoral calendar or a budget for the elections. The
formal preparations for a national dialogue, announced
by President Kabila as a means to forge consensus on
the electoral process, have not yet begun, in part due to
strong opposition against the initiative by many major
opposition groups.

President Kabila is continuing consultations,
including with the United Nations and the African
Union, on the designation of an international facilitator
for the national dialogue. During my meetings with
the President, I have expressed the readiness of
MONUSCO to support an inclusive Congolese process
guided by the country's Constitution. In that context,
it is encouraging to note that, at the end of December,
the Catholic Bishops Conference met separately with
leaders of the majority and opposition parties, the
Electoral Commission and civil society representatives
to seek their views on reviving the electoral process.
I understand that all participants agreed on the need
for some form of dialogue. I am continuing my
contacts with the committee established by the Bishops
Conference to support further confidence-building
efforts and encourage a way forward. However, many
of my interlocutors have expressed scepticism that the
rift between the majority and the opposition can be
bridged, potentially leading to delays in the electoral
calendar.

In the absence of agreement on the electoral
process, political polarization has heightened tensions
and contributed to an atmosphere of increased
harassment and human rights violations. Since last year,
MONUSCO has registered more than 260 human rights
violations related to elections, mostly against opposition
members, civil society representatives and journalists.
That, combined with the rising number of human rights
abuses by armed groups in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, illustrates a worrying trend of narrowing
political space and a real challenge to the conduct of
peaceful, credible elections. However, in other areas
where there have been longstanding human rights
concerns, it is important to acknowledge the significant
steps taken by the Congolese authorities. For example,
the Forces armees de la Republique de'mocratique du
Congo (FARDC) completed 20 trials in the past three
months, finding 19 officers guilty of rape. For the past
nine months, the FARDC has supported the commission
overseeing the action plan against sexual violence, to
which President Kabila recommitted his support last
December.

Turning to the security situation, there has been
a significant deterioration in the eastern part of the
country in recent weeks, particularly in the Beni and
Lubero territories of North Kivu, where activities by
the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) and the Force
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR), among
other groups, pose ongoing and serious threats to the
civilian populations. In the Beni territory, the ADF
has been the target of operations by the FARDC under
Sukola I operations for the past two years. Nonetheless,
the ADF remains able to coordinate simultaneous
attacks on the FARDC and MONUSCO. The Council
will recall that more than 500 civilians have been
killed by the ADF and its allies since 2014, and since
December of last year there have been 45,000 newly
displaced civilians.

That situation continues today, with some people
displaced as far north as Ituri province, with ongoing
tensions among the communities on the ground.
MONUSCO has responded against suspected ADF
locations, including a 1 December 2014 aerial operation
following ADF attacks around Eringeti and Makembi.
The Mission has taken immediate steps to strengthen
the protection of civilians through increased joint
police and military patrols, and the redeployment of
an additional company operating base of the Force
Intervention Brigade, along with increased outreach
and early warning activities.

On 4 and 5 December, I visited Beni to meet with
local authorities and civil society to assess options for
further action. I returned to the area on 12 December
with a delegation of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Great Lakes Region to engage their
diplomatic support. I have also encouraged the
Government at the highest levels to engage directly on
this serious issue. President Kabila's recent visit to the
east is a positive sign in that regard.

Since October, FARDC Sukola II operations have
intensified against the FDLR in Lubero and bordering
territories. That has been accompanied by an increase
in Mayi-Mayi operations against the FDLR and its
allies. Civilians have been caught up in the fighting
and have been displaced, forcibly abducted or targeted
for massacres or harassment, often on the basis of
ethnicity and perceived collaboration with the FDLR.
Reprisal attacks by suspected FDLR elements have
been reported, most recently on 7 January in Miriki,
southern Lubero, where displaced members of the Hutu
community had sought refuge. At least 18 people were
killed in the attack, mostly women and children from
the Nande community. The situation appears to be
worsening in Lubero, and could potentially turn into
an open inter-ethnic conflict between the Hutu and
Nande communities. That dynamic could easily spark
violence in adjoining territories where competition over
land and customary authority has already heightened
tensions. Reports of increased recruitment into self-
defence groups based on ethnicity are a worrying
sign, and the upcoming elections period could serve to
further politicize and instrumentalize the groups on the
ground.

MONUSCO is engaged with the Government
and the FARDC command to encourage increased
military pressure on local militia in North Kivu and
to cooperate with a view to bringing about increased
voluntary disarmament. That, in combination with
ongoing disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes and political engagement to resolve conflict,
is a key priority for the Mission in the coming period.
Increased early warning activities to ensure the
effective protection of civilians in this area are also a
key priority.

The crisis in Burundi has produced new risks of
renewed instability in South Kivu, Already there are
13,000 refugees from Burundi sheltering in the camp of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees in Uvira territory, and a new flow of refugees
into the country has been reported. The Mission has
received worrisome reports of infiltrations by armed
elements into this province, with local actors expressing
fears that some groups are trying to establish rear bases
in Uvira and Fizi territories. We will continue to closely
monitor the situation along the border and the impact
of the Burundian crisis on Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to ensure that appropriate contingency plans are
in place.

The Council is well aware of the proposed
reduction of MONUSCO's force by 1,700 troops. I am
ready to address questions regarding how the reduction
will be taken forward, in close coordination with
the Government via a strategic dialogue and in line
with resolution 2211 (2015). In that regard, I would
highlight that the drawdown will be accompanied by a
process of force transformation, which will ensure that
MONUSCO exercises greater operational capability in

eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, even as the
force gradually reduces in overall numbers. The key
goal is to continue to project force and to be able to
protect civilians as the number of static sites decreases.
The core of the force transformation is rapid deployment
capability, delivered by rapid reaction brigades, which
will start deployment into MONUSCO next month.
That, combined with greater air reconnaissance
and operational capabilities, is designed to ensure
responsiveness, agility and the ability to take forward
a robust strategy to protect civilians in the coming
period.

In conclusion, I would like to draw the Council's
attention to three areas where strong messaging and
engagement would be particularly useful.

First, given the very real risks of civil unrest and
violence related to the electoral process, it is critical
that every effort be made to rebuild confidence among
the stakeholders to find a way forward. I would
encourage the Council to support an inclusive dialogue
that upholds the Constitution. Such a process should
build confidence among the citizens, ease political
tensions, reduce the risk of escalation and contribute
to an atmosphere conducive to the protection of
the fundamental freedoms guaranteed under the
Constitution.

Secondly, there is a window of opportunity now
to deepen our partnership with Governments and
move towards a common vision and joint approach
to addressing insecurity in the east of the country. I
have received clear signals of this from President
Kabila himself and others in the Government. I believe
it is important that every effort be made to work
collaboratively with the FARDC and State authorities
to meet the many challenges and protect civilians
at this difficult time. The resumption of security
cooperation would be a key aspect in that regard, and
could lead to meaningful reductions in the capabilities
and influence of armed groups in the east. The
Council's encouragement of such an approach would be
particularly useful at this time.

Thirdly, regarding the Mission's force reduction and

transformation, I am confident that the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO
will soon resume structured and meaningful discussions
within the framework of the strategic dialogue in order
to agree on ways to effectively implement MONUSCO's
mandate and jointly develop an exit strategy. The
Council's continued support for such an approach will
be important, particularly upon entering the mandate
renewal discussions in March.

(Spoke in French)

In conclusion, I thank the Security Council and the
Member States for their active support to MONUSCO.
I also express my gratitude to all the personnel of the
Mission and of the United Nations who are working
in difficult and at times dangerous conditions in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In that regard, I
pay solemn tribute to Staff Sergeant Dyson Mayao, of
Malawi, who lost his life last year serving in the Force
Intervention Brigade tasked with protecting civilians
against attacks in the city of Erengeti.

