Mr. Keita (Mali) (spoke in French): I should like
to welcome the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, and to
thank him for his presentation which, as usual, was
highly instructive. I should also like to congratulate the
Security Council mission to East Timor and Indonesia,
led by Ambassador Andjaba, on the quality of the
report that it submitted to us. The clear
recommendations that were formulated will certainly
further support the transition of East Timor to
independence.

With regard to the implementation of resolution
1272 (1999), my delegation welcomes the measures
taken by the Special Representative to further support
the capacities of the national police and the judiciary.
The measures suggested to this end enjoy our full
support. The progressive neutralization of the militia
activities is to be welcomed. However, we believe that
we must continue to be vigilant and support East Timor
even after independence.

At the political level, my delegation welcomes
the great progress made towards independence and the
further Timorization of public life. We urge the
international community to maintain its support for the
activities of UNTAET until this lofty mission has
completed its work. We are all committed to it and to
an independent and stable East Timor.

With regard to resolution 1319 (2000), my
delegation is still concerned about the very high
number of refugees remaining in West Timor, and we
therefore support the recommendations made by the
Security Council mission. It is essential for concerted
and coordinated activities to be urgently undertaken
with the Indonesian Government so as to speed up the
process of the safe return of the refugees. Such an
approach should also apply to the exercise ofjustice by
the Indonesian Government with regard to those who
are found responsible for serious human rights
violations in East Timor.

In conclusion, I would like once again to pay
tribute to UNTAET and to ask it to stress national
reconciliation and justice and to intensify cooperation
with Indonesia. The resolution of several key issues
depends on this work.

