Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Oscar Fernandez-
Taranco, Mr. Chergui and Mr. Lauber for their valuable
briefings.

The Dominican Republic notes that the security
situation in Burundi has remained stable despite an
atmosphere of tension between the Government and
the opposition. We are concerned about the tense
relations that persist between Burundi and the East
African Community, and which have affected the
inter-Burundian dialogue. We understand that dialogue
is the most important tool to achieve the smooth
unfolding of the electoral process, scheduled for next
year.

Therefore, we urge the Government of Burundi
to fulfil its commitment to end the political crisis. We
call on the East African Community to extend its good
offices to the situation. In that regard, we reiterate that
it is essential to guarantee the protection of all civilians,
including journalists and human rights defenders,
guaranteeing their safety and free movement in the
exercise of their functions in Burundi. Therefore, we
regret the closure of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights in Burundi.

Women and girls continue to be reported as the
main victims of cruelly perpetrated acts of sexual and
gender-based violence. They also continue to be victims
of ethnic or political hate speech. They are also the
most affected among refugees, and the lack of access to
education impacts their opportunities to develop skills,
resulting in increased vulnerability to exploitation and
abuse. Therefore, we advocate that the return of the
refugees take place through transparent refugee status
determination procedures.

In addition, we are pleased that the Chair of
the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission visited Burundi from 5 to 10 May to
learn first-hand about the impact of the support of
the Peacebuilding Fund in Burundi through the joint
project launched in October 2018 by UN-Women,
the United Nations Development Programme and the
International Organization for Migration to strengthen
local mechanisms for conflict prevention and resolution
in Burundi. It is also very positive that he met with the
network of women mediators in the country.

In that context, we highlight the role of the network
in enabling women to be part of the dialogue in their
communities and to play a role in peacebuilding.
However, we also recognize the challenges facing them,
such as developing capacities through an exchange of
experiences with other women who work in conflict
resolution in other countries, as well as communication
and transport barriers, in facilitating dialogue in
communities and raising awareness among other
women with regard to peacebuilding. It is therefore
vital that women have the necessary financial support
to further develop their activities.

In a spirit of fraternity and solidarity with the
Burundian people, with whom we recently established
diplomatic relations, the Dominican Republic calls on
the authorities to implement and respect international
standards to ensure and protect freedom of expression,
freedom of the press and access to information. We
believe it important that the recent measures impeding
the freedoms of expression and the press through media
and social networks be reconsidered and brought into
line with the demands of today's society.

We are also extremely concerned about reports of
persecution of religious minorities. We therefore urge
the State to fulfil its obligation to support, respect and
guarantee religious freedom and non-discrimination on
the basis of religion and to promote recognition of the
importance of the inclusion of minorities in social and
public life. The exodus of those communities from their
homeland has triggered a series of tragic events that
violate the rights to freedom of movement, education
and food, among others, not only of adults but also of
children. In addition, the State must guarantee the safe
return of those who, owing to the terrible situation,
have sought refuge.

With a view to promoting State cooperation with
international bodies and non-profit organizations that
are working to improve the situation in Burundi, the
Dominican Republic urges the Burundian authorities
to cooperate with the International Criminal
Court, which is currently undertaking preliminary
examinations of cases of killings, imprisonment,
enforced disappearances, torture, gender-based and
sexual crimes and violence against civilians and human
rights activists.

Finally, we underline the need to cooperate with
humanitarian actors, whose main objective is to
bring relief to a population affected by the difficult
humanitarian and human rights situation. Those actors
have been restricted in carrying out their work, to the
extent of having to leave the country, while others have
become victims of arbitrary arrests.

