Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands) (spoke in French): I thank the three briefers for the clarity
of their statements this morning. I believe that they
demonstrated how the United Nations, the African
Union and the European Union are working together
in close cooperation for peace in the Central African
Republic. I also thank their teams, which are made up
of people who devote all their efforts and energy in the
service of achieving lasting peace.

I join other delegations in conveying our
condolences to the families and Governments of the
Blue Helmets of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) who lost their lives. I would like
to say that today their work is more necessary than
ever. The Kingdom of the Netherlands is concerned
about and condemns the escalation of intercommunal
violence and attacks against civilians, MINUSCA and
humanitarian workers. Today I will focus on three
aspects of how to respond to the crisis: first, the need
to strengthen our support for the African Initiative for
Peace and Reconciliation; secondly, the need to protect
civilians and prevent incitement to violence; and,
thirdly, the imperative redeployment of the Central
African Armed Forces.

My first point concerns the peace process conducted
under the African Initiative. The Netherlands welcomes
the work of Mr. Nebie and the panel of facilitators. In
particular, we welcome the holding of consultations
with armed groups. However, the increase in violence
is undermining the peace process. We firmly condemn
such acts and call on armed groups to lay down their
weapons. The security of the people in Central Africa
must improve so that an inclusive dialogue to achieve
peace can begin. We encourage the African Union and
MINUSCA to continue working in close cooperation in
complementarity. We welcome MINUSCA's efforts to
arrive at local agreements and support local initiatives
to promote peace. Moreover, the Netherlands welcomes
the initiative of President Touadera to reactivate the
three bilateral joint commissions between the Central
African Republic and Cameroon, Chad and the Sudan.
We call on the countries of the region to constructively
commit to aggressively confronting the cross-
border roots underlying the conflict in the Central
African Republic.

Secondly, I underscore the urgent need to protect
civilians. They continue to be the first targets in the
relentless violence. The protection of civilians must
remain MINUSCA's priority. We encourage the Mission
to further strengthen its early-warning mechanisms,
but it alone cannot stop the threat of hateful rhetoric,
which is toxic to peace in the Central African Republic.
The Government of the Netherlands calls on the Central
African Government, as well as political and religious
leaders, to act to end incitement to violence. We welcome
the recent declaration issued by the High Council for
Communication and encourage the operationalization
of its Office. There can be no peace without justice. In
that regard, the progress of the Special Criminal Court
is commendable, in particular the adoption of the rules
of procedure and evidence.

My third point concerns the importance of
strengthening State authority, which is necessary
for achieving a lasting solution. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands welcomes the contribution of the
European Union Military Training Mission (EUTM)
to the training of the Central African Armed Forces.
We recognize, however, that more support is needed
to redeploy the EUTM-trained forces. We welcome the
recent letter from the Secretary-General describing
the conditions under which MINUSCA could play
a role in that regard (S/2018/463). We believe that in
the current circumstances it is crucial that the Council
take a decision on this matter as soon as possible. We
call on all international partners contributing to the
redeployment of security forces to strengthen their
coordination efforts.

We are alarmed, as is the Secretary-General, by
the increase in intercommunal violence. A few weeks
ago, a young Central African woman working for peace
showed us the threats she receives every day on social
networks. No one should fear for their lives because
of their ethnic origin or religion. We must prevent this
conflict from escalating.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my thanks to
the Special Representative, Mr. Onanga-Anyanga, for
his considerable efforts and leadership.

