Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): First of all, I
would like to thank Mr. Serry for his informative
briefing. I think we all owe thanks and respect to the
members of the Secretariat, who do such important
work on this issue. I would also like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to speak today on
this very important issue. It might seem trite to refer to
this as an important issue, but it is important to all of
us, wherever we live, including in Australia. We spoke
at some length on this in the General Assembly, so I
will be brief today.

As a firm friend of Israel and of the Palestinian
people, Australia shares the vision of two States,
Palestine and Israel, living side by side in peace,
security and security. We welcome the statement of the
Middle East Quartet of 15 December 2008, reiterating
its support for the ongoing negotiations through the
Annapolis process. We were encouraged by the
commitment of the parties to the Quartet on
9November 2008 at Sharm el-Sheikh to "vigorous,
ongoing and continuous negotiations", and of course to
implementing their respective obligations under the
Road Map for peace.

The progress made at Annapolis must not be lost.
That is why it is important that, irrespective of the
composition of the leadership in Israel or the
Palestinian Authority, this progress must continue, and
they must expedite bilateral negotiations and of course
abide by their obligations under the Road Map.

Australia is deeply concerned by the
humanitarian situation in Gaza, which we referenced a
few weeks ago during Israel's recent appearance at the
Human Rights Council in the context of the Universal
Periodic Review process. We are very much concerned
by the resumption of violence and indiscriminate
attacks against Israel, which we have condemned. We
strongly support the Quartet's call for the Egyptian-
brokered ceasefire to be respected and extended.
Australia echoes the Quartet's call for humanitarian
supplies into Gaza to be assured continuously.

Like all right-thinking nations, Australia supports
efforts to achieve a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace between Israel and its neighbours, consistent
with the Security Council's resolutions, including its
most recent resolution on the subject, resolution 1850
(2008). We welcome renewed interest in the Saudi-
sponsored Arab Peace Initiative as a possible basis for
further discussions, and hope that progress can be
made on the Israel-Syria track.

Peace will be achieved only with the support of
the international community. Of course, it is the
parties' principals who will have to make peace, but we
have a deep and serious responsibility to support that

process. Both the Israelis and the Palestinians have
asked us to support their efforts by promoting an
environment conducive to peace, non-violence and the
two-State solution. The Quartet has similarly called on
all of us to provide diplomatic and political support
and to assist in building the institutions necessary for a
future Palestinian State.

Australia is committed to providing that support
and we stand ready to assist in any way we can.

