Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The tone of today's discussion has, of course,
been set by the most recent report of the Secretary-
General on East Timor. We support the basic provisions
of the report and its conclusions, including the
recommendation to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) for a final period, to 20 May 2002.

We agree with the Secretary-General's conclusion
that the people of East Timor and the international
community have reason to be proud, given everything
that they have achieved to date. We commend the work
done by UNTAET, carried out under the wise and
effective guidance of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Sergio Vieira de Mello, as well as
the progress achieved towards establishing statehood in
the territory through independence.

We welcome in particular the successful
Timorization of authority in the territory - in our
view, that is the only true path towards building an
independent, stable State. On the whole, we believe
that the United Nations has played a key role in
resolving the crisis in East Timor; now we must
envisage the evolution of the role of the Organization
within the international community's post-conflict
presence in the new State. In this regard, we fully agree
with the approach set out by the representative of the
United States of America. We believe that the scale,
configuration and time frame for the future
international presence should be determined by
analysing the real needs of East Timor, as well as the
pace of developments in the situation on the island,
taking full account of the position of the Government
of the country.

We support in principle the idea that the overall
duration of the future mission should not exceed two
years. We are convinced that in helping to establish an
independent State we need to involve a broad spectrum
of organizations and agencies from within the United
Nations system. At the same time, regional structures,
international financial institutions and individual donor
countries should bolster the efforts of the United
Nations, which will have to play a coordinating role in
this process.

We also believe that as State structures are
established in East Timor, the international presence
should gradually be wound down. All of these
processes, including the transition from UNTAET to
the new form of the United Nations presence, should be
smooth and carefully regulated so that the
achievements of the United Nations in East Timor can
continue successfully.

In the light of the points that I have just made, we
support the thrust of, as well as the specific ideas
contained in, the most recent report of the Secretary-
General. We pay tribute to the Secretariat and
UNTAET for the enormous amount of work that they
have done in developing ideas regarding the future
United Nations presence. In this context, however, we
must once again note that so far we have not been
given a unified, comprehensive concept of future
international assistance by the United Nations to East
Timor. We are focusing on that issue because we are
convinced that, without such a concept, the future
activities of the United Nations in East Timor will be
based, at best, on mere serendipity, rather than on well
calculated, long-term strategies.

It is clear to us that a responsible approach to this
matter would require not only expertise, but close
coordination of action with all the international players
that will be providing assistance to East Timor. We are

not talking about giving additional work to any United
Nations or international institutions; we are saying that
we need to ensure a well-organized, well-thought-out
division of labour between them, in accordance with
their relevant competences.

We hope that the Secretary-General's detailed
proposals to the Security Council will be submitted in
good time - ideally by early April - so that the
Security Council can elaborate the mandate for the new
mission without undue haste, and thus help to foster a
smooth outcome to the situation after East Timor gains
independence.

