Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): First of all, I would like to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council during October and to assure you of my
delegation's full cooperation. I would also like to
express our appreciation to the permanent
representative of the United Kingdom, Ambassador
Emyr Jones Parry, for his innovative presidency last
month.

We learned with consternation of the outbreak of
violence that has recurred in the Middle East over the
past two days, which has been marked by the attack in
Haifa and the raids into Syrian territory.

All of these acts are serious violations of the
terms of the Quartet's road map, of the ceasefire
agreement of 1974 between Israel and Syria and of
international law. Such acts are dangerous because they
jeopardize the prospects for a speedy return to peace
and security in the region - prospects that are already
very weak. Cameroon has always condemned all acts
of terrorism. We believe that there can be no
justification for such acts and that no cause can
legitimize them. Similarly, Cameroon, which is
resolutely committed to combating that scourge, is
convinced that our common struggle must be
undertaken with full respect for fundamental human
rights and international law.

Faced with this dangerous escalation, we call on
all of the parties to demonstrate a great deal of restraint
at this extremely difficult and delicate time. We call on
them to refrain from any initiative that might
exacerbate the situation. We call on them to respect
their commitments - contained both in the road map
and in earlier agreements. Finally, we call on them to
put an end to the cycle of violence in the Middle East
so as to facilitate a resumption of dialogue.

We urgently appeal to the international
negotiators, in particular the Quartet, immediately to
take actions aimed at the containment of the situation
and to accelerate the taking of bold steps, which the
Secretary-General referred to on 26 September. Such
bold steps, in keeping with the road map, should deal
simultaneously with the fundamental needs of the two
parties, namely, security for Israel and an end to
occupation for Palestine.

It goes without saying that if such measures are
not taken we will run the risk, as the Secretary-General
warned us, of having to pay a heavy price. Recent
events make clear the urgent need for what Cameroon
terms comprehensive disarmament in the Middle
East- a disarmament policy aimed in particular at
cultural disarmament, which would eradicate war
psychosis and the violence in people's hearts and show
the various parties that their survival depends, not on
the results of war, but on the outcome of negotiations.

We have just received a copy of a draft
resolution. Immediately after the end of this public
meeting we will transmit it to our capital and await
instructions.

