Lord Ashdown: Thank you, Mr. President, for
inviting me here today.

It is a special pleasure to be here - and not just
with my colleague Judge Theodor Meron, President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, with whom we have worked extremely
closely. We shall both speak about our joint plans to
create a domestic capacity for prosecuting war crimes
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I also express my pleasure
at being here with my colleague the Ambassador of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. One of the features of the last
year has been an increasingly close partnership
between the Bosnian authorities and us. I pay tribute
not only to the Ambassador, but also to the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities for all they have done to make
that possible.

First, I would like to give the Council a more
general view of the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. My report to the Secretary-General,
annexed to document S/2003/918, which has been
distributed to members of the Council, covers the
period 12 October 2002 to 31 August 2003. That report
will be the basis of my briefing today.

When I was here last I had been in office for just
over four months. If I recall correctly, I spoke then
about my priorities, my intentions and my plans for the
future. Today I would like to update the Council on
what we have actually done in accordance with those
original intentions, and on the concrete achievements
of the past year. Let me stress that they are not my
achievements; they are the achievements of the
international community working in partnership with
the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina. I shall then
turn to what we in the Office of the High
Representative believe are the challenges that still lie
ahead of us.

I am conscious that the Council's time and
attention have, for obvious reasons, been taken up by
events elsewhere in the world since I last reported. The
Balkans are - thankfully, let me underline - no
longer at the centre of the international agenda of
problems. In so far as there is a renewed interest in the
Balkans, it is because what has happened there as a
result of the United Nations having taken the lead in
peace and stabilization issues now offers us more
opportunities than difficulties.

Out of the glare of the media spotlight, the slow,
unglamorous - but vital - work of entrenching
Bosnia and Herzegovina's peace has continued. I
remain impatient with the speed of that work, as indeed
I must. I am well known, I fear, by my staff and by
some in Bosnia and Herzegovina alike, as being a
deeply impatient man. I think, by the by, that Bosnia
and Herzegovina needs more impatient people. But
although I remain impatient, I am happy to report that I
believe that real progress is now being made.

Under the slogan with which we started my
mandate - "Justice and Jobs" - we have maintained
our primary focus on the two key priorities:
establishing the rule of law and reforming Bosnia and
Herzegovina's weak and aid-dependent economy. It
might be argued that those are priorities that we should
have been pushing earlier, but they are now being
pushed ahead fast 4 for some uncomfortably fast.

The process of bringing Bosnia and
Herzegovina's police forces up to European and
international standards goes on apace. The European
Union Police Mission, which picked up where the
United Nations left off, monitoring and mentoring the
police officers that the International Police Task Force
trained and certified, has continued.

The Herculean task of reforming the entire
judiciary and court system continues apace, and is on
track for completion in the next five to six months,
thanks in large measure to the exceptional work done
by my colleague Bernard Fassier, Senior Deputy High
Representative who, with your agreement, Mr.
President, may add a word or two later, particularly on
domestic war crimes issues.

Thanks to that work, I am proud to be able to tell
the Council that, as a result of the efforts that have
been made, not least by the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina themselves, Bosnia and Herzegovina is
now the first country in the Balkans to have the
archetypal prerequisite of a modern State: complete
separation between the judicial branch and the
executive. We have now created independent high
judicial and prosecutorial Councils to ensure that that
separation is properly maintained.

Meanwhile, the new State Court, with its special
panels for organized crime, has been created from
scratch. It is staffed with international as well as
Bosnian prosecutors and judges, who, working in
partnership, are armed with new criminal codes and
criminal procedure codes written by Bosnian lawyers.
That structure was introduced last January and the
Court is now engaged in trying and convicting
criminals. The Special Chamber will shortly hear the
biggest human-trafficking case in Bosnian history - a
case which has not just involved the illegal trafficking
of women, but one in which those who are charged, if
found guilty, will prove to have been among those
people who have held to ransom a certain area of
Bosnia and Herzegovina for far too long.

It is not just organized criminal networks,
however, that we are after. In the past year, we have
begun systematically to attack the networks that
provide sustenance and support to war criminals as
well. By taking aggressive action to block their bank
accounts and investigate their businesses and by
restricting, through European Union and other visa-ban
processes, their freedom to travel, we are slowly
tightening the noose around the likes of Radovan
Karadzic and those who helped him to evade justice, so
making it inevitable that they will soon be brought to
justice.

There is a long, long way to go - of course there
is - and I do not wish in any sense to be complacent
about the journey that has still to be travelled.
Nevertheless, bit by bit, Bosnia's lawless rule is being
replaced by the rule of law.

On the economic front, we have started to drive a
bulldozer through the mass of red tape and regulations
that entangles businesses, prevents enterprise and
deters investment. Bosnia's business community has
come together on what has become known as the
"bulldozer committee", a panel of local business
representatives - I stress "local" - that prepares
concrete, practical reforms and, in the first - ever civil
society dialogue with Government, puts them to
Governments and Parliaments for adoption. It has
proved highly successful.

The authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Governments and Parliaments have risen to the
challenge that is put to them by the country's business
community. Fifty economic reforms that make it easier
to form businesses and start enterprises have been
passed in 180 days and another 50 are in the pipeline.
There surely cannot be many countries represented in
this building that have reformed their economies to
liberalize their markets with such aggressive speed.

Again, there is still a very long way to go, but, as
noted in the recent country report on Bosnia and
Herzegovina from the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) - not well known for handing out easy
praise - the macroeconomic framework of Bosnia is
being strengthened at commendable speed. Indeed, the
report says that the macroeconomic framework over
the past year has been strengthened at a faster pace
than the IMF had previously known for similar
countries in a similar position.

Meanwhile, for some time now we have also
enjoyed low inflation and a stable currency, thanks in
no small measure to the excellent work of the Central
Bank and its Governor, Peter Nicholl, one of the
primary architects of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
economic stability and one of the unsung heroes of the
peace implementation process.

Now we are tackling the other great structural
reforms, starting with the public finances that affect the
ordinary citizen. Bosnia and Herzegovina's elaborate,
excessively decentralized governmental structure was
designed to protect group political interests, not to
meet individual citizens' needs. One of the changes
that Bosnia and Herzegovina has to make is from a
structure designed to protect groups to a structure
designed to protect individual citizens. That system -
the result, of course, of the Dayton Agreement -
means that Bosnia and Herzegovina has 13 Prime
Ministers, 10 cantonal assemblies, five Presidents, four
levels of Government, three Parliaments, two armies
and one vast administrative structure that can no longer
be afforded if money is to go to ordinary citizens rather
than to governance and bureaucracy.
That is why the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities began this summer to reform the revenue
system by creating a single, State-level indirect tax
authority to replace the two rotten, corruption-prone
entity customs and tax administrations that we have in
place at the moment. This reform will also lead to the
introduction of a modern, European-standard value
added tax (VAT) system for the whole of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Our target date is 1 January 2006 - two
years after we believe the legislation will be passed at
the end of this winter. If we manage to achieve that, the
introduction of a VAT system in such a fractured
country in such a short period of time will, I think, be
remarkable - about two and a half times faster than
any other country will have done it - but that is our
aim and we are determined to stick to it.

Securing the revenue base is only part of the
picture, of course, which is why the authorities have
agreed to further bear down on public expenditure,
reform the public administration and reduce the Size of
the public sector. This is a major, central and urgent
task for the year ahead. As the IMF has recently stated,
the benefits of such changes are already beginning to
make themselves felt. As we bear down on public
expenditure, we believe, savings equivalent to about 1
per cent of the gross domestic product could be
expected in next year's budget. We should be able to
return those savings to the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

I think I can say that the agenda I outlined last
year has begun to take shape and that the reforms have
begun to bite. I would not underestimate the task that is
ahead of us, but we are nevertheless broadly where I
hoped we would be when I spoke to the Council a year
ago.

Perhaps more encouraging even than this, the
Council may find, is a less measurable but more
important shift that I think we can say we have started
to detect. It is relatively easy relatively quickly to
change the "hardware" of the State - its institutions. It
is much more difficult to change the "software" of the
State - people's attitudes and their sense of
belonging- but here, slowly, changes appear to be
coming, too. There has been a shift in the political
culture, a shift in the political mindset. It would be
easy, of course, to overstate the case, but there are now
the first signs that the Bosnian authorities are
beginning to move beyond the old, sterile,
confrontational politics of the immediate post-conflict
period and towards a more rational, more pragmatic
politics focused on the bread-and-butter issues of
everyday concern to their constituents and citizens.

That is not to say, of course, that the old enmities
have died away or that deep-rooted suspicions do not
remain. Of course they do. It would be remarkable if
they did not, given that we are a mere seven years
away from a war in which 250,000 people were
killed- a higher proportion of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's population than most European
countries sustained in the Second World War.
Nevertheless, the events of the past year, I think, do
give cause for some guarded optimism. Let me explain
why.

Since the turn of the year, we have established
four commissions, each composed - let me
underline- entirely of representatives from Bosnia
and Herzegovina, under international chairmanship. We
may chair, but they do. Those commissions have been
tasked to tackle four of the most intractable issues
facing the country, issues that until very recently we all
considered to be too neuralgic, too difficult, to discuss:
the creation of a State-level tax administration, which I
referred to a few moments ago; the introduction of a
unified State-level command and control for the armed
forces, parting company with the strictures of Dayton;
the creation of a modern, democratically-accountable
State-level intelligence service; and the political and
administrative unification of the still terribly divided
city of Mostar.

It is too early to say with absolute certainty
whether these will all meet with success, but the early
signs are very encouraging. The Mostar Commission
has just been established and is expected to report
around the end of the year, but the other three
commissions have all operated in an atmosphere of
genuine, constructive debate, produced high-quality,
European-standard legislative reforms, and forwarded
them to Governments and Parliaments for adoption in
the next couple of months.

I argue that these reforms are in many ways the
most significant since the end of the Bosnian war
almost eight years ago - significant because, for the
first time, they have begun to break out of the Dayton
prison. For the first time, they have used a previously
neglected clause in the Dayton Peace Agreement
allowing entities to pass some competencies from the
entity level to the State in areas such as tax, defence
and intelligence. That has strengthened the State as a
functioning organ in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It has
also provided a way for the three people working
together in constructive dialogue to turn the golden key
that unlocks the door of the Dayton prison.
In this way, the foundations of Dayton are finally
being built on - through consensus, not by imposition
of the international community - by the Bosnian
authorities, through the Bosnian institutions, so as to
build a more rational, more affordable and more
sustainable State. Dayton is being used, not as in the
past to block reform, but to enable it. We have started
to amend Dayton within Dayton by agreement between
the peoples. In a real sense the constitution of the
country has now become the property of its people, not
of the international community.

I would like to stress that this has happened not
because of the coercive power of the High
Representatives, the threat of imposition or removal,
but because of the magnetic pull of the Euro-Atlantic
structures - NATO and the European Union. That
magnetic pull has now become as powerful as - and,
in my view, it will become more powerful than - the
scourge of the Bonn powers. That has started,
genuinely, to take hold. It was that factor, far more than
any threat from me, that resulted in the real changes
that have taken place through the four commissions to
which I referred earlier.

The significance of this fact is, in my View,
already becoming apparent. Not only are we able
steadily to tick the boxes of the Mission
Implementation Plan of the Office of the High
Representative - our guiding document as we track
towards a change in that Office's mission - but we are
able to do so increasingly without resorting so often to
the use of the extraordinary and - let us face it -
draconian powers invested in my Office. Indeed, I am
glad to say that I have had to impose only half as many
laws and amendments this year as I did last year - a
trend that I hope and anticipate will continue into 2004.
That is a trend that we planned should happen, and it is
happening.

That is the good news, and I would submit that
there is a fair amount of it. There is, of course, bad
news, and it would be wrong of me not to outline the
task ahead.

The pace of reform remains too slow. The green
shoots of the new type of politics that I have described
may have started to appear, but I must stress that they
remain fragile and could still be easily killed off. The
new institutions that we have created are weak, under-
funded and too often dysfunctional. The forces of
criminality, obstruction and disintegration in Bosnian
politics may be on the retreat, but they remain very
powerful. The enemy is still there.
That brings me, finally, to the substantive topic of
our discussion today: the unfinished business of
bringing the war criminals of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to justice and the need to develop a local capacity
capable of taking over from the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia.

I need not remind members of the Security
Council that resolution 1503 (2003), adopted on 28
August, noted that the establishment of a War Crimes
Chamber within the State Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is an essential prerequisite for achieving
the objectives of the ICTY Completion Strategies and
for pushing forward the process of peace and
reconciliation. I would argue that it is also essential in
the task of investing Bosnia and Herzegovina with the
attributes of statehood. I wholeheartedly agree, of
course, with that resolution, and I am proud that I will
shortly be able to hand over to my colleague, Judge
Meron, the Tribunal's President, who will speak on this
subject from the perspective of the ICTY.

But before I do so I would like to make a few
brief comments. First of all, let me underline the
commitment of my Office, and of all the other
international agencies in Bosnia and Herzegovina, to
ensuring the success of this project. We are only too
aware of the pernicious influence that indicted war
criminals like Mr. Karadzic are still able to exert over
Bosnia's political environment. Mr. Karadzic may no
longer be able to block the process of reform, but he
remains a baleful curse over the whole country, and the
sooner that that is removed, the better. We know that
peace cannot be described as fully entrenched until the
perpetrators of the unspeakable crimes are finally
brought to justice.

But there is little point in willing the ends unless
we are also prepared to will the means. We have,
collectively, made a good start. At the behest of the
Security Council and the Peace Implementation
Council (PIC), the Office of the High Representative
and the ICTY have, together with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Council of
Europe and the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
produced detailed recommendations for the creation of
a War Crimes Chamber within the State Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Within my Office, that effort
has been led with great skill and dedication by my
friend and colleague, Ambassador Bernard Fassier,
who is sitting behind me.

I was tasked by the PIC Steering Board to
establish an Implementation Task Force, co-chaired by
my Office and the Minister for Justice of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. That Task Force has, in turn, established
a number of working groups to deal with specific
issues relevant to the project, such as the renovation of
the buildings where the trials will take place, the
preparation of the legal framework, the review and
transfer of ICTY cases and other related issues, not the
least of which is witness protection.

My Office is also in the process of establishing a
functioning State-level police force with investigative
and law-enforcement powers. A witness protection
department is also envisaged, and should become
operational early next year. That department will need
to expand over the course of the year if it is to provide
protection for witnesses in war crimes cases.

Another issue that will need to be dealt with in
the months ahead is the current lack of a State-level
detention facility to serve such a capacity. The
Implementation Task Force will need to address this, as
well as the myriad of other problems involved in this
project.

So we are making progress. But let me stress - I
know that Judge Meron and Bernard Fassier will do
likewise - that all of this is dependent on sufficient
funding being found. If we will the ends, we have to
will the means. I would like to remind the Council that
the project has been costed at 28 million Euros for the
first five years, plus - if we choose to follow that
route - an additional 11 million Euros for the
construction and operation of a State-level prison. I
simply invite those who find that expensive, to
compare it to the costs of running the Tribunal at The
Hague. But at the start, these two projects will have to
be run in parallel. Some of that extra money will, of
course, be met from the budget of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. But it will inevitably require substantial
international funding too.

We have already received pledges for funding
from several Governments, and in this respect I am
grateful and pay tribute to the Governments of
Germany, the United Kingdom the United States and
Italy. But we are nowhere near the targets yet. That is
why I appeal to all members to exercise maximum
influence for maximum attendance at the donor's
conference in The Hague at the end of this month.

To sum up, I think that we are close to finishing
the job in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are close to our
first, historic success in this relatively new but very
difficult business of peace implementation. We cannot,
however, bring closure to Bosnia and Herzegovina's
terrible war, and we cannot bring peace to the relatives
and loved ones of that war's 250,000 victims, until
those who bear the guilt for that suffering are brought
to justice. We owe it to them to make this project
succeed. And I believe that we will.

