Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I wanted to take the
floor because we are at an important point in this region.
I also want to welcome the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General back to the Security Council and,
through him, to thank the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) for everything it is doing. It
was also extremely helpful to have the update from
the Ambassador of the Congo. I would like to start by
saying to my good friend the Ambassador of Equatorial
Guinea that the contribution that his country makes is
not modest. It is much more than that.

It has been five years since the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework was signed. It has proved to
be crucial to pursuing peace and stability in the Great
Lakes region. But as the Special Representative and
the Ambassador of the Congo have spelled out, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has always been
at the centre of the Framework, and the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo - the nerve
centre - affects the stability of the region. As the
Council has discussed in recent days, we are now at
a critical juncture. What happens in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo over the next few months could
be a defining moment for greater regional stability. We
have a choice between seeing the situation improve or
seeing it overturned. The United Kingdom, for its part,
remains committed to supporting the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and
to the holding of free, fair and credible elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in December.
We welcome the progress that has been made in
the five years since the signing of the Framework. I
would like to highlight the increase in the participation
of women and the commitment to greater regional and
international cooperation in the course of advancing
peace and security. Nevertheless, we are concerned
about the fact that progress has not been made in
the implementation of key elements, including the
repatriation of foreign combatants. As the Ambassador
of the Congo highlighted, we welcome efforts to
reinvigorate the Framework, and urge all its signatories
to implement it in full. We are very supportive of what
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
had to say on judicial issues.

We are also concerned about the continued
proliferation of violence in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, particularly in North and South Kivu,
Tanganyika, lturi and the Kasais. The results of that
instability have indeed been devastating. A total of
4.5 million Congolese have fled their homes and
communities. There are more internally displaced
people in the Democratic Republic of the Congo than
anywhere else in Africa, and more than 13.1 million
people are in need of humanitarian assistance and
protection. We therefore support the other calls that
have been made in the Council for regional players
to come together in the interest of stability in the
coming months. I also would like to endorse what the
French Ambassador said about the importance of that
regional cooperation.

I would like to conclude by talking about elections.
Credible and constitutional elections are the only way
to end the political crisis and achieve stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and we urge the
signatories of the Framework to ensure that peaceful and
credible elections can take place in December 2018. That
means that the electoral calendar must be respected, key
milestones met and the confidence-building measures
of the 2016 December agreement implemented in full.
Critically, that includes freeing political prisoners and
opening the political space and permitting peaceful
demonstrations. This is a region that is in all our
interests. The United Kingdom pledges to work together
with partners to achieve progress.

I have some other remarks on other aspects of
the region and the Framework, but I will save them
for consultations.

