Mr. Gokool (Mauritius): First of all, on behalf of
my delegation, I express our deepest sympathy to and
solidarity with the Government and people of
Afghanistan for their losses suffered as a result of the
devastating earthquake in the north of the country.

Let me join others in thanking the Secretary-
General for the very comprehensive and detailed report
and Ms. Frechette for her statement this morning.

Mr. President, your chairing this meeting today
signifies how much Norway takes to heart the peace
process in Afghanistan. We are very grateful for this.

Mauritius fully supports the recommendations
and observations made in the report. As observed in its
paragraph 116, we must set realistic and achievable
objectives, which we can attain only through genuine
commitment and determination. We agree that
Afghanistan now has the chance at least to be a country
at peace with its neighbours and itself. We must,
however, strive hard to translate this into reality.

Among other things, two important ingredients
for the success of reconstruction and rehabilitation
programmes are, first, the readiness of the Afghans
themselves to assume responsibility for rebuilding their
country, and, secondly, the continued effort and
commitment of the international community. Reading
through the report, my delegation has no doubt that
both ingredients are adequately expressed. We
appreciate the majestic strides made towards normalcy
and peace by the Interim Administration.

We also appreciate the preparatory work for the
convening of the emergency Loya Jirga, which would
pave the way for a broad-based multi-ethnic, multi-
religious representative assembly for a united
Afghanistan.

We support the proposal for a single mission, the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), which will bring all humanitarian and
reconstruction activities under one umbrella.

Like other delegations, we too believe that the
challenges of UNAMA will be multifaceted and
complex. Any shortcoming or delay in the
implementation process of the plan would reverse all
achievements. Complacency, procrastination and
unnecessary delays in extending the pledges of support,
financial or otherwise, would be a real impediment. We
must at all cost avoid the effects of the domino theory
and start putting all efforts into the reconstruction of
Afghanistan, which could take many, many years to
complete.

In this regard, we have just asked ourselves what
the priorities should be. I would like to enumerate four
of these. The first priority is security assurance. As the
report mentions in paragraph 45, the unstable security
situation in certain parts of the country remains a very
worrying factor. A stable and peaceful life cannot be
possible in a country where the threat of violence and
ethnic rivalry prevails. Recent incidents in Afghanistan
prove once again how dangerous it would be for the
international community to operate without assured
security. The Interim Administration is trying to build
its capacity for providing peace and security to the
Afghan people.

To meet Afghanistan's immediate needs, my
delegation fully supports the proposal for an expanded
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), an
extended mandate as suggested by Chairman Karzai.
Any effort to address the immediate concerns of
Afghanistan without prioritizing the security aspect
would fail to produce the desired results.

Secondly, the reconciliation process should not be
delayed. The clashes between Afghan political leaders
in certain provinces are matters of real concern. No
political advancement towards a broad-based and
representative Government in Afghanistan will be
possible if ethnic rivalries are left unchecked. We must
ensure that the establishment of the emergency Loya
Jirga will give due consideration to ethnic and regional
differences and will help accommodate the parties in a
fair and equitable manner.

Thirdly, I would like to associate myself with the
comments of other delegations concerning the question
of narcotic drugs and drug trafficking, which should be
urgently addressed. The pre-assessment survey of
opium poppy cultivation conducted by the United
Nations International Drug Control Programme
confirms earlier indications that cultivation has
resumed at a relatively high level throughout the
country, after the considerable decline in 2001. As
terrorism exploits the drug trade, the international
community should take prompt action in this regard.
We welcome the decree passed on 22 December by the
Interim Administration banning the cultivation,
production, processing, use of and trafficking in illicit
drugs. We hope that the restructured Afghan police will
effectively deal with that problem.

Fourthly, with regard to humanitarian concerns,
no political process will succeed in bringing about
stability and peace in Afghanistan if the humanitarian
situation is not addressed in the right way and at the
right time. The plight of refugees and displaced
persons must be given the consideration that it
deserves. More than 20 per cent of the Afghan
population has been displaced; the poverty rate is
increasing at an alarming pace; food distribution to the
needy in the affected areas is uneven; and blatant
abuses of human rights, especially those of women and
children, have rent the social fabric of the country. My
delegation feels that it is high time for the international
community to focus its efforts on seeking appropriate
solutions to the humanitarian problems. We welcome
the proposal to confer responsibility for relief, recovery
and reconstruction activities in Afghanistan on the
Deputy Special Representative, to whom we wish
every success in this regard.

We believe that the international community's
efforts in Afghanistan should lead to durable results. It
is the belief of my delegation that in our efforts we
must ensure that the Afghan reality is kept fully in
View.

Finally, I would like to stress that national
prosperity is furthered not by war but by peace, and
that it is not to be found in opposition or confrontation,
but in cooperation. It is a positive-sum game, in which
all the parties win. The partnership between the
international community and the Afghan people
represents a leap forward, and this process needs to be
further promoted in order successfully to realize
programmes to rebuild Afghanistan. We hope that
international multilateral and bilateral donors will
continue to contribute to the development of
Afghanistan.

