The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation.

A year ago, the Russian Federation raised the
question of undertaking, under the auspices of
the Security Council, a comprehensive analysis of
problems related to the suddent outbreak of terrorism
and extremism in the Middle East and North Africa.
Since then, the situation there has deteriorated further.
The growing potential of the crisis has reached the
point where it is possible to speak of the destruction
of the political map of the region as it stood back then.

Today, we can clearly claim that attempts to address
the situation in isolation, without linking it to the overall
regional and historical context of individual conflicts,
are futile. We addressed the situations in Iraq, Libya,
Yemen, Lebanon and Syria in that way in their time,
seeking each time to convince one another that if only
we resolved that specific problem everything would be
fine. In most cases, solutions were often sought in a
change of that particular regime or others at any price,
with no regard for the consequences and without a
comprehensive strategy or even a short-term vision of
the following two or three steps.

The euphoria that engulfed many following the
Arab Spring Changed to horror with the spread of chaos,
the escalation of violence, the shadow of religious
warfare looming over the region and, of course, the
unprecedented terrorist threat. The heinous activities
of the Al-Nusra Front, Al-Qaida in Iraq, Al-Qaida in
the Islamic Maghreb, the Yemeni branch of Al-Qaida,
Al-Shabaab in Somalia, Boko Haram and other groups
have faded in the light of the expansion of the so-called
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Across
the territories of Iraq and Syria, ISIL has created an
extremist quasi-State on the ground that possesses a
vast repressive aparatus, stable sources of income, a
well-equipped army and elements of weapons of mass
destruction.

ISIL cells are flourishing in Libya, Afghanistan
and elsewhere. Its announced plans include the capture
of Mecca, Medina and Jerusalem and the spread of its
evil activities to Europe, Central and South-East Asia,
and Russia. These terrorists carry out mass killings and
public executions, and threaten the very existence of
various ethno-religious groups, including Christians,
Kurds and Alawites. ISIL has a professional propaganda
machine active in dozens of languages.

Today, as the merciless expansion of terrorists
leads to an uncontrolled wave of population movements
to Europe, we recognize the damage that has been
done and that there is a need for joint action. We note
that, at the recent informal summit of the European
Council in Luxembourg and the Prague summit of
the Visegrad Group, it was clearly recognized that the
migration crisis cannot be resolved until its root causes
are addressed - in other words, until a solid bulwark
is erected to block ISIL and its desire to subjugate the
region with laws dating back to the Middle Ages. We
should not be stopping the refugees but the terrorists
and conflicts and war they engender.

The Russian assessment of the situation was clearly
spelled out in the statement made by President Putin
at the general debate of the General Assembly on
28 September (see A/70/PV.13). We do not seek to drive
the discussion in the fruitless direction of saying who is
right and who is guilty, but unless we learn the lessons
to be drawn from the reckless, mistaken adventures
undertaken over the past 10 or 12 years, we will not
be successful. The main lesson is that any unilateral
actions are dangerous. What we need are collective,
agreed approaches that are backed by Security Council
decisions. We believe that has to begin with a clear
and unambiguous determination of priorities. In that
connection, in our view, there is a clear understanding
that the main threat is terrorist aggression, embodied,
as it is, in the actions of ISIL.

We believe that should be followed by consistent,
practical steps in three key, interconnected areas. First,
it is necessary to combine and coordinate the efforts
of those who are able to make a real contribution to
the fight against terrorism, namely, the armed forces
of Syria and Iraq, the Kurdish militias, the armed
ranks of the patriotic Syrian opposition - in short,
anyone who opposes ISIL on the ground, as well as
outside actors who in one way or another can support
counter-terrrorism efforts in the region. It is essential
that such coordination be based on decisions of the
Security Council, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations. In planning joint action in the
fight against ISIL, use could be made of the potential
of such a Charter-established body as the Military
Staff Committee. This is precisely a case in which the
military expertise of the permanent members of the
Security Council is needed, in the interest of maximum
efficiency in counter-terrorist efforts in the region.

Secondly, there is a need to step up progress on
the intra-Syrian dialogue on the basis of the Geneva
communique of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex).
We support the efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and we are
making our contribution to launching a political process
that brings together representatives from the entire
spectrum of opposition forces and the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic.

Thirdly, there is a need for inclusive and balanced
external support for the political process, including the
participation of Russia, the United States of America,
Saudi Arabia, Iran, Turkey, Egypt, the United Arab
Emirates, Jordan and Qatar. In that regard, we believe
that the European Union has a useful role to play. China's
involvement would also boost the chances for success.
We believe that such an array of outside sponsors
acting in unison would help Syrians reach agreement
on the basis of common goals, that is, preventing the
creation of an extremist caliphate and strengthening the
Syrian State on the basis of national reconciliation and
understanding.

While addressing the General Assembly recently
(see A/70/PV.13), President Vladimir Putin proposed
discussing the possibility of a Security Council
resolution on coordinating all forces that want to
stand up against the Islamic State and other terrorist
groups. Today we will present to the members of the
Council a draft resolution based on previously adopted
Council resolutions, with the aim of aligning joint
counter-terrorism efforts on the basis of the norms
of international law. We expect a comprehensive
discussion of this topic in the coming month.

We are mindful of the growth of the threat posed
by ISIL, and there is a need now to forge practical
cooperation on the activities of all forces working to
counter terrorism. On 30 September, following a request
of the Syrian leadership, the President of Russia asked
for and received the consent of the Federation Council
to use the armed forces of the Russian Federation in the
Syrian Arab Republic. I am referring here exclusively
to the use of the Russian air force to carry out strikes
against ISIL positions in Syria. We have informed the
authorities of the United States and other members of
the coalition established by it. We are prepared to set
up open channels of communication to ensure the most
effective fight against terrorist groups.

The most important task is to counter the financing
of terrorism. The ingenuity of terrorists in an effort
to diversify their sources of income cannot but cause
concern. Among their main sources are the illicit trade
in oil and other mineral resources and illegal trafficking
in drugs, weapons and cultural artefacts, as well as
"donations" from sympathizers. In that connection, we
call for more stringent implementation of the provisions
of resolution 2199 (2015) with regard to drawing up
a sanctions list of physical and legal entities that are
trading with the Islamic State. There is also a need to
improve the effectiveness of the Group of Experts of
the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee, systematically and
while taking advantage of the potential of the Financial
Action Task Force on Money Laundering and related
regional structures. We also propose making States
accountable for their implementation of resolution 2199
(2015) in a regular and systematic maner.

We believe that it is necessary to include the
Islamic State as a separate entity on the Security
Council's counter-terrorism sanctions list. Any delay in
addressing this clearly pressing issue would, of course,
be counterproductive in terms of the effectiveness of
United Nations counter-terrorism efforts.

We call for more aggressively countering the
threats posed by foreign terrorist fighters. We need
urgently to establish a single database on such fighters,
develop additional mechanisms for sharing information
on their movements and put in place simplified
procedures for their extradition. Preventive efforts are
of particular importance. First and foremost, we need to
counter incitement to terrorism in line with resolution
1624 (2005), adopted 10 years ago. Since that time, the
urgency of countering terrorist ideology has increased
substantially. Russia's multi-ethnic and multireligious
character gives us unique experience when it comes
to peaceful coexistence among different ethnic groups
and religious communities. We are ready to share our
experience and to learn from our partners.

Preventing terrorism, including in partnership with
civil-society organizations, also entails addressing
Violent extremism. We believe it fundamentally
important that the initiatives now being proposed in
this area be firmly based on international law, including
respect for sovereignty and equality of States and
non-interference in internal affairs. One cannot bandy
about slogans to promote the fight against extremism
in specific countries over the heads of legitimate
Governments. Such attempts have already happened
and have not led to anything good, as everyone here is
aware.

Combating the terrorist threat must go hand in
hand with heightened efforts to resolve various conflict
situations in the region, whether in Syria, Libya or
Yemen. First and foremost, however, this applies to
the longstanding stalemate in the Palestinian-Israeli
question, which is fuelling extremist feelings on the
Arab street. The Quartet of international mediators,
together with Arab States and with the support of other
United Nations Members, must acknowledge their
responsibility for re-establishing direct talks between
Israel and Palestine, on the basis of the concept of two
States. Progress on that track would make a major
contribution to ensuring stability and security for the
peoples of the region.

We look forward to a frank discussion during the
course of today's meetings, as well as in upcoming
meetings. It is important that we listen to one another
as we explain our positions, as well as to find ways
to cooperate on the basis of the Charter of the United
Nations in order to put an end to the terrorist threats and
ensure security in the Middle East and North Africa.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.

I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Wang Yi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the People's Republic
of China.

