Mr. Kalumba (Zambia): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of January 2002. Let me also thank you for convening
this timely meeting to allow us to examine the issues of
conflict in Africa, discuss the causes and propose
possible solutions. Let me thank the Ambassador of
Mali for the able manner in which he chaired the
Council's deliberations during the month of December
2001. I also wish to thank my fellow ministers who
have travelled from various countries to come attend
this important debate. Allow me also to recognize the
presence of our own Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), Mr. Amara
Essy.

My thanks go to the Security Council for
devoting considerable time to organizing this meeting
to address conflict situations in Africa and for the
efforts the members are making to find solutions. It is
important that Governments, regional bodies and our
continental organization, the Organization of African
Unity, complement each other's efforts. In this way,
close cooperation between the Security Council and the
OAU will be of immense value in our efforts to find
solutions to our chronic problems in Africa. In various
forums and declarations, African leaders have pledged
to find solutions to these problems, and yet peace has
eluded us as a continent. I will return to this subject of
leadership in Africa later.

For over 40 years, various parts of Africa have
been afflicted by one kind of conflict or another.
Conflicts have many causes, which may be internal as
well as external. Some are internal, arising from a
myriad of reasons, and often are fuelled by external
forces. Nearly all the most difficult conflicts arise from
the process of State-building. They arise from the
fundamental problems of constructing State structures
that can serve as vehicles for ensuring the security,
sovereignty, dignity and justice of the people. The
process has often bred or generated conflict.

Among these are ineffective governance coupled
with weak institutions, inequality in the distribution of
resources, poverty, ethnicity and regionalism, power
struggles within and among the elite, poor conditions
of service in public institutions, corruption and
nepotism, misallocation of resources, foreign
interference, and instability as a result of a very fluid
political culture.

In his excellent report on the causes of conflict
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa, the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan, noted that the causes were
multifaceted and included historical, internal and
external factors. The curses of colonialism,
neocolonialism, the cold war and now globalization are
the defining factors in understanding the nature and
causes of conflict in Africa. Some of these causes are
external, ranging from ideology to attempts to win
spheres of influence.

Conflicts, whether internal or external, have the
same results. They are ruinous and have a destructive
impact on people, livestock, property and
infrastructure. They provoke distress, fear, aggression
and anxiety. They hinder communication and obstruct
problem solving. They also destroy cohesion and unity.
They lead to the spread of small arms and light
weapons, internal displacement of people and refugees
fleeing across borders, resulting in heavy expenses to
host countries, including my own.

The nature of conflicts in Africa and the diversity
of actors involved in these conflicts require a
fundamental rethinking of African security. The tools
and techniques for managing conflicts include those
suggested by Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali
in "An Agenda for Peace" and by Kofi Annan in his
report on the causes of conflict in Africa and in the
Millennium report, "We, the Peoples".

Conflict prevention is central to poverty reduction
and sustainable development. To work effectively
towards peace, African countries and the international
community have to work together as partners before,
during and after conflict. Promoting peace-building and
conflict prevention and resolution requires that donor
agencies work very closely with the relevant branches
of government and other actors in the international
community.

To achieve a long-term solution, policies need to
be clear, coherent, comprehensive and well coordinated
in order to improve the effectiveness of conflict
prevention and management. Relevant policy areas
include trade, finance and investment, foreign affairs,
defence and development cooperation. Our nations
require economic well-being. The ingredients of
achieving structural stability are social development,
environmental sustainability and regeneration. In
addition, the goals of social peace, respect for the rule
of law and human rights and social and economic
development must be reinforced.

Security, including human security, is a critical
foundation for sustainable development. That means
protection from systematic human rights abuses,
physical threats, violence, extreme economic, social
and environmental risks and threats to territorial
sovereignty. Poverty and insecurity mutually and
systematically reinforce each other. In this context, the
requirement of security goes beyond the classic
requisite of defence from military attack and extends to
well-being and the protection of persons and property.

To achieve meaningful peace, the involvement of
the international community is necessary. Peace-
building hinges on trust, cooperation and deeper
partnership. Donor engagement in the process is
extremely important; we reject the notion of donor
fatigue. Conflict resolution goes with humanitarian
assistance, and development cooperation requires
shared objectives, common approaches to planning
processes, and coordination mechanisms.

The African States have no choice but to work
with the international community to come up with
workable solutions. In a globalized world, there is a
need for all to be part of the solution. We hope that,
with the leadership of the United Nations, particularly
the Security Council, efforts to solve these problems
will continue.

As I conclude on the issue of conflict in Africa, I
wish to touch upon a phenomenon that appears to
underpin the perpetuation of conflict: the crisis of
politics and leadership in Africa, to which I referred
earlier. It is clear that political and social events in
Africa, as elsewhere, are heightening a growing
awareness of the turbulent environment within which
public life has to flourish or falter and within which
systems of governance have to be developed and
implemented. Whether we call it globalization, neo-
colonialism or something else, that evident turbulence
is forcing most Governments into technocratic political
responses that are self-evidently partial, incoherent and
provisional in nature. Consequently, public confidence
in politics and politicians has fallen - more so in
Africa, perhaps, than in other continents. Political
solutions have become numb in the face of growing
problems with unemployment, the AIDS pandemic,
street children, urban housing standards, ethnic tension
and environmental degradation.

The political power structures and traditional
structures of representation that worked so well for the
West are constantly brought into question. Electorates
are, at best, uninterested and, at worst, hostile towards
those in power. We can call this an anti-politics. It is
happening at a time when there is growing diversity in
the media, including the greater reach of those media,
where we can watch wars in real time, the private
agony of public figures in real time and the fiasco of
elections in various countries, both rich and poor, in
real time. And, of course, the Internet links us all into a
global village.

The question, then, is this: Why should the
governance of countries in Africa be in such crisis
today when our people are supposedly better informed?
It is my view that, above many other reasons why
people in Africa, as perhaps elsewhere, are losing faith
in political leaders is not just those leaders'
incompetence and their failure to get the job done as
promised, but rather something bigger. It is an
increasing perception that something is missing in
political life: morality.

The old definition that politics is the art of lying
has come to clash with the search for a moral role in
political leadership, which in politics is said to be
something that the majority of people demand only of
men and women of the church. In Africa, as perhaps
elsewhere, there is a growing popular demand for our
leaders to be both good managers and good preachers
who must be selfless, less cynical, honest and truthful.
The issue, then, is not that people have chosen to
abandon politics but rather that they want more out of
politics: not just effective government, but good
government. "Effective" is a managerial concept, but
"good" is a value judgement the basic indicators of
whose success are broader, less definite and rapidly
changing. And there lie not only Africa's political
crisis but the seeds of political and moral turbulence: a
dynamic that slides countries into war.

