Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): The moment we had
feared has come to pass. Iraq is in the midst of a bitter
war. Some States have come together to invade Iraq
without the authorization of the United Nations. This
unilateral resort to force is compounded by the fact that
progress was being made in dealing with the
disarmament of Iraq through inspections authorized by
the Security Council.

We regret this war, as do millions of people
around the world. We recall the position of the African
Union and the Non-Aligned Movement that war is not
a solution to the world's problems. We reaffirm the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq, and believe
that the people of Iraq must be allowed to determine
their own future and freedom.

Now more than ever, the United Nations must
play a central role in securing an end to the war. The
United Nations is the primary institution that gives
legality and legitimacy to our collective efforts to
secure peace and security in the world. The fear is that
despite optimistic expectations, this war may result in
an unwanted occupation that will further complicate
the achievement of peace and stability in the entire
region.

The war in Iraq must not be allowed to lead to the
erosion of the principles and values that are contained
in the Charter of the United Nations. For more than 50
years, the international community has relied on the
United Nations to address disputes and promote peace
and security in the world. Imperfect as it may be, the
United Nations is the principal institution governing
the international political system, and endows legality
and legitimacy on our actions.

It is for that reason that we agree with the
Secretary-General that

"Perhaps if we had persevered a little
longer, Iraq could yet have been disarmed
peacefully, or - if not - the world could have
taken action to solve this problem by a collective
decision, endowing it with greater legitimacy,
and, therefore, commanding wider support, than
is the case now." (SG/SM/8644)

As a country that voluntarily disarmed itself of
weapons of mass destruction, South Africa strongly
believes in a world free of all weapons of mass
destruction. Ideally, we believe that no State should
possess such weapons. We therefore made every effort
to ensure that Iraq fully implemented all relevant
Security Council resolutions, including 1441 (2002). It
is for this reason that we agreed with the weapons
inspectors when they indicated that they needed more
time - "months not years", to quote Mr. Blix - to
assure the world that Iraq is free of weapons of mass
destruction.
The tragedy of the war in Iraq is that it continues
to produce civilian and military casualties. Although
we may disagree on the need for this war, we cannot
ignore its casualties. The Security Council has a role to
play in ensuring that provisions are in place to assist
with the delivery of humanitarian relief to the Iraqi
people. We would wish to caution the Security Council
from being drawn into drafting a resolution that would
provide tacit or implied approval of the military
operations that are under way in Iraq at this time.

The Security Council must pass a resolution on
humanitarian assistance that upholds the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Iraq and ensures that the
natural resources of Iraq remain in the hands of the
people of Iraq. South Africa believes that the open-
ended and punitive sanctions that the people of Iraq
have been forced to endure for more than 12 years must
come to an end.

As an interim measure, the oil for food
programme is important for the people of Iraq.
According to the Secretary-General, 60 per cent of the
27 million citizens of Iraq depend on the programme
for daily sustenance. We agree that this programme
could be adjusted to ensure that the humanitarian goods
that have been ordered by the Iraqi Government are
delivered. It is also appropriate to prioritize the
delivery of essential medicines and food from the
existing contracts and to ensure that the most urgent
needs of the Iraqi people are addressed.

The war in Iraq should not destroy the foundation
of the rules-based system of collective security with
which the United Nations and its Charter provide us.
The founders of the United Nations sought to bring
predictability to international governance. They
envisaged a world order in which the lives of the
innocent and weak would be protected, and not one that
is premised on military might and the law of survival
of the fittest. The United Nations is more relevant than
ever in a world confronted by complex challenges.
There are places all over the world where peace must
be won. Iraq is no exception.

