Mr. Sotirov (Bulgaria): I feel privileged to
congratulate you, Mr. President - our former
colleague and friend - on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March. I wish you and your colleagues every success in
the fulfilment of your important tasks.

My delegation welcomes the valuable
participation of the Foreign Minister of the Republic of
Macedonia, Mr. Srgjan Kerim, in the present debate.
The action plan he introduced today merits careful
consideration. We believe that its realization would
create conditions for a reduction of the tension in that
part of the region and for the strict implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999), as the only basis for lasting
solution to the existing problems.
Bulgaria has associated itself with the statement
just made by the Permanent Representative of Sweden
on behalf of the European Union. However, as a
neighbouring country we asked for the floor to reiterate
our strong concern with regard to the recent acts of
violence in the northern part of Macedonia, along its
border with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The
Bulgarian Government has already adopted two
declarations strongly condemning the activities of
terrorist groups that violate the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of the Republic of Macedonia. The latest
tragic incidents led to the death of three Macedonian
soldiers.

The Bulgarian Government considers that the
activities of the armed Albanian extremists in the area
of the village of Tanusevci amount to opening up a new
front in the war over Kosovo, and believes that they
impede the efforts of the international community to
find a lasting, peaceful solution to the problem on the
basis of the provisions of Security Council resolution
1244 (1999). These attacks do not stem from an inter-
ethnic conflict in the Republic of Macedonia, but
represent attempts to initiate such a conflict in that
country.

The attacks came at a time when, after a 10-year
effort, the Republic of Macedonia and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia had concluded an agreement on
the delimitation of their common border. The Bulgarian
Government welcomed this agreement as an additional
factor for regional stability. Therefore, we strongly
reject any attempts to question a border recognized by
international law. We consider that the recent events
affect the security of the Republic of Macedonia and
may generate a new source of destabilization in this
part of the region. Serious concerns exist that the
undermining of the borderline in the area serves the
interests of certain organized crime elements that
finance the extremist circles on both sides of the
border. Only a total isolation of the extremists can put
an end to their illegal activities.

The stability of the Republic of Macedonia is of
key importance for the national interests of Bulgaria
and the other countries in the region. Therefore, the
Bulgarian Government renders strong moral and
political support to the efforts of the Macedonian
authorities to use political and diplomatic means and
refrain from seeking a military solution. My
Government maintains permanent contacts with the
Government of the Republic of Macedonia. We have
already expressed our readiness to provide any
assistance on a bilateral and multilateral basis,
including military and technical, that the Macedonian
authorities may deem necessary for the management of
the existing crisis. Tomorrow, Prime Minister Ivan
Kostov will pay an official visit to the Republic of
Macedonia.

Bulgaria considers that the active involvement of
the international community is vital for reducing the
existing tension. It is still possible to prevent the
spillover of the conflict to other parts of the border
area. Otherwise, if the escalation of tension is not
curbed in due time, the United Nations might be forced
to resort to a much larger-scale and costly operation.
We commend the readiness of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization to support the stability and
security of the Republic of Macedonia. As a participant
in the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the United Nations
Interim Administration in Kosovo, Bulgaria expects
further measures to be taken in order to strengthen the
control of the Yugoslav border between Kosovo and
Macedonia and to disrupt the supply sources of the
extremists. A case in point is to find ways for
guaranteeing the implementation of the provisions of
the Military Technical Agreement signed in Kumanovo
on 9 June 1999, entrusting KFOR with control over the
Yugoslav border with the Republic of Macedonia and
Albania.

Bulgaria will continue to closely follow the
situation on the border between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Republic of Macedonia and will
spare no efforts in promoting stability and cooperation
in southeastern Europe. My Government will welcome
any decision by the Security Council that could reduce
the tension and facilitate the full implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999).

