Mr. Lolo (Nigeria): I would like to thank the
Presidents and Prosecutors of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) for their candid and informative briefings on
the work of the two Tribunals. We commend the ICTY
and the ICTR for the progress made in implementing
their completion strategies during the past six months.
We are pleased with the firm commitment as well as
measures deployed by the Tribunals to expedite the
conduct of their proceedings. We note with satisfaction
that the two Tribunals are complying with due process
standards and that the forecasts for the reporting period
have been substantially met.

Despite these positive developments, we note
with concern the challenges affecting the work of the
Tribunals, not least staff constraints, the parallel
assignment of judges to several ongoing trials and
contractual matters. Given the lack of an immediate
solution to these problems, it is our view that the
Council should not be overly optimistic in its
completion strategy estimates. We urge the Tribunals to
continue to better manage delays in order to minimize
their impact. The Council, on its part, needs to be
flexible, proactive and pragmatic in its response to
those factors, particularly the retention of staff, the
extension of judges' terms and budgetary issues that
are outside the Tribunals' control yet inhibit their
effectiveness.

We share the assessment that cooperation
between Member States and the Tribunals remains an
indispensable element for the success of the
completion strategy. In this regard, we are concerned
that some fugitives have continued to remain at large.
We urge all States to cooperate with the Tribunals to
ensure that these fugitives are apprehended and
brought to justice. In the same vein, we stress the need
for cooperation in referring cases to national
jurisdictions, transferring convicts for the enforcement
of sentences, and relocating acquitted persons and
persons who have served their sentences.

Cooperation would also be enhanced through the
training national prosecutors and judicial officers,
information-sharing with the Tribunals, and joint
projects between States. In this context, enhancing the
capacity of States to prosecute breaches of
international humanitarian law is important. These
activities, we believe, will sustain the good work done
by the Tribunals, serve the course of justice and
advance the fight against impunity.

We welcome the efforts of the Tribunals to
increase mutual legal cooperation and assistance. We
share the assessment in the ICTR report (S/2010/259)
that recognition of the importance of such cooperation
and assistance in the residual mechanisms will greatly
contribute towards the further closure of the immunity
gap. Member States are encouraged to take advantage
of the Office of the Prosecutor's information resources
for national prosecution of suspects not charged by the
Tribunal.

As we consider the exit strategy for the Tribunals,
it is important to continue to reflect on their legacies.
There is need to sustain activities that showcase and
disseminate information on the activities of the
Tribunals at this vital stage of the completion strategy.
More outreach activities are needed to make the work
of the Tribunals understood by local stakeholders. It is
also necessary to establish sustainable reference
centres for information and archives on the activities of
the Tribunals.

In closing, I would like to commend Ambassador
Mayr-Harting for his leadership of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals.

