Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome Judge Theodor Meron,
President of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, and Judge Carmel Agius, President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). I would also like to welcome
Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). I would
also like to thank them for all their efforts and for their
comprehensive briefings.

The Security Council, when it established the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and the ICTY, wished to underline the importance
of the rule of law, to show that the international
community was serious about countering war crimes
and crimes against humanity, to ensure accountability
for the perpetrators of such crimes and to underline the
importance of fighting impunity at the international
level.

The two Tribunals have done an excellent job
in completing their tasks of tracking the accused,
protecting witnesses and ensuring compensation for
the victims, as well as fair trials. The ICTR concluded
its work at the end of last year, and it is expected that
the ICTY will also conclude its work at the end of next
year. Therefore, the Residual Mechanism, with its two
branches in The Hague and Arusha, would receive
the pending cases from those two Tribunals. In that
context, we would like to underscore our appreciation
and satisfaction with all the efforts undertaken to
ensure a smooth transition.

The international community must realize that
accountability is not just a duty to respect the rights
of the victims and hold criminals accountable for their
crimes. Those two elements are extremely important,
but it should also be a preventive mechanism to
ensure that deplorable crimes against humanity are
not repeated. It should be a message of warning to all
those who might believe that human life and dignity
can be taken lightly. Such individuals should know that
they will never be safe from punishment and that such
crimes will not be subject to any statute of limitations
and will not be tolerated.
Despite all that, many horrific crimes continue to
take place throughout the world. Our work is therefore
far from finished. The international community must
address with attention, impartiality and justice all
those horrors without regard for their narrow political
interests, because respect for humanity is above any
other priority. We must send a single unambiguous
message with regard to grave violations of international
humanitarian law that tells perpetrators that their deeds
will not go unpunished and that the rights the victims
will be protected.

Achieving the objectives for which the two Tribunals
were established depends on the Council's support
and the full cooperation of all Members of the United
Nations, including in tracking the three fugitives from
the ICTR, who have now become the responsibility of
the Residual Mechanism. The international community
should continue to track them until they are brought
to justice. Also, there is the important issue of the
relocation of those who have either been acquitted or
whose sentences have been served. In that context, I
would like to underline that Egypt fully supports the
work of the Residual Mechanism and highlights the
importance of the optimum utilization of financial and
administrative resources to facilitate its work in the
best possible manner.

