Mr. Hanningstad (Norway): In our common
determination to uphold international peace and
security, we must do our utmost to ensure the success
of United Nations peace operations. Norway welcomes
the initiative of the Dutch presidency of the Security
Council to debate operational mandates and exit
strategies, which we believe is a timely and useful
contribution to attaining this goal.

The exit of a United Nations peace operation
should follow the successful restoration of peace and
security in the country or region in question. When the
United Nations decides to intervene in a complex
conflict, the goal must be to move from the situation
that led to the eruption of conflict to a situation in
which a new and self-sustained situation of peace and
security has taken root.

This means that the operation must support the
development of a society and political structure that
can address both the fundamental causes of the conflict
and the resolution of conflicts of interest through a
legitimate and participatory system. Due consideration
should therefore be given to the role of natural
resources as a cause of armed conflict and a means of
waging it.

In our view, we need to distinguish between "end-
date"- and "end-state"-oriented exit strategies. It is our
belief that an exit strategy for the military component
of a mission based on an end date and disconnected
from the overall objectives of the peace operation,
reduces the chances of success. Planning for military
withdrawal must therefore be coordinated with a
gradual transfer of responsibilities from the
international mission to local authorities, as this is
essential in order to normalize the situation in a post-
conflict area.

A well-defined exit strategy is also important in
obtaining support for the mission among the people and
their representatives. In order to reduce the possibility
of the unilateral withdrawal of forces, or the pressure
for an "end date"-oriented exit strategy, the troop-
contributing countries must be trusted and supported in
their efforts to fulfil the mission's mandate. We believe
realistic mandates containing a well-defined goal for
the mission and a carefully established plan for how to
reach that "end state" will contribute to this.

A key word in devising exit strategies is
"planning". The Brahimi report contains several
important recommendations for strengthening and
improving the planning capacity of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. We should put great effort
into implementing these recommendations in order to
strengthen the capacity of the United Nations to make
long-term overall strategies for the successful conduct
of future multifunctional peace operations.

To sum up our views, certain principles should be
followed in pursuing successful peace operations and,
by implication, the successful exit of such missions.

First, United Nations peace operations should be
given clear goals and mandates. The Security Council
must engage in debates and negotiations that are
realistic and frank with regard to the nature of the
situation under consideration and to the desired
outcome.

Secondly, the mandate should fit the task. The
United Nations needs to address the root causes of the
conflict in question. In many cases, these are
interconnected in a web of economic, social, historical
and ethnic factors. The complexity of the causes of
conflict requires a broad concept of peace and security
in order to understand them and a broad response in
order to address them. Furthermore, complex peace
operations require a high level of coordination within
the United Nations system.

Thirdly, the resources must fit the mandate. The
Security Council should not initiate operations without
being adequately prepared. Adopted mandates must
have the backing of forces sufficient in numbers and
material to be carried out effectively. In this regard, we
welcome the Brahimi Panel's recommendations aimed
at closing the gap between mandates and resources. In
our view, due consideration should be given to ways of
involving potential troop-contributing countries more
closely in the work of the Security Council with regard
to mandating peace operations. This would help close
the gap between mandates and resources, while still
enabling the United Nations to deploy peace operations
in a timely manner.

Fourthly, there is a need for a long-term
perspective on peace and security. The involvement of
the United Nations should be seamless, from
preventive measures through peace operations to post-
conflict reconstruction and peace-building. An overall
long-term strategy designed to lead to a self-sustaining
peace in the conflict area where a United Nations
operation is launched is therefore required. We also
believe that the Council must remain engaged
throughout all phases of a peace operation.

Norway will actively work towards the
implementation of these principles when we take our
seat in the Security Council on 1 January next year.

