Mrs. Zappia (Italy): The report of the Secretary-
General (S/2019/493), for which we are grateful,
highlights the rapid changes that we are witnessing
in Afghanistan. At the outset, I wish to underline
how crucial the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan remains to the stabilization and
development of the country. Italy thanks Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Yamamoto
and his staff for their laudable commitment.

The attainment of peace is the most formidable
of the many challenges facing Afghanistan today.
The latest diplomatic developments, with the efforts
of the United States Special Representative to set up
the groundwork for peace negotiations, as well as the
trend towards greater regional cooperation, are opening
a window of opportunity that must be seized. All
stakeholders should do their part in order to achieve
that goal, with the United Nations playing a leading
role, in order to ensure that all positive initiatives and
contributions feed into a unitary and coherent design.

Persistent security threats continue to entail very
high costs, draining precious resources and energy
away from addressing other urgent needs, such as
institutional consolidation and economic and social
development. Italy expresses its deep gratitude to the
National Unity Government and its Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces for the sacrifices made in
the daily fight against terrorism and violent extremism.
We stand by their side and remain determined in our
support for strengthening the Forces' capabilities, first
and foremost through our contribution to the Resolute
Support Mission.

The prospects for peace in Afghanistan have never
been more tangible than they are today. Italy expresses
its full support for those diplomatic initiatives that can
concretely facilitate the launching of a reconciliation
process in Afghanistan. Nevertheless, the lion's share
of the work that must be done in order to seize this
opportunity lies in the domestic sphere. Only a process
that encompasses extensive and inclusive participation,
and where there is true Afghan ownership and
leadership, can ensure such an outcome.

Women, in particular, must be empowered to play an
active role in the process in order to protect their rights,
as enshrined in the Constitution, and to safeguard the
broader civil and social gains achieved in the course
of the past 17 years. I welcome the joint Afghanistan-
United Kingdom initiative for establishing a new group
of friends on women's rights, and Italy stands ready to
join and contribute to the group.

We wish to reiterate our deep appreciation
of President Ghani's commitment to peace and
reconciliation, beginning with his generous offer
made in February 2018 to negotiate with the Taliban
without preconditions, which was renewed in Geneva
last December. The determination to achieve peace also
found its expression in the consultative loya jirga that
was convened at the end of April.

The presidential elections scheduled for next
September will be a litmus test for Afghanistan. The
organizational and procedural difficulties of last
October's parliamentary elections must serve as a
lesson learned in order to ensure that the upcoming
presidential elections will be credible and transparent. It
is vital that they be held without delays or shortcomings.
The credibility of Afghan institutions depends on that.
We invite all presidential candidates, from the current
President to members of the opposition, to commit
to a responsible approach that will ensure that those
institutions are protected.

The importance of the upcoming vote should not
distract our attention from seeking peace. Electoral
considerations should not prevail over the urgent need

to promote dialogue among all components of Afghan

society and make the necessary compromises in order to

reach a peace agreement. Italy fullyjoins in the appeals

to distinguish between the electoral track and the peace

track, pursuing each one independently of the other.

In conclusion, I would like to express my country's

unwavering support for all sincere efforts to restore
peace and stability to Afghanistan.

