Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): I would like to thank
your delegation warmly, Mr. President, for convening a
debate on this very important topic. We also appreciate
the opportunity for us to present the perspective of the
smallest State participating in today's debate, and I
would like to thank New Zealand for pointing out the
importance of listening to the views of small States as
well.

This morning we have heard expressions of what I
believe is a worrying trend to considering the Security
Council as a playground of the powerful, a place where
grand geopolitical moves are made or prevented. The
focus on the Charter of the United Nations in this debate
is therefore appropriate and one that we appreciate.
Liechtenstein affirms its strong commitment to the
purposes and principles of the Charter. It might be said
that that is easy for a small State with no army to do, but
my point underlines the fact that for many small States,
respect for the Charter is a matter of survival, and a
very serious one.

It has also emerged in today's debate that everyone
seems to have his favourite purposes and principles
of the Charter, a choice that is usually inspired by a
country's history or standing in the world. For us, the
starting point for the Charter's purposes and principles
is its very first purpose:

"To maintain international peace and security,
and to that end: to take effective collective
measures for the prevention and removal of threats
to the peace".

In our view, the Charter envisages an activist Security
Council that responds to the needs ofthe world. It is true
that the number of meetings, resolutions, field missions
and so on is ever increasing; but so is the number of
conflicts and the number of people affected by conflict
worldwide. Today we have more refugees than at any
point since the Second World War. We therefore need
even more Security Council action. How do we achieve
that? First, in reaffirming their commitment to the
Charter, we believe that Council members must make
greater effort to overcome their differences and commit
to working for compromise. Rather than debating the
contours of abstract concepts, they should search for
practical solutions in concrete situations. In recent
years that has become more difficult as differences,
especially among permanent members, have grown.
We therefore believe that there is now an increased
responsibility on the part of the elected members of
the Council to take greater ownership of the Council's
work and lead the way to more compromises.

Secondly, the veto - the use of the veto, the
threat of the veto and the possibility of the threat of
the veto - remains the greatest procedural obstacle to
Security Council actions where permanent members
have difficulty agreeing on a course of action. The
price of such inaction is unacceptably high when we are
faced with mass atrocities and thousands of innocent
victims. We cannot continue to give greater weight to
the opinion of one single permanent member than to the
need to save thousands of lives. We therefore reiterate
our call to Security Council members not to block
Council action aimed at preventing or ending mass
atrocities, and to put such a commitment in writing.

Thirdly, we should recognize that the Charter and
change go hand in hand. The Charter's values and
principles underpin the international system and have
inspired new instruments, such as the Arms Trade
Treaty. We must act on our evolving understanding of
threats to peace and security, as, for example, has been
recognized by the Council in the case of terrorism,
and as it has sometimes done in response to massive
human rights violations. But we must place human
rights and people's dignity, especially the rights of
civilians in armed conflict, more firmly at the centre
of our reference. Such an approach also constitutes
a return to the Charter itself, which at the beginning
of its Preamble established that we the peoples of the
United Nations are determined

"to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in
the dignity and worth of the human person, in the
equal rights ofmen and women and of nations large
and small".

Therefore, if the world's greatest Powers were able to
make such a statement in 1945, just after the end of the
Second World War and a complete collapse of human
decency, they will hopefully also be determined to
reaffirm their faith in the role of the Security Council,
70 years later. The Security Council Chamber remains
the most important forum for that win-win cooperation
that the presidency has called for.

