I thank Mr. Geir Pedersen for his briefing and his commitment. Let me begin by reiterating that the Niger continues to fully support the calls of the Secretary-General and the Special Envoy for a complete and immediate nationwide ceasefire in Syria and beyond to enable an all-out effort against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. My delegation takes note of the report of the United Nations Board of Inquiry. That report is very important, as it attributes responsibility to the perpetrators of the attacks on hospitals that are on the United Nations deconfliction list and other civilian facilities in north-west Syria. The Niger condemns those attacks and calls for the international community to take appropriate actions to hold anyone involved accountable. As it relates to the humanitarian situation in Syria, I am sure that Mark Lowcock will give us a better picture this afternoon. However, as we know, food security and humanitarian assistance are essential during these difficult times. My delegation therefore calls on all parties to work together to make sure that the aid reaches all Syrians in need. It is also worth noting that since Russia and Turkey agreed on a ceasefire agreement on 6 March, there have been fewer hostilities in Syria. My delegation commends the Astana guarantors, Russia and Turkey for their diplomatic efforts and encourages them to continue them for the sake of millions of Syrians. The Niger calls on Council members and Special Envoy Pedersen to build on this momentum in order to make progress on the political front, as mandated by Security Council resolution 2254 (2015). My delegation is pleased to hear that the agreement on the agenda was reached, and we call on the parties involved to continue their efforts and participation in the Constitutional Committee. However, discussing the process of the meetings should not be the only item on the agenda. The Constitutional Committee should also begin talks on various issues aimed at furthering the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) and leading Syria to the holding of free and transparent elections. In the same vein, my delegation supports the Special Envoy's call for a large- scale release of all arbitrarily held detainees on humanitarian grounds, and we call on all parties to ensure medical care for all detainees. Because the current unilateral sanctions are affecting Syria's economy and the spread of COVID-19 will only make things worse, my delegation supports the Secretary-General's appeal to waive sanctions that could undermine Syria's capacity to respond to the pandemic. In conclusion, my delegation calls on Council members and the international community to show unity and compassion by helping the Syrians navigate through these terrible times.
