Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I would like
to thank Special Representative Sandra Honore for her
briefing. During last week's discussion on post-conflict
peacebuilding (see S/PV.7143), we deliberated on some
core elements that also apply to today's debate. Today
I would like to make three points, focusing on mutual
responsibility among all parties concerned. This
factor will be all the more important in consolidating
the achievements made to date and expediting the
remaining process.

First, with regard to the political process, the
recent agreement signed by all political stakeholders
to hold combined elections this year is encouraging.
The growing impatience among the population must
be addressed without further delay. The political
leadership in Haiti should step up preparations for the
long-delayed elections while providing a level playing
field for all participants. Addressing the socioeconomic
grievances of citizens should be a top priority for the
Haitian Government. In that regard, we commend
the supporting role played by the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and
international partners.

Secondly, with regard to institution-building,
we would like to stress that the establishment of
national institutions should be accompanied by
strong political will, otherwise their legitimacy
and effectiveness, which constitute a solid basis for
national unity and the credibility of authorities, cannot
be ensured. Political consensus on that aspect is
another indispensable ingredient for the success of the
upcoming elections. In that context, we welcome the
continued professionalization of the Haitian National
Police and hope that that impetus can spread to other
equally important institutions ensuring the rule of law
in Haitian society. MINUSTAH, the United Nations
Development Programme and other partners need to
continuously seek greater synergy to assist the Haitian
Government in its capacity-building efforts through
effective coordination.

Lastly, on the reconfiguration of MINUSTAH, we
appreciate the Secretary-General's forward-looking
approach to reconfiguring MINUSTAH beyond 2016.
The five options presented in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2014/162) provide a good basis for the Security
Council possible alternatives given the evolving
situation. We support the Secretary-General regularly
reviewing and reporting on his strategic assessment to
the Council as the Council seeks the most appropriate
course of action in the years ahead.

We hope that the Haitian people and their leadership
will take all of those challenges more proactively, in
close cooperation with international partners. The
Republic of Korea extends its full support to Special
Representative Honore and MINUSTAH in assisting
Haiti's stabilization and capacity-building in this
consolidation process.

