Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important open
debate. Let me also thank the Secretary-General,
Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos, Assistant
Secretary-General Ivan Simonovie and Mr. Spoerri
for their important contributions to the discussion
of an issue of particular relevance to the work of the
Council. I also wish to welcome warmly the presence
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guatemala, which
underlines the commitment of his country to human
rights and to the protection of civilians.

The report of the Secretary-General that is before
us (S/2012/376) is an important document, drawing
our attention again to old and new concerns affecting
the situation of civilians in armed conflict, which call
for serious consideration and decisive action. We share
those concerns and support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General.

Portugal naturally shares the Views that will be
expressed later on by the observer of the European
Union on this subject, but allow me to underline some
aspects that we consider particularly relevant.

Let me state the obvious. Attacks against civilians,
wherever they take place, are unacceptable and should
be vigorously condemned. Parties to conflict should
abide fully by international humanitarian law and
human rights law. Even if such compliance would not,
in itself, reduce the violence and the suffering inherent
to conflict, it would surely allow for fewer civilian
casualties, less exposure of civilians to violations and
less displacement of populations.

Civilians still constitute the majority of victims in
conflict. Too frequently, they are deliberately targeted
and used as instruments of war. Women and children
are particularly victimized, be it through the sexual
violence imposed on them, their recruitment to serve
as combatants or their simple murder. Care providers
and humanitarian aid workers and their facilities have
also increasingly been targeted in a deliberate move to
increase the vulnerability of the civilian victims of war.
The threat posed by mines and other explosive devices
in densely populated areas has also increased, with the
aim of causing indiscriminate casualties and the flight
of whole populations.

In fact, if we look at the different scenarios of
present day conflict, be it in Syria, Afghanistan,
Somalia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Cote
d'Ivoire, the Sudan, Gaza or the areas affected by the
Lord's Resistance Army, the plight and suffering of
civilians has worsened, not improved. This confronts
the Security Council with an increased responsibility.
How can we meet that responsibility more effectively
and translate our political will into increased protection
of civilians, especially women and children as the most
vulnerable, in the context of armed conflict? Allow me
to underline three areas.

First, we believe that United Nations peacekeeping
operations continue to play a crucial role in that context.
Sadly, peacekeepers continue to lose their lives in
order to protect civilians, as recently happened in Cote
d'Ivoire. I wish to pay a humble tribute to all of them
and to their courage and sense of duty.

Along with entrusting peacekeeping missions with
strong protection mandates, improving the engagement
of the missions with local communities and humanitarian
agents can also have a positive impact in enhancing the
protection of civilians. It would undoubtedly reinforce
a much-needed early-warning capacity in different
conflict scenarios.

But let us not dwell on illusions. Strong protection
mandates, which are needed, must be accompanied
with the necessary means for missions to fulfil such
mandates. There is indeed a worrying trend to enhance
mission mandates without sufficient consideration
being given to what that entails or to the specific
conditions in which peacekeepers must operate. The
primary responsibility in that matter lies with the
Council.

Also, for peacekeepers to engage usefully with the
population, they must of course be acquainted with
local conditions, be they political, social, or cultural.
But more importantly, they must be able to speak the
language of the country, which is too often not the case.
A second fundamental area would be to improve and
ensure the access of humanitarian assistance providers
to the civilian population. I fully recognize that this is
easier said than done, and I pay tribute to all that the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and Government and non-government agencies are
trying to do in that field, amidst all types of difficulties
and often confronted with deliberate opposition to their
efforts.

But it is plain that, in many dire situations, denial of
or constraints to humanitarian assistance are yet another
instrument of war aimed at increasing the pressure
on the civilian population. As such, they should be
vigorously opposed, and the Security Council should
act forcefully when such situations arise. Denying or
impeding humanitarian access are violations of human
rights and humanitarian law and should be treated as
such.

A third dimension by which we could decisively
increase our capacity to protect civilians is
accountability. Bringing perpetrators of crimes against
civilians to trial must become the norm and not the
exception. Recent verdicts of the Special Court for
Sierra Leone and the International Criminal Court are
not only important landmarks in terms of international
justice, but also demonstrate that it can be done.

Let me also take up the suggestion of Valerie Amos
for more systematic recording of civilian casualties and
the conditions in which they occur. That would also
contribute toward strengthening accountability.

The United Nations and the Security Council, in
particular, must show strong resolve in countering
impunity and set the example for national judicial
institutions. I believe that would have a positive effect
in terms of deterrence. But it is also obvious to me
that impunity and a lack of reparation for victims also
hampers reconciliation efforts and, ultimately, threatens
peacebuilding in post-conflict situations.

The Security Council should therefore fully utilize
all the instruments at its disposal, directly or through
other bodies such as the Human Rights Council, to
strengthen accountability.

Let me conclude by reiterating the need for the
Council to act in a consistent, determined and prompt
way in increasing the protection of civilians in conflict
situations, using all the available tools and in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations to fulfil that aim.

It is not only our credibility that is at stake. It is also
the need to answer to the plight of millions of innocent,
suffering, victims whose pleading eyes we see daily on
our televisions.

