Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French): This meeting of the Security Council is a
necessary one. It could have been held earlier, as
Lebanon, with the support of France, had proposed.
Members of the Council cannot remain silent in the face
of the deterioration of the situation, which affects the
security of Lebanon and of Israel, threatens the national
cohesion of Lebanon and seriously jeopardizes the peace
process.

France reaffirms the right of all States in the region,
including Lebanon and Israel, to live in security. It
understands Israel's desire to keep its people safe from
acts of violence. However, France deeply regrets that the
ongoing military actions of the last few days have already
led to the death of several dozen Lebanese civilians and
forced hundreds of thousands of others to flee their
homes. This mass exodus endangers the national
reconstruction efforts to which Lebanon, after so many
years of tragedy and division, and with such courage and
determination, has devoted all its energy.

France is convinced that the present crisis cannot be
resolved by military means. It is only the implementation
of resolution 425 (1978), which was adopted by the
Security Council, that can, over the long term, ensure
respect for the security of the States of the region by re-
establishing Lebanon's complete sovereignty over its
territory and thereby enabling the Lebanese Government
to participate fully in the maintenance of peace.

But what must be done right now is to halt the chain
reaction of acts of violence and reprisals, which strike
primarily the civilian populations in Israel and in
Lebanon, and which have already taken many lives.
France calls on all parties concerned to demonstrate
responsibility and restraint, and to order a cease-fire as
soon as possible. It is in this spirit that at the request of
the President of the Republic, the French Minister for
Foreign Affairs is today travelling to the region.

 

Our Council must closely monitor a crisis which
threatens security in the Middle East. It must therefore
remain seized of this matter. The scale of the exodus of
people forced to flee creates immediate problems of
assistance and aid, which the United Nations should
endeavour to resolve.

It is important, under these grave circumstances, that
we each reaffirm our confidence in Lebanon's future, our
resolve to help that country and our determination that the
security of all States of the region shall be assured by
peaceful means. It is the whole peace process that must be
saved.

