Mr. A] Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): We
appreciate the convening of this open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, and thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the other briefers
for their statements today.

The upheavals in parts of the Middle East and
North Africa in the past couple of years have brought
the issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
to a prominent place on the Council's agenda. That
fact has manifested itself in the convening of regular
open debates such as today's, presentations of reports,
and the holding of workshops and thematic meetings
on the protection of civilians. Incidences of violence
against civilian populations in conflict situations have
allowed us to identify measures to protect civilians in
circumstances of armed conflict. Yet, the reality on
the ground has also affected the notion of and practical
measures for protecting civilians.

Despite the fact that there has been some progress
on the issue of civilian protection, there have been many
failures along the way. A large part of the reason for that
distressing state of affairs lies in the double standards
and injustices in different armed conflicts, including
the situation of territories under foreign occupation,
as well as the fundamental failure of some parties to
respect the principles of international and humanitarian
law.

The Secretary-General, in his latest report on
this issue (S/2012/376), while recalling the five core
challenges on the protection of civilians, emphasizes the
necessity of enhancing compliance with international
human rights and humanitarian law, and accountability
in the protection of civilians. He rightly points out that,
in many conflicts, to a large degree accountability
is the absent factor that allows further violations
to thrive. That became clear in the response of the
Security Council to the situation in Libya, where the
Council authorized all necessary measures to protect
civilians, but where the extent of those measures went
beyond the protection of civilians and thus raised major
concerns among Member States. For this reason, the
Secretary-General recommends that

"[i]n the future, in addition to complying

scrupulously with international humanitarian

law and human rights law, the implementation of
such decisions must be limited to promoting and
ensuring the protection of civilians" (S/2012/376, para. 19).

The root causes behind many conflicts are poverty,
exclusion and marginalization, foreign interventions
and military excursions, and occupation. In addressing
the suffering of civilians in armed conflicts, we should
take stock of these causes. However, the influence
exercised by some members of the Security Council in
reaching balanced solutions to conflicts have sometimes
exacerbated them and contributed to their prolongation,
with severe impacts on peace and stability and the
protection of civilians.

In that regard, I would like to refer to the case of
Syria. We firmly believe that the current crisis should
be promptly resolved on the basis of the initiatives of
Kofi Annan and the active and constructive engagement
of all parties concerned. The prolongation of the crisis,
for whatever narrow-minded political interests, would
have dire consequences on peace and stability in the
region and for civilians in Syria.

Premeditated attacks on civilians, as the result of
the indiscriminate or disproportionate use of force or
massive terrorist operations, are gross violations of
international humanitarian law. All parties to an armed
conflict, including international coalition troops, must
bear the responsibility for their acts under international
humanitarian law. Those guilty of violations, State and
non-State actors alike, must not evade responsibility for
crimes committed.

I would like here to refer to the unpalatable yet
brutal reality of indiscriminate targeting of civilians in
Afghanistan and Pakistan during air strikes, which have
resulted in a high number of civilian casualties in many
instances. That fact has also been noted in resolutions
adopted by various organs of the United Nations, in
which serious concerns have been expressed about
the high number of civilian casualties, and which have
called for compliance with international humanitarian
and human rights law and for appropriate measures to
ensure the protection of civilians.

We hope that the international community will
take all the measures necessary for the protection of
civilians on the basis of fairness and without double
standards. Justice demands that the perpetrators of
violations of the rights of the people, including those
living under occupation, be held accountable for their
deeds. That is extremely important for the credibility
of the Council. If we want our debate on the protection
of civilians to be meaningful and effective, we should
adopt a balanced and comprehensive approach and
see the causes and the effects. We hope that these
discussions will be successful and that we will take the
necessary measures, because this question is extremely
important for humans and human dignity.

Finally, once again the representative of the Israeli
regime has used this body, in the name of the protection
of civilians, to level some baseless allegations against
Iran. That criminal regime referred to arms smuggling
from Iran to Hamas and Syria. That is slander,
because the Israeli regime, in its brutal and murderous
apparatus, has excluded the civilian population in Gaza
and other occupied territories from the jurisdiction of
international law, as if those people do not deserve
the protection required under the Geneva Conventions
and international law. Some 1.5 million Palestinians in
Gaza are deprived of all their basic needs of life and
of humanitarian assistance, including United Nations
assistance.

Gaza continues to be the largest prison maintained
by the Israeli-occupying authorities. Many civilian
homes continue to be targeted by Israeli missiles, which
constitute premeditated attacks against the civilian
population and civilian objects. The crimes committed
by the Israeli armed forces in their deliberate killing
and infliction of great suffering on civilians constitute
grave breaches of international law, in particular the
Fourth Geneva Convention. The Israeli armed forces
should therefore be held accountable. Only by ensuring
accountability for serious violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights, as well as justice
for victims, can we expect our efforts to protect civilians
to be translated into meaningful and practical actions.

