Mr. Bessho (Japan): Japan welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2368 (2017), which
we co-sponsored. I would like to express my gratitude
to the United States for taking the lead on drafting this
important resolution.

We have witnessed a large number of terrorist
attacks around the world since the adoption of
resolution 2253 (2015), in December 2015, and tactics
are evolving. It was clear that we had to step up our
measures by reviewing resolution 2253 (2015).

There are a number of new paragraphs in today's
resolution that address recent terrorist trends. I would
especially like to highlight paragraph 39, on returning
and relocating foreign terrorist fighters, and paragraph
36 on passenger name records (PNR). While the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant is experiencing military
setbacks in Iraq and Syria, their threat is spreading
globally. Foreign terrorist fighters are returning to their
countries of origin and transiting through, travelling to
or relocating in other Member States.

For example, as the Secretary-General's report
of 31 May (S/20l7/467) indicates, the threat level has
intensified in South-East Asia due to returnees and
relocating fighters going to the region. Given the
global nature of the phenomenon, all Member States
must enhance their measures against returning and
relocating foreign terrorist fighters. In addressing the
issue, we must bear in mind that the tactics of foreign
terrorist fighters are evolving, including through
the use of broken travel techniques. Passenger name
records are one effective measure to detect foreign
terrorist fighters. Today's resolution is the first to call
upon Member States to use and develop PNRs. Such
documents include passengers' booking information,
including itineraries, the names of traveling companions
and payment methods. By analyzing PNRs, we can
uncover suspicious travel patterns, the flow of terrorist
actors and funds and, ultimately, terrorist networks.
I stress the importance of PNRs and encourage all
Member States that have not yet done so to employ
PNR systems as soon as possible. To my knowledge,
only 15 of the 193 Member States have introduced PNR
systems thus far.

In conclusion, I stress the importance of moving
from adoption to implementation. Japan is always
ready to work closely with other countries to enhance
their capacities in this area. We must unite against the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and other terrorist
groups by implementing today's resolution, as well
as related resolutions, in order to further enhance our
counter-terrorism measures.

