Mr. Bosah (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for your efficient leadership of the Security Council
during this month. I also take this opportunity to thank
members of the Security Council for their visit to the
Lake Chad basin region, which allowed them to assess
the security and humanitarian challenges faced by the
Governments in the region.

Nigeria fully aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Cameroon on behalf of
countries of the region, and appreciates this opportunity
to share one or two remarks as a country at the centre of
this insurgency.

We welcome today's unanymous adoption of
resolution 2349 (2017), which not only recognizes
the complex challenges faced by the region but also
encourages regional Governments to sustain their
momentum in the fight against Boko Haram and to
further enhance regional military cooperation and
coordination - a welcome development. Nigeria's
consistent support for the work of the Security
Council is an indication of our appreciation of this
foremost United Nations organ, which has the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace
and security. The robust discussions that members of
the Council held with senior officials of the Nigerian
Government during their recent visit bears testimony
to that assertion.

At this critical juncture, after an improvement in
the security situation due to recent military gains, it
was our expectatio that the Security Council and the
international community would continue to engage
the Governments in the region in the search for
lasting peace, security, protection of civilians and the
resolution of the humanitarian crisis that arises from
Boko Haram activities. We look to the Security Council
to continue to approach the situation constructively, as
it has done since the emergence of Boko Haram in the
regional crisis.

Despite the enormous challenges resulting from
the terrorist activities of Boko Haram, the Government
of Nigeria remains resolutely committed to combating
terrorism and all ofits ramifications. We have put in place
a robust people-driven counter-terrorism strategy, built
on the combination of revamped security operations and
a human rights approach, to help lead to rehabilitation,
reintegration and reconstruction. In order to achieve
that strategic objective, the presidential committee on
the north-east intervention has been empowered with a
mandate to provide and coordinate synergy, leadership
and direction to the various initiatives in the zone.
It encompasses Government development partners,

private foundations and civil society.
We are also accelerating the implementation of
existing legal and institutional frameworks to alleviate
the suffering of our people and to provide effective
humanitarian aid, in the spirit of the May 2016 World
Humanitarian Summit, held in Istanbul. In effect,
Nigeria is providing food, support, integrated heath
care, shelter, psychosocial support and access to water
and sanitation amenities for those in need. We are also
engaging highly respected community and religious
leaders to discourage vulnerable youths from being
radicalized. We will continue to accord the highest
priority to bolstering the resilience of internally
displaced persons and to increasing their participation in
vocational training and skill-acquisition programmes.

The countries of the Lake Chad basin region now
desperately need the support of the United Nations and
the international community, if it is to achieve credible
implementation of resolution 2349 (2017). It is also time
for the Council to focus, once again, on the imperative
of providing those countries with comprehensive
assistance programmes in a variety of areas related to
peacebuilding, including ensuring security, building
capacity and generating socioeconomic development.
The shrinking of Lake Chad has adversely affected the
communities around the basin, thereby exacerbating
their hardship.

With the scale of the knock-on cross-border
effects of the humanitarian crisis, it is increasingly
difficult for any single State in the Lake Chad region to
independently meet the needs of the vicitims. In spite
of our national capacities, we are stretched, especially
with the duelling financial resources. All Lake Chad
basin countries are making spirited efforts to alleviate
human suffering. Nigeria reiterates its call for strong
international action in support of the implementation of
the the Lake Chad development and climate resilience
action plan.

It is apparent that we neither lack ideas nor
initiative, but resources - owing to competing
demands from all development sectors. We therefore
reiterate the urgent imperative for increased global
action and active engagement with countries of the
Lake Chad basin in order to accelerate recovery efforts.
Nigeria reaffirms its commitment to working with
the Council and with the international community as
a whole. We deeply appreciate the critical assistance
of the United Nations system and partners that support
us in the north-east intervention and the Lake Chad
basin. We urge the Council to continue to work with
us to find more structural solutions, with national
ownership spearheading the drive for urgent lifesaving
and protecion measures.

In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that the future
of the people of the Lake Chad basin region rests on
durable security and sustainability of the resources
around the lake. We are confident that building genuine
collaboration and forging strong partnerships with the
Lake Chad Basin Commission and the African Union
will enable us to swiftly tackle that challenge.

