Mr. Liow Tiong Lai (Malaysia): Draft resolution
S/2015/562 before the Council today is being introduced
by Malaysia on behalf of the countries participating in
the joint investigation team on the downing of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-l7: Australia, Belgium, Malaysia,
the Netherlands and Ukraine. It is on their behalf, as
well as on behalf of my own delegation, that I take the
floor to explain our position.

A year ago, on 17 July 2014, the international

community was shocked by the tragic downing of the
civilian Flight MH-l7 in eastern Ukraine. The Council
was united in its immediate reaction by adopting
resolution 2166 (2014) by consensus a few days later.
That resolution condemned the incident; called
for a full, thorough and independent international
investigation, in accordance with international civil
aviation guidelines; called on all States and actors to
cooperate fully with the international investigation; and
demanded that those responsible be held to account and
that all States cooperate fully with efforts to establish
accountability.

Since then, an independent air safety investigation
has been conducted in full compliance with annex
13 of the Convention on International Civil Aviation
and the guidelines of the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO). The Dutch Safety Board has led
the air safety investigation ever since the investigation
was transferred by the State of occurrence, that is
Ukraine, to the Netherlands. The investigation has been
assisted by experts from various countries, including
Australia, France, Germany, Indonesia, Italy, the
Russian Federation, Ukraine, the United Kingdom and
the United States of America.

Alongside but separate from the air safety
investigation, the law enforcement agencies ofAustralia,
Belgium, Malaysia, the Netherlands and Ukraine
have been cooperating in a joint investigation team to
undertake a criminal investigation into the downing of
Flight MH-17. The investigation has been undertaken to
implement the Council's call in resolution 2166 (2014)
for a full, thorough and independent investigation
into the incident. The United Nations has expressed
confidence that the investigation is being carried out in
line with international standards.

On the first anniversary of the downing of Flight
MH-17, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon welcomed
the progress made by the independent international
investigation, in accordance with resolution 2166
(2014). ICAO has also expressed its support for the
ongoing independent international investigation.

A year ago, the Council demanded accountability
in resolution 2166 (2014). It is now timely for the
Council to take clear and decisive action to demonstrate
its political will and determination to pursue the cause
of accountability for the senseless killing of those on
board Flight MH-17. That is why today, on behalf of
the countries participating in the joint investigation
team - Australia, Belgium, Malaysia, the Netherlands
and Ukraine - Malaysia is requesting the Council to
take action on the draft resolution to establish an ad hoc
international criminal tribunal.

It is important for the Security Council to take
clear and decisive action under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations against those responsible
for the downing of flight MH-17, and to send a very
clear message to the growing number of non-State
actors with the ability to target civilian aircraft that
such attacks are unacceptable. Thus, the establishment
of an international tribunal by the Council would send
a clear message that the international community is
committed to taking action against those who threaten
international peace and security by endangering civil
aviation. All those who travel by air will be more at risk
if perpetrators are not held to account.

An international tribunal would also be best placed
to deliver justice to the families of all victims. The
creation of an obligation to cooperate with the proposed
tribunal would also maximize the prospects for
securing international cooperation with the tribunal.
The establishment of a tribunal prior to the completion
of the criminal investigation would also ensure that
this establishment is as depoliticized as possible and
consistent with the Security Council's own practice in
relation to other ad hoc criminal courts and tribunals.
Regardless of who the perpetrators are, we want to
ensure that the arm of justice will reach them and that
there will be no impunity. Moreover, the draft statute
of the tribunal, which is annexed to the draft resolution,
would ensure the independence of the judges and the
prosecutor and provide full power to the prosecutor to
carry out his or her own investigation.

Malaysia, which is one of the countries
participating in the joint investigation team, has been
engaging with all Council members to seek support
for the draft resolution. We have held consultations on
the draft resolution and the statute within the Council
and engaged in extensive outreach efforts, both in New
York and in capitals, to explain our initiative, address
possible concerns and seek the support of Council
members and the grieving nations. We would like to
thank all those who have supported our efforts and
sponsored the draft resolution today.

As we submit the draft resolution to the vote, I wish
to appeal to all Council members to bear in mind the
calls forjustice and accountability issued by the victims"

families and loved ones, as well as the Council's promise
to ensure accountability in resolution 2166 (2014). We
must send a clear signal against impunity. The families
and loved ones of the victims of the downing of Flight
MH-l7 will expect no less from us. We ask the Council
to support our initiative. Words cannot express how
deeply the families of the passengers and crew involved
have been affected by these events. Our hope is that
they will find some comfort not only in the united
support we will have demonstrated here in the Security
Council, but more importantly in the action taken by
the Council on the draft resolution.

For these reasons, Malaysia will vote in favour
of draft resolution S/2015/562. We urge all Council
members to do the same.

