Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Security Council has just adopted a new resolution
on the Iranian nuclear issue. This is the fourth Security
Council resolution on the issue since July 2006. It
reflects not only the international concern over the
issue, but also the expectations of all parties for an
early, peaceful settlement of the issue through
diplomatic negotiations.

At present, developments regarding the Iranian
nuclear issue are mixed. On the one hand, the latest
report by the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) states that the Agency
can verify the non-diversion of declared nuclear
material in Iran and has no concrete information about
possible current undeclared nuclear material and
activities in Iran. Iran has clarified a series of
outstanding issues such as uranium contamination,
polonium experiments and the uranium metal
document and provided information similar to that
which it had previously provided pursuant to the
Additional Protocol. China welcomes the previously
mentioned cooperation between Iran and the IAEA. On
the other hand, the report also points out that Iran has
not suspended uranium enrichment activities, as
required by the Security Council resolutions, has
started the development of new-generation centrifuges
and continues construction of its heavy-water reactor
and production of heavy water, while issues relevant to
the possible dimensions of Iran's nuclear programme
remain outstanding.

As the impasse on the Iranian nuclear issue is not
yet broken, the international community is increasingly
calling for greater diplomatic efforts, in the hopes that
the parties concerned can find a breakthrough point
soon and bring the issue back onto the track of
settlement.

It is against that background that the Security
Council once again adopted a new resolution on the
Iranian nuclear issue. Like the previous three
resolutions, it is not aimed at punishing Iran, but is

aimed at urging Iran's return to the negotiating table
and thus reactivating a new round of diplomatic efforts.
The sanctions measures are not targeted at the Iranian
people and will not affect normal economic and
financial activities between Iran and other countries.
All the sanctions measures are reversible. That is to
say, if Iran suspends uranium enrichment and
reprocessing activities and complies with the relevant
IAEA and Security Council resolutions, the sanctions
will be suspended and even terminated.

China wishes to reiterate that sanctions can never
fundamentally resolve the issue. They can only serve
as a means to promote reconciliation and negotiations.
The best way to resolve the issue remains diplomatic
negotiations. We call upon all parties concerned to
adopt a highly responsible and constructive attitude,
show the necessary flexibility as appropriate, give full
play to initiative and creativity and demonstrate
determination and sincerity in resuming negotiations.

We call upon the parties to make unremitting
efforts to enhance all-round diplomatic endeavours,
seek a solution that will not only ensure Iran's right to
the peaceful use of nuclear energy but also address the
international concern over nuclear non-proliferation,
and strive to achieve an early, long-term,
comprehensive and proper solution of the Iranian
nuclear issue. We call upon Iran to fully comply with
the IAEA and Security Council resolutions as soon as
possible.

The Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the six
countries have issued a joint statement, in which they
reiterate their commitment to resolving the issue
through diplomatic negotiations and express their
readiness to strengthen diplomatic efforts and adopt
creative approaches to vigorously facilitate the
resumption of negotiations. China hopes that all parties
concerned will seize the opportunity, engage in closer
contacts and dialogue on the basis of equality and
mutual respect, increase mutual trust and reduce
misperceptions, address on another's concerns and seek
an approach that is acceptable to all for the resumption
of negotiations.

China is ready to work with all parties to make a
contribution to the peaceful settlement of the Iranian
nuclear issue.
