Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to thank you, Sir, for your
delegation's initiative of convening this open debate on
such a complex and important issue as that of post-
conflict peacebuilding. I believe that the participation
of those speakers who preceded me, and their
statements, are commensurate with the importance that
my country attaches to this item and with that which
your country, Denmark, also attaches to it.

This is a timely initiative: to give an integrated
response to conflicts, a response in which the concept
of peacebuilding complements the traditional idea of
peacekeeping. The evolution of the concept of
peacebuilding reflects the close relationship between
that concept and that of conflict prevention. What we
have come to call peacebuilding aims both at
eradicating the deep root causes of a conflict and at
adopting a diverse group of measures intended to
prevent the resurgence of the conflict.

What does the Charter mean when it speaks of
the need to take effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to the peace and for
the suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches
of peace? Ultimately, in our view, this refers to
peacebuilding.

We see the process of peacebuilding as an effort
to internally improve the conditions for peace by
strengthening a society's capacity to manage its
conflicts without violence. In that context, in our view,
we cannot lose sight of the fact that the elements of an
appropriate strategy should include the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants;
addressing the situation of refugees and displaced
persons; the eradication of poverty; the promotion of
sustainable development; the protection of human
rights; and the strengthening of the rule of law and
democratic institutions.

We consider all those fundamental concepts to be
indispensable for planning any post-conflict
peacebuilding strategy. However, an integrated strategy
must take account of the specific characteristics of
each country in conflict. No conflict is the same as
another; only through deep knowledge of the causes of
a conflict will it be possible to formulate a
peacebuilding strategy.

I would therefore like to recall that in the
Millennium Declaration (General Assembly resolution 55/2) we decided to make the United Nations more
effective in maintaining peace and security by giving it
the resources and tools it needs for conflict prevention,
peaceful resolution of disputes, peacekeeping, post-
conflict peacebuilding and reconstruction.

Peacebuilding is a long-term process that requires
sustained action by the international community, as
well as by all parties involved, donors and troop-
contributing countries, with sufficient resources and a
common and coordinated political will with respect to
their activities in all phases from planning to
implementation.

In such peacebuilding processes, the Security
Council has the important role of coordinating the
work of numerous actors and of avoiding unnecessary
duplication, thus optimizing efficiency, especially with
respect to regional organizations, international
financial organizations and the affected States. In that
regard, coordination by the Security Council with the
Economic and Social Council in accordance with the
provisions of Article 65 of the Charter has a
fundamental role to play in the promotion of
sustainable development.

With respect to the Secretary-General's report
entitled "In larger freedom" (A/59/2005), we believe
that it is extremely important to stress the cooperation
and coordination that must exist among peacekeeping
operations and the funds, specialized agencies and
programmes of the United Nations system. Here, we
believe that the role of coordinating the work of the
various United Nations agencies, played in-country by
the Resident Representatives of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) with the objective
of avoiding overlapping efforts or resources, must be
coordinated with individual countries' policies for
poverty eradication and for reaching the Millennium
Development Goals. In our view, the guiding principles
for such cooperation must be respecting the decisions
of Governments, supporting and complementing their
initiatives and not acting parallel to them.

The challenge before us is great: we must
strengthen the capacity of the United Nations to
prevent conflicts, to respond rapidly when a conflict
occurs and to provide solutions for the building of a
lasting peace. My country strongly supports that
process and supports the present initiative.

