Mr. Franco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): In
the course of the open debate of 26 March, regarding
today's agenda item, we noted the need for a
comprehensive assessment, possibly to take place in
July, under the United Kingdom presidency. We are
gratified to note that this open debate, with the
presence of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Lakhdar Brahimi, could mark the
beginning of that exercise to understand fully the most
complex challenges that face the United Nations in this
region, which is particularly critical to international
peace and security.

We hail the progress in implementing the Bonn
Agreement, and we note, as does the Secretary-General
in his report, that this is a constantly evolving process,
subject to a large number of challenges and difficulties.
We take this opportunity to pay tribute to President
Karzai and the other Afghan authorities, as well as to
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), to the other countries of the region, and to
the rest of the international community, including
Japan, the United Kingdom, the United States,
Germany and Turkey, for their sustained commitment
to Afghanistan and for all that has been accomplished
in such a short period of time in the history of the
country. We convey particular congratulations to
Special Representative Brahimi on the quality of his
ideas and on the lucid way in which he has guided the
implementation of the "light expatriate footprint"
concept.

We hail the political progress made, including the
holding of the Loya Jirga, the formation of the
transitional Government, and in general the great step
forward that Afghanistan has taken towards
establishing a participatory democracy. We take note of
the immense challenges that lie ahead in the
humanitarian and reconstruction areas. But at the same
time, we express our confidence in the United Nations
approach, which aims at national capacity-building as
the most effective instrument for achieving results in
the not-too-distant future.

We draw attention to the importance of the
Afghan Government's commitment to eradicating the
cultivation and export of opium. And we remind the
Security Council that it is essential to apply fully the
principle of shared responsibility. This is an area where
the entire international community has something to
contribute. Drugs were a recurrent problem during the
Taliban period, when we were told of the existence of
large stockpiles to meet the demand. Now, this is still
an issue which tends to be relegated to a secondary
level, in spite of its potential to erode the nascent
institutions of Afghanistan and to promoting terrorist
activities and arms trafficking.

Security is still an ongoing issue. Security is,
without any doubt whatsoever, the most pressing need
of the Afghans at the present time. The Security
Council, through its actions, should help to meet that
need. The previous report of the Secretary-General
(S/2002/278), dated 18 March 2002, contained specific
references to this issue. In paragraph 126 of that report,
the Security Council was told that security remained
the essential requirement for the protection of the peace
process in Afghanistan. Moreover, the Council was
urged to make managing the security sector the first
reconstruction project in the country. Resolution 1401
(2002) was adopted subsequently, although it was
impossible fully to fulfil that appeal. The report of the
Secretary-General before us today and Ambassador
Brahimi's briefing make that appeal once again.

We understand the difficulties in securing
external forces prepared to participate in an expanded
deployment of the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) to areas outside of Kabul. However, this
understandable reluctance on the part of potential
contributors cannot be an argument for tolerating
complacency on the part of the Security Council,
especially when faced with a security situation that
could potentially undermine the effectiveness of its
other decisions. While progress is being made in
building up an ethnically and regionally balanced
national guard, the Council's responsibility is to
discuss alternative political plans in order to respond
promptly to potential crises in Afghanistan. These
would include the expansion of ISAF to areas other
than Kabul, on the basis of the terms described by
Mr. Brahimi.

The presence on Afghan territory of Taliban cells
and Al-Qaeda remnants, the fragmented and
decentralized pattern of power in the country, the
continued presence of independent military factions
throughout the territory, the remote relationship
between the central Government and the provinces and
the recent political assassinations are arguments that
militate in favour of careful Security Council reflection
on the security situation. The Council would have more
material on the basis of which to provide responses to
this dilemma if in the future it could receive
appropriate military advice, provided not only by the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and the
Secretariat, but also by the participants in the anti-
terrorist coalition led by the United States and the
military operation which began 8 October 2001.

We conclude by highlighting one aspect of
Mr. Brahimi's briefing on the integration process of the
United Nations. The common objective is to reinforce
Afghan capacities and to meet the priorities set within
the national development framework of the
Transitional Administration, and not the national
priorities of any other parties. This is a guiding
principle for the participation of the international
community which Colombia unreservedly supports.

