Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Allow me
to thank Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Yemen, whose valuable
and continued efforts we welcome; Stephen O'Brien,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs;
and Muhannad Hadi, World Food Programme Regional
Director, for their briefings and their commitment.

As we have just heard, the humanitarian situation in
Yemen is extremely serious. There are several aspects
that we find particularly troubling.

First is the attacks on the civilian population.
France firmly condemned the attack on 8 October,
where, according to the United Nations, there were 140
deaths and many wounded. We cannot stress enough
how essential it is that all parties respect international
humanitarian law.

The degradation of the health situation is very
troubling. Yemen's health-care system is almost
completely destroyed, and Yemenis no longer have
access to basic health services. Today more than
19 million people - approximately 80 per cent of the
population - have difficulty in accessing drinking
water and basic sanitation. In these circumstances, the
outbreak of cholera - with 6 deaths, 61 confirmed
cases to date and more than a million potentially
contaminated people - is particularly disturbing and
shows the extent to which the situation has deteriorated.

The picture painted by the World Food Programme
indicates that part of the population is on the brink of
famine. There has been no significant improvement for
months, especially in the regions most affected by the
conflict, and today 14 million Yemenis - over half
the population - live in conditions of food insecurity,
with 7 million of them in a food emergency situation.
Malnutrition rates have also reached alarming heights.

The survival of millions of Yemenis depends
today on the immediate and unimpeded delivery of
humanitarian aid, as well as on the re-establishment
of services that are essential for survival. More than
ever, the parties must ensure total, secure, permanent
and unhindered humanitarian access, pursuant to their
international obligations. In particular, the parties must
facilitate and guarantee the work on the ground by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

Given these tragic circumstances, the recent
military developments are unacceptable, and it is with
great concern that we have noted that the 72-hour
ceasefire last week was not only not fully observed, but
it was also not renewed. Attacks on vessels in the Red
Sea and against Saudi territory must cease. Moreover,
it is essential to determine precisely which country is
providing arms to the Houthis.

We once again call on parties to commit to and
honour a new and immediate cessation of hostilities,
which would provide a respite for the local population
and enable a resumption of negotiations. As we have
stated time and again, the only solution to the conflict
is a political one. We deeply regret the rejection of
the peace plan proposed by the Special Envoy. We are
ready, in the Security Council, to determine how to
pressure the parties to the Yemeni conflict to shoulder
their responsibilities. The Yemeni population has been
subjected to untold suffering. Each party must make the
necessary concessions and put their individual interests
aside. Each party must be able to commit to the road
map for peace and its implementation.

The basic parameters of the settlement are known
to one and all, as they were the result of in-depth
consultations over several months in Kuwait, New York
and, in recent days, in Riyadh and Sana'a. It is crucial
that the international community, particularly regional
Powers, support the process and not fuel the risk of
escalation. We reiterate our full support for the tireless
efforts of the Special Envoy and his road map - his
commitment and determination to bring the parties to
an agreement are remarkable and are to be encouraged.

The longer the conflict lasts, the more difficult
it will be to deal with its long-term consequences.
The more the humanitarian situation deteriorates, the
greater the reconstruction needs will be. The longer
the instability persists in the country - not allowing
the legitimate Government to exercise the control that
it should have - the greater the risk of terrorism,
which threatens not only Yemen but, as we know, the
entire world.

In conclusion, I would point out once again our
support for the efforts of the Special Envoy, who spares
no effort or time in securing the commitment of all
parties in restoring peace and stability in Yemen. We
fully trust him in reaching a definitive proposal that
will lead to an agreement. In our national capacity, we
are fully behind him and we will use every opportunity
to engage in dialogue with our regional partners to
advocate a cessation of hostilities and a peaceful
settlement in Yemen. Let us together show that it is
possible to have a unified Security Council in order to
settle the crisis, under the aegis ofthe United Nations. It
is our responsibility to do so, and if we pool our efforts
we will have the means.

