The President (spoke in Spanish): I would now like
to make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.

I would first like to thank the delegations that have
wished us well for Peru's assumption of the presidency
for the month of April. We also thank Mr. Lacroix for
his briefing and welcome the presence here today of
Ambassador Regis.

Peru is committed to sustaining peace in our
brother country of Haiti. As a troop-contributing
country we sent some 6,000 troops there over the 13
years of existence of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti, which worked to maintain stability
in the country, and we associate ourselves with the
statement that the representative of Canada will make
today on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti. Peru
has been closely following the positive developments of
recent years and the role played by the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH)
in strengthening the national institutions that are
called on to ensure access to justice, the rule of law
and the safeguarding of human rights, and in enabling
an orderly and viable transition to sustainable peace
in Haiti.

We would like to highlight three elements that we
consider essential in renewing MINUJUSTH's mandate.
The first is the importance of continuing to support
efforts to build institutions capable ofprotecting human
rights and ensuring access tojustice in Haiti. We believe
that this is a fundamental element of MINUJUSTH's
mandate that cuts across all of its the activities. Such
activities must rely on specific approaches to protecting
women's and children's rights and fighting corruption
and impunity. The latter includes ensuring due process,
dealing with legal proceedings expeditiously and
providing adequate prison conditions.

The second is the importance of coordinating
efforts effectively to ensure an orderly and feasible
transition to sustainable peace and development in
Haiti. That means strengthening the United Nations
presence in the country in supporting national efforts
to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, as well
as promoting partnerships with various stakeholders,
including international financial institutions, regional
and subregional organizations, the private sector and
civil society. We should also foster greater participation
by women and young people in building a viable future.

The third is the urgency of combating cholera. We
welcome the significant efforts that Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres has made in that area and stress
how important it is that the international community
increase its support for such efforts.

In the light of all of these issues, Peru supports the
renewal and extension of the mandate of MINUJUSTH
for an additional year, with a view to moving forward
with a transition process based on the conditions on
the ground and ensuring stability and economic and
social progress.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council

I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.

