Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, let me join others in expressing our deepest
grief to the representative and the friendly people of
China with regard to the tragic earthquake this
morning.

I would like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his update
on recent developments in the Middle East. We also
thank the Permanent Representative of Israel,
Ms. Gabriela Shalev, and the Permanent Observer of
Palestine, Mr. Riyad Mansour, for their presence and
contribution to our debate.

Allow me to point out that the delegation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina aligns itself with the
statement of the European Union.

Bosnia and Herzegovina remains deeply
concerned over the situation in the Middle East. Recent
events have additionally burdened the already fragile
situation on the ground. We therefore underscore the
need for an immediate resumption of the proximity
talks as a prelude to full Israeli-Palestinian peace
negotiations.

We take this opportunity to underscore once again
that lasting peace and security can be achieved only on
the basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions,
the Madrid principles, the Road Map and the
agreements previously reached by the parties, as well
as the Arab Peace Initiative. Bosnia and Herzegovina
remains committed to the two-State solution, with the
State of Israel and an independent, democratic,
contiguous and viable State of Palestine living side by
side in peace and security.

In order to achieve this objective, the parties have
to meet their obligations and commitments. In that
sense, Bosnia and Herzegovina condemns the recent
decision of the Government of Israel to approve the
building of 1,600 new housing units in East Jerusalem,
which came at a time when new hopes for the
resumption of proximity talks were on the horizon. We
reiterate that all settlement activity on occupied land is
illegal under international law and is contrary to
Israel's obligations under the Road Map. We call upon
Israel to immediately end all settlement activities,
including natural growth, dismantle all outposts erected
since March 2001 and refrain from demolitions and
evictions in East Jerusalem.

Bosnia and Herzegovina does not recognize the
annexation of East Jerusalem and stresses that the
status of Jerusalem is a permanent status issue that
must be resolved through negotiations between the
parties. We also wish to stress that the holy ground of
the three great monotheistic religions deserves mutual
and global respect for peace, freedom of religious
expression and human rights.

Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches high importance
to the determination of the Quartet to remain actively
involved on all tracks and to encourage the pursuit of a
comprehensive resolution of the Middle East conflict.
At its last meeting, held in Moscow on 19 March, the
Quartet underlined that the proximity talks are an
important step towards the resumption, without
preconditions, of direct, bilateral negotiations that
resolve all final status issues, as previously agreed by
the parties.
We also appreciate the efforts of the United States
Special Envoy, Senator Mitchell, and his tenacity in
laying the groundwork for a resumption of
negotiations. Furthermore, Bosnia and Herzegovina
supports the View that the entire international
community must help all the parties to transform the
unsustainable status quo into a politically sustainable
negotiating process without further delay, with a View
to reaching a peace agreement at the earliest possible
time.

Bosnia and Herzegovina deeply regrets the lack
of any meaningful steps towards reconstruction and
rehabilitation in Gaza. We reiterate our call for the
urgent and full implementation of resolution 1860
(2009) and for the immediate, sustained and
unconditional opening of crossings for the flow of
humanitarian aid, commercial goods and persons to
and from Gaza, in accordance with the 2005
Agreement on Movement and Access.

Bosnia and Herzegovina strongly condemns all
armed attacks on civilians and wishes to reiterate that
the civilian populations must be protected. We join the
Quartet in condemning the 18 March rocket fire from
Gaza and we urge the Palestinian side to continue to
implement its obligations to end violence. We call once
more for an immediate end to all violence and terror.
We urge all the parties to observe restraint and make
every effort to avoid further escalation.

I would like to conclude by emphasizing that
meaningful dialogue is the only way forward. Bosnia
and Herzegovina urges both the Israelis and the
Palestinians to immediately resume peace negotiations
as the conditio sine qua non for achieving a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

