Miss Durrant (Jamaica): My delegation wishes
to thank Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his
briefing on the developments in Kosovo since the
Council was last briefed on 19 December. Many of the
concerns which were expressed in that briefing by my
delegation still remain, particularly in relation to the
security situation, the situation of minority
communities, detained and missing persons and the
humanitarian situation. We are still deeply concerned
about the situation in the Presevo Valley and the
potential for destabilization. That situation must not be
allowed to worsen further.

Since we were briefed in December, Mr. Hans
Haekkerup has taken over as head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) in succession to the dynamic leadership of
Mr. Bernard Kouchner, to whom my delegation wishes
all the best in his future endeavours. We extend a warm
welcome to the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General as he seeks to address the remaining
challenges in Kosovo. We have noted that his first
priority is to speed up the preparatory process that will
lead to Kosovo-wide elections. We agree that the legal
framework for an elected assembly and provisional
Government has to be settled before such elections are
held.

We are still convinced that the provisions in
resolution 1244 (1999) must serve as the basis for the
work of UNMIK and must be fully implemented. The
work of UNMIK is significant and my delegation
wishes once again to express our unequivocal support
for that work as the Mission's men and women seek to
prepare Kosovo for substantial autonomy, in
collaboration with the people of Kosovo. We encourage
UNMIK to continue its work in reconfiguring the
existing administrative structures as part of its efforts
to build local capacity for self-governance.

We believe that the process of defining autonomy
and of developing institutions of self-government, with
the people of Kosovo sharing more and more
responsibility in the administration of the province,
must be actively pursued. The early meeting between
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the members of the Interim Administrative Council
underlines his commitment to fulfilling the terms of
resolution 1244 (1999).

The Jamaican delegation fully supports the other
priorities set out by the Special Representative, namely,
making law enforcement as effective as possible in
order to create a secure environment for the return of
Kosovo Serbs, and fighting organized crime. While
there have been notable improvements over the last
year and a half, my delegation remains concerned
about the security situation and the situation of
minorities. We have always maintained that, until these
are effectively addressed, it will be difficult to promote
reconciliation. These groups continue to feel at risk and
this does not augur well for continued forward
movement. We have noted the terms of the framework
document to which Under-Secretary-General Guehenno
referred, established for the return of Kosovo Serbs,
and we hope that this document can be put into practice
speedily.

It is only when these concerns are addressed that
the people of Kosovo will be able to focus on their
pressing social and economic needs. We welcome the
focus on economic development, particularly the
development of small and medium enterprises. We
agree that a legal framework is critical for the
promotion of private-sector development, and we
welcome the four key regulations which were endorsed
by the Interim Administrative Council (IAC).

The priorities outlined by Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno, in addition to private-sector
development, are essential when looking at Kosovo's
development in a broader sense. Built into the areas of
health, education, poverty alleviation and housing,
however, must be the focus on capacity-building,
which will prepare the people of Kosovo for autonomy
and ensure sustainability of the projects which have
begun.

Under-Secretary-General Guehenno has informed
us that the situation in southern Serbia, in the Presevo
Valley, remains unstable, and that recent incidents
threaten the ceasefire. If the sources of tension are to
be removed, it is important that a spirit of
reconciliation be generated among the communities.
The flow of illegal weapons must be stopped.

My delegation reiterates that it is imperative that
there should be increased surveillance by the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) to put an end to extremist activities and
to stop the traffic in illegal weapons. We continue to be
encouraged by the commitment of the Yugoslav
authorities to work with UNMIK, and we believe that
this can only be helped by UNMIK's decision to
establish a liaison office in Belgrade.

The issue of trafficking in human persons is one
which my delegation has addressed on several
occasions over the past year. We were therefore pleased
to learn that UNMIK has now approved a regulation
making trafficking in persons a crime punishable by
two to 20 years in prison. This is an important
development, as it indicates the seriousness of the
crime, which affects mainly women and which has to
be addressed in concert with the neighbouring
countries.

The regulations prohibiting trials in absentia for
serious violations of law and creating the legal
guarantees necessary to make Kosovo more attractive
to foreign investment are other important additions to
the corpus of law for Kosovo.

Let me join in thanking Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno for having briefed the Council on the
voluntary testing programme being instituted by
UNMIK in regard to the possible hazards from
depleted uranium. This is important to allay fears,
particularly among the civilian population of Kosovo,
and we agree with Ambassador Chowdhury that the
Council should be kept informed of any developments.

In conclusion, my delegation recognizes that
many challenges remain for Kosovo and for the
international community in the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999). We will continue to fully
support the efforts of UNMIK and the people of
Kosovo as they seek to chart their future destiny.

