Ms. Haq: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to
introduce the report of the Secretary-General
(S/201 1/641) on the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), covering the period from
8 January to 20 September 2011. I would like to
acknowledge the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Timor-Leste, Mr. Zacarias Albano da Costa.
The report describes a calm situation in which the
overall trend is positive and the country continues to
make progress towards sustainable peace and
development. When UNMIT was established in 2006,
Timor-Leste was marked by a fragile security situation,
a weak institutional framework for the Policia Nacional
de Timor-Leste (PNTL), and thousands of internally
displaced persons in camps throughout the capital.

Today, Timor-Leste is a very different place.
Much has been achieved. Political leaders across the
board are unequivocal about the need for continued
peace, dialogue and stability. The PNTL has resumed
responsibility for police operations throughout the
country, and UNMIT police has intensified its focus on
providing support for further institutional development
and capacity-building of the PNTL. Dili is a vibrant
and safe city. With the Government's Strategic
Development Plan for 2011-2030, there is along-term
vision for the further development of the country. The
electoral management bodies have significantly
strengthened their capacity since 2006 and are
spearheading preparations for presidential and
parliamentary elections in 2012. Nevertheless,
significant challenges remain, including in the areas of
institutional capacity-building, further strengthening of
the security sector, and such socio-economic issues as
youth unemployment.

President Jose Ramos-Horta, President of
National Parliament Fernando "Lasama" de Araujo,
Prime Minister Kay Rala Xanana Gusmao, and Frente
Revolucionaria do Timor-Leste Independente
Secretary-General Mari Alkatiri deserve much credit
for contributing to an environment in Timor-Leste of
continued progress towards the consolidation of peace,
development and stability. They and other political
leaders from across the spectrum have consistently
reiterated the importance of promoting tolerance,
mutual respect, and commitment to the democratic
process. Since the report's closing date of
20 September, I have held two of my regular meetings
with all political parties, and one meeting with women
party representatives. During these meetings, I have
been heartened to hear party representatives describe
their own responsibilities towards ensuring that this
constructive political climate persists.

As the Secretary-General's report notes, good
progress continues to be made in all areas of UNMIT's
mandate. Let me first focus on two key elements for
continued peace and stability in Timor-Leste that are
11-60396
also critical aspects of UNMIT's mandated support:
policing and elections.

In the area of policing, the PNTL's resumption of
responsibility for the conduct, command and control of
all police operations in the country on 27 March was a
milestone. As I mentioned earlier, since then UNMIT
police support has focused on strengthening capacity-
building and training of the PNTL within the
framework of the PNTL-UNMIT Police Joint
Development Plan. The Plan sets out a comprehensive
programme of capacity-building activities in the key
areas of administration, discipline, legislation,
operations and training. UNMIT police have also been
providing operational support to the PNTL as required
and requested, and will maintain this capacity
throughout the electoral period. UNMIT police are
already supporting the PNTL in preparing for the 2012
elections, including through ongoing training in the
areas of operational planning and incident command
and control, as well as assistance in developing a joint
operations plan for elections.

A key challenge for meeting our goals in the
policing area is retaining UNMIT police officers and
selecting others with the expertise needed for the
effective implementation of the Joint Development
Plan. Here, I appeal to police-contributing countries to
provide officers qualified for specialized advisory
positions, and reiterate the Secretary-General's request
that the countries concerned approve extensions of
deployment for police officers serving in key UNMIT
positions.

Since the PNTL's resumption of policing
responsibilities on 27 March, PNTL officers have
effectively addressed incidents, and there has been no
impact on the continuing low crime rate. In the long-
term, the PNTL's enduring effectiveness will depend,
to a large extent, on its ability to maintain the trust of
the Timorese public. As noted in the Secretary-
General's report, the Office of the Secretary of State
for Security completed its review of the 199 officers
with pending criminal or disciplinary issues, with
criminal and/or disciplinary action recommended
against 121 officers. The importance of the PNTL's
continuing efforts to enhance internal disciplinary
mechanisms - demonstrating its commitment to
transparency and the rule of law - cannot be
overstated. Another essential element of maintaining
trust among the population is to serve its most
vulnerable members, including the victims of domestic
11-60396
violence, which continues to be the second highest
reported crime in Timor-Leste after assault. Continued
efforts to engage in community policing can assist in
tackling this issue, which UNMIT continues to
promote in all our work with the PNTL.

As mentioned in the Secretary-General's report,
the PNTL continues to face a challenge in meeting all
of its logistical requirements. I urge the Government
and Parliament, including in the context of the current
2012 budget discussions, to work together to ensure
adequate financial allocations for the PNTL to
overcome existing logistical gaps and to maintain any
assets UNMIT might eventually transfer to it. Those
gaps are also being discussed in the High-level
Committee on Transition, on the basis of detailed
analysis of requirements and costs.

The parliamentary and presidential elections in
2012 will undoubtedly be another major milestone for
Timor-Leste. Although the electoral calendar has not
yet been announced, preparations are proceeding. The
Technical Secretariat for Electoral Administration has
drafted subsidiary electoral legislation, including the
rules and procedures for candidate nomination, polling
and counting and campaigning, as well as codes of
conduct for media, observers and party representatives,
all of which are currently under review by the National
Electoral Commission. United Nations support to the
elections, provided through the joint UNMIT and
United Nations Development Programme electoral
support team, is a key example of United Nations
integration in action.

I would like to highlight that, while the
representation of women in Parliament - 21 out of
65 members - is already commendable, Parliament's
approval of the amended parliamentary election law
providing for an increase in the quota of women on
party lists of candidates to one in every three reflects
the widespread commitment to women's participation.
To enhance women's participation in the elections,
both as voters and as candidates, a national steering
committee has been established, comprised of members
of Parliament, the Secretariat of State for the
Promotion of Equality, the electoral management
bodies, civil society organizations, United Nations
agencies and UNMIT. On 7 and 8 November, the
steering committee hosted a national workshop,
entitled "Women's leadership leads us to peace and
stability", to discuss strategies to bolster women's
participation in the elections.
3

Nevertheless, challenges remain. While women
are currently playing important roles in a number of
key Cabinet, State and other leadership positions, it is
encouraging that multi-pronged efforts are being made
by the Government and local authorities, civil society
and the United Nations to increase the level of
women's participation in political, electoral and other
decision-making processes. During my discussions
over the past months, I have appealed to all entities
concerned, including State institutions and political
parties in Timor-Leste, to promote women's full
participation in important forums and decision-making
processes that will influence the course of their
country's future.

The elections are expected to be a major political
event next year. I encourage international partners to
again show their commitment to Timor-Leste by
sending observers for the elections and by providing
the financial support still needed for United Nations
electoral activities to be conducted at the request of the
Government.

Furthermore, the elections are widely expected to
lead to a peaceful transition to a new Government in
Timor-Leste, by the third quarter of 2012, with the
space for meaningful engagement of an opposition. It
is also expected that the PNTL will demonstrate its
capacity to manage security throughout the electoral
period. Based on those assumptions, and counting on
continued stability, I am optimistic that conditions will
allow for a smooth departure of UNMIT by
31 December 2012.

On 30 September, the Government submitted to
Parliament its proposal for the 2012 State budget, in
the amount of $1.76 billion, with the plenary debate
beginning on 9 November and expected to conclude by
25 November. Parliament's discussions of that budget,
in which all parties, including the opposition, actively
participate, is yet another example of its role as a well-
functioning forum for democratic debate.

As the Council knows, in July, Parliament
approved the Timor-Leste Strategic Development Plan
for the period 2011 to 2030, which sets out the
Government's strategies and actions to transform
Timor-Leste into an upper-middle income country by
2030. As the implementation of the Plan proceeds, it
will be important for public investments to promote
inclusive, equitable and sustainable growth, so that all
segments of the population benefit from Timor-Leste's
natural resources and growth. Creating increased
employment opportunities for young people will be
particularly important as an indispensable contribution
to long-term stability and prosperity.

Encouragingly, Timor-Leste's leaders are tackling
those issues, making good progress on several of the
Millennium Development Goals and redoubling
attention to the targets that are currently off-track.
Furthermore, through its chairmanship of the group of
seven plus fragile States (g7+), Timor-Leste is at the
forefront of the global policy agenda on strategies for
enhancing aid effectiveness to fragile and conflict-
affected states.

Finally, there have been advances in
strengthening the anti-corruption infrastructure. The
Anti-Corruption Commission, which became fully
staffed at the beginning of this year, has proceeded to
undertake investigations. Parliament also approved a
law establishing the Audit Chamber of the High
Administrative Tax and Audit Court, whose staff are
now being trained in Lisbon.

As mentioned in the Secretary-General's report,
the Commander of the Falintil-Forcas de Defesa de
Timor-Leste (F-FDTL), Major General Taur Matan
Ruak, resigned on 1 September. On 6 October,
President Jose Ramos-Horta hosted a ceremony to
mark the transfer of command to newly promoted
Major General Lere Anan Timur, Major General Ruak's
long-term deputy. That smooth transfer of command is
a promising sign for F-FDTL's continued institutional
stability.

Timor-Leste has also continued to demonstrate its
commitment to human rights. On 12 October, Timor-
Leste's national report, which highlights the progress
made and challenges faced in efforts to promote and
protect human rights in the country, was adopted at the
twelfth session of the working group of the United
Nations Human Rights Council, under the Universal
Periodic Review.

On 20 September, UNMIT launched the first
public report by a peacekeeping mission on the rights
of persons with disabilities, entitled "Of Course We
Can". At that event, for the first time, UNMIT provided
persons with disabilities information in alternative
formats, including a Braille version of the report and
sign language.
11-60396

UNMIT's transition is well under way. On
19 September, the President, the Prime Minister and I
signed a joint transition plan to guide the transition
process in seven focus areas. That was the first time
that a peacekeeping mission jointly established such a
mechanism with a host Government. It has been a
personal privilege for me to work so closely with the
Timorese leadership on this ongoing matter.

As part of the transition process, the Government
is proceeding with efforts to ensure that sufficient
resources are dedicated to strengthening its logistical
capacity in areas currently supported by UNMIT, such
as aviation services. In addition, UNMIT is increasing
its capacity-building activities, for both its almost 900
national staff and for various national counterparts. In
the context of the transition process, joint working
groups in each of the focus areas have also identified
areas of support currently provided by UNMIT that
should be handed over to United Nations agencies,
which in turn will need to raise the financial resources
required to expand their responsibilities between now
and the end of next year.

The planned and orderly conclusion of a
peacekeeping mission is only one aspect of a
successful transition. Equally important is establishing
the nature of the United Nations engagement that will
be needed thereafter by the country in question, in
consultation with that Government based on its
priorities and requirements. As the Secretary-General
has indicated in his report (S/2011/641), consultations
will continue on various options for a United Nations
presence in Timor-Leste following UNMIT, noting that
any option would need to be discussed with the
Government that will be formed following the 2012
elections.

The coming year will be an eventful one for
Timor-Leste. Just like the Timorese public, UNMIT
looks forward to what in Dili is sometimes called the
democracy-fest that is expected in 2012. Credible and
peaceful presidential and parliamentary elections
would further demonstrate to the world the progress
made by Timor-Leste in advancing sustainable peace
and development. The elections will also be a test of
the capacity of Timorese security institutions,
particularly the PNTL, to ensure public safety and
security across the country.
As I mentioned earlier, Timor-Leste still faces a
number of long-term challenges in order to achieve its
development aspirations, including in terms of
enhancing institutional capacities, further

strengthening the security sector and increasing human
resources. In areas such as access to justice, oversight
and accountability mechanisms, youth employment and
health, additional support will be particularly needed.
Yet, as the Secretary-General's report reflects, there are
also many reasons for optimism. First and foremost
among them is the determination of the Timorese
people, without which none of the progress described
in the report would have been possible.

In conclusion, I would like to thank Foreign
Minister Da Costa, as the representative of the
Government of Timor-Leste, for our excellent
collaboration. I would furthermore like to thank all
political parties, including the opposition, as well as
civil society, for their continued collaboration. My
thanks also go to all staff of UNMIT and the United
Nations country team for their contribution towards our
mandated efforts to support Timor-Leste.

