The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Nigeria.

I add my voice of appreciation to Assistant
Secretary-General Cheng-Hopkins for her lucid and
comprehensive briefing. I also want to thank
Ambassador Sylvie Lucas, Chair of the peacebuilding
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
for Guinea, for sharing her perspectives on the PBC
with us.

Nigeria greatly appreciates the continuing
dialogue on the activities, progress and challenges of
United Nations peacebuilding, given our common
efforts to prevent post-conflict countries from sliding
back into war. The Secretary-General's agenda for
action delineated the yardsticks for measuring the
effectiveness of the efforts of the PBC, the
Peacebuilding Support Office (PBSO), the Security
Council, the integrated United Nations missions and
other major actors in the peacebuilding arena.

The PBC itself has outlined a road map of actions
in 2011 to add value to its peacebuilding efforts. The
road map identifies resource mobilization and the
building of national capacities as core peacebuilding
priorities. As a lightning rod for the United Nations
major peacebuilding efforts, the PBSO has supported
the progressive realization of the road map over the
past year. Indeed, six years since the inception of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture, the PBC
and the PBSO have undeniably transformed our
collective vision of conflict resolution.

The derivative of this renewed focus on
benchmarks is an emerging resource-driven approach
to peacebuilding by all the funds and agencies
concerned with post-conflict peacebuilding. However,
in this drive for results, we must never lose sight of the
imperative to tailor all peacebuilding programmes to
the specific needs of the host nation. As an ardent
supporter of the peacebuilding agenda, Nigeria is
convinced that the results-driven approach,
complemented by national ownership, is a prerequisite
for sustaining the high-level political commitment of
Member States and international institutions alike to
programmes that assist countries transitioning from
conflict.

It is our task in the Council to actively engage
with the PBSO and the PBC in exchanging views on
peacebuilding best practices and lessons learned.
Besides providing immense benefits to countries on the
agenda of the PBC, lessons learned can also benefit
other nations emerging from a state of instability. A
case in point is the new Libya, whose current
leadership has reached out to the United Nations for
post-conflict support and assistance. The vision of the
National Transitional Council - and indeed, of all of
us - of a peaceful, harmonious Libya cannot be
realized without social structures in place to ensure the
rule of law and the adequate provision of social and
economic infrastructure.

Over the past six years, the PBSO, the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund have acquired appreciable specialization in
helping nations to their feet after devastating conflicts.
Their wealth of knowledge should be mined for
principles of peacebuilding that will be applicable even
in countries that are not on the PBC's agenda.

The notion of early peacebuilding that PBC Chair
Ambassador Gasana vociferously advocated in March
should be developed, promoted and operationalized. To
address the multidimensional challenges faced in post-
conflict settings, we must recognize the thin line
between traditional peacekeeping operations and
peacebuilding. Through the rapid deployment of
peacebuilding agents, we can lay the foundations for
long-term peace, independent of external actors.
Providing training for mission leadership and building
national civilian capacity for achieving national
ownership are also critical areas that require intense
focus, as most States often lack national capacities in
the aftermath of protracted conflict. Indeed, given the
complexity of the threats to peace, there is an even
greater imperative for the coordination of responses. A
clear division of labour and accountability must be
agreed, buttressed by a common strategic framework
and aligned with the objectives of each peacebuilding
exercise.

In addition, I wish to emphasize the critical need
for collaboration between the United Nations and the
regional and subregional organizations within the
geographical zones of the countries on the PBC
agenda. The contributions of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) and the African
Union in peacebuilding in their various regions have
been very remarkable and enormous.

Turning specifically to Guinea-Bissau, we can
say that the security sector reform programme is
absolutely central to that country's return to stability.
While the ECOWAS road map has been proven to be
an important rallying point, the country needs
continued technical and financial assistance in the
implementation of the road map's steps. Therefore, all
stakeholders must remain resolute in our support of the
Guinea-Bissau Government.
As was discussed in the Council only last Friday
(see S/PV.6642), women must play a central role in
conflict prevention and peacebuilding. Indeed, there is
an urgent need to enhance the mobilization of
resources available for initiatives to mainstream
women in peacebuilding activities, in order to address
their peacebuilding needs, promote gender equality and
empower women in peacebuilding contexts.

We want to call on all stakeholders in the

peacebuilding effort to remain focused on all that can

be achieved in the long term through a sustained

commitment and indeed a collective and sustained
effort.
22
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council. There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.
11-57138
