Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): I, too, should like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Kane for her briefing.

The situation surrounding Palestine and Israel
presents critical challenges at this time. All parties
concerned must exercise the utmost restraint in order to
avoid a further escalation of the situation.

Japan is deeply concerned over the deterioration
of the situation caused by the recent acts of violence by
the Palestinian extremist groups and the military
operations conducted by the Israel Defense Forces,
mainly in the Gaza Strip. We call on the Government
of the Palestinian Authority to bring to an end the
violence by the Palestinian extremist groups, including
rocket attacks, and to make every possible effort to
secure the immediate release of the Israeli soldier
abducted on 25 June.

In that regard, Japan has been working for
immediate action on that case through various
examples. For example, Mr. Tatsuo Arima, Special
Envoy of the Government of Japan on the Middle East
Peace Process, appealed to President Abbas on 26 June
to make efforts to resolve this matter.

Japan calls upon the Government of Israel, in
particular, to exercise maximum restraint. We strongly
urge the Israeli Government to avoid actions that cause
casualties among Palestinian civilians, as well as those
which bring about the destruction of civilian
infrastructure, such as electric power stations, and thus

directly impact the daily lives of the Palestinian
population. The detention of elected members of the
Palestinian Government and legislature is cause for
grave concern. Japan also expresses its regret at the
flight by Israeli military aircraft over Syrian territory,
which can only serve to heighten the tension in the
region.

Japan is deeply concerned over the negative
impact which the deterioration of the situation will
have on future efforts for peace. At the same time, we
strongly hope that the situation will calm down and
that an environment will prevail that is conducive to
negotiations for peace. To that end, Japan welcomes
the pledges made by Prime Minister Olmert and
President Abbas last week to undertake negotiations,
and Japan supports the efforts made by President
Abbas to advance the peace process. We also expect
Israel to refrain from taking any unilateral action that
might prejudge the outcome of the final status
negotiations.

We are concerned about the further exacerbation
of the humanitarian situation in Palestine. We reiterate
at this critical juncture the importance for the
international community, including Israel, to continue
providing humanitarian assistance and to take
necessary measures for that purpose.

One year ago, at the time of President Abbas'
visit to Japan, Prime Minister Koizumi announced an
assistance package of approximately $100 million for
the immediate future in support of the President's
peace efforts and for the well-being of the Palestinian
people. About 80 per cent of the pledged amount has
been disbursed to date. Japan, as one of the major
donors to Palestine, will address the improvement of
the humanitarian situation in an appropriate manner. It
is of primary importance, however, for the Israeli
Government fully to resume the transfer of tax and
customs revenues to the Palestinian Authority in order
to improve the fiscal and humanitarian situations in
Palestine.

In conclusion, we announced last Wednesday that
Prime Minister Koizumi will be making a visit to
Israel, Palestine and Jordan just prior to the
forthcoming Group of 8 summit meeting, if the
situation permits. During his visit, he will hold talks
with his counterparts to seek ways for the advancement
of the Middle East peace process through negotiation,
and encourage the relevant leaders to take a proactive
role in that endeavour.

