Ms. Wilson (Australia): I thank you, Sir, for having
convened this important meeting today.

The scale, nature and compounding impact oftoday's
global peace and security challenges are immense and
seriously straining the resources and capacity of the
United Nations to respond. Those issues have been felt
most acutely by a number ofAfrican countries caught in
cycles of violence, crisis and relapse. More than half of
the world's armed conflicts are taking place in Africa,
causing significant suffering and displacement. The
majority of United Nations peacekeeping missions are
deployed in Africa, and conflicts there dominate the
Council's agenda. While the United Nations is rightly
at the centre of global efforts to maintain international
peace and security, it cannot and should not do it alone.

Strategic and operational partnerships between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, in line with Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, are essential to preventing
crises, strengthening international responses,
increasing coherence and complementarity of efforts,
and achieving sustainable peace. Indeed, the need for
closer strategic cooperation and partnership between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations was a consistent finding across the
recent reviews on United Nations peace operations,
peacebuilding architecture and resolution 1325 (2000)
on women and peace and security, with the role of the
African Union (AU) particularly emphasized. The
outcome of the peacebuilding review built further
on those findings, specifically encouraging regular
exchanges, joint initiatives and information-sharing
between the United Nations and the African Union.
Australia strongly supports those efforts.
The United Nations has long understood that
addressing the root causes of conflict is fundamental
to finding durable solutions. Local and regional actors,
including organizations like the African Union and
its subregional economic communities, are often
well placed to sound the early warning siren to the
international community of emerging threats to peace.
It is critical to make the most of the comparative
advantages between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations. Further strengthening
the partnership between the AU and the United Nations
is one of the most important opportunities to do that.

Great strides have been made over recent years
to enhance United Nations-AU cooperation. Australia
welcomes growing African leadership in maintaining
peace and security in the region. But more can be
done. Australia calls for all parties to continue to work
together in those efforts, particularly to formalize
early engagement to enhance communication and
information-sharing; undertake joint analysis,
coordinated threat assessments and joint early warning
assessment missions to ensure common understanding;
strengthen operational and policy coherence between
the organizations; improve links between the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council; and
better facilitate transitions between regional and United
Nations peace support operations, when required.

