Mr. Ayewah (Nigeria): Mr. President, today in Bosnia
and Herzegovina we have in UNPROFOR a United Nations
presence expected to keep the peace, render humanitarian
assistance and promote a peaceful resolution of the conflict
through political negotiation. Its performance of this task is
premised on the cooperation of the parties to the conflict.
Unfortunately, for most of its stay so far in Bosnia, it
cannot be said that UNPROFOR has enjoyed the confidence
and cooperation of both parties: its personnel have been
deliberately targeted, resulting in an unusually high
number of casualties. At other times, they have been
harassed, held hostage, chained, detained, and thoroughly
humiliated. UNPROFOR remains the most expensive
United Nations peace-keeping operation, and yet the
achievement of peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina remains
a distant dream.

In essence, all the arguments in favour of a total
withdrawal of the United Nations from Bosnia are
present, yet we all agree that Bosnia should not be
abandoned, that humanitarian assistance must continue to
be rendered and that civilian populations must be
protected to the extent possible. We also agree that the
war must be contained, and that the credibility of the
United Nations must not be allowed to suffer irreparably
through a precipitate withdrawal. There lies the dilemma
of the Security Council and of the international
community.

If we compare this with other situations, we can see
that to talk of having reached a turning-point in the
Council's assessment of the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina would almost be an understatement. Indeed,
my delegation believes that the turning-point has been
passed beyond which UNPROFOR's ability to operate
effectively, efficiently and safely in much of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, on the basis of impartiality and the consent
of all the parties, may be seriously compromised. The
United Nations must therefore endeavour to maintain its
neutrality and avoid falling down the slippery slope of
becoming involved as a combatant in the field.

The crisis of the last two and a half weeks -
following the air strikes - in which UNPROFOR
personnel were detained by the Bosnian Serb forces,
many of them in humiliating circumstances and in
violation of international norms of military conduct, has
been a source of great concern to my Government. It is
concerned not only about the safety of those detained but
about the image of the United Nations, and it is against
this background that my delegation has carefully
considered the recent report of the Secretary-General on
the performance of UNPROFOR.

In examining this report, we took careful note of the
key observations of the Secretary-General, which, inter
alia, include a reference to the parties' lingering illusion
that a military solution to the conflict is possible:
UNPROFOR is not in Bosnia to end or to fight a war, but
to create the necessary conditions for a negotiated
settlement. Furthermore, a recurring refrain throughout the

 

report is the emphasis the Secretary-General places on the
need for the consent and cooperation of the parties if
UNPROFOR is to discharge its duties.

A related notion is reflected in his remark that military
protection serves primarily to dissuade random or
unorganized attacks, and cannot substitute for the consent
and cooperation of the parties. According to the
Secretary-General,

"consent and cooperation could be assured, in the
midst of war, only by strict adherence to the peace-
keeping principles of impartiality and transparency."
(S/1995/444, para. 56)

In the absence of the required consent and cooperation,
only limited measures are available to reduce the risks to
the Force's personnel.

In his report, the Secretary-General has requested the
Security Council to spell out UNPROFOR's mandate in
Bosnia clearly and to also clarify the ambiguities
surrounding its assigned tasks. In this connection, he has
put forward four options for the future of UNPROFOR. The
Council's current response - to increase the number of
troops in Bosnia to protect UNPROFOR better and enhance
its capability to discharge its duties - does not answer
some of the pertinent questions that have been posed by the
Secretary-General, nor would it, in our view, enhance
UNPROFOR's performance of its duties in the long run, in
the absence of a cease-fire, a cessation of hostilities,
cooperation from both parties and an intensification of the
political process.

Nevertheless, we have taken note of the assurance that
in spite of the significant increase in the strength of
UNPROFOR through the rapid reaction force, which would
have the effect of changing its configuration as a
peace-keeping operation, the status and impartiality of
UNPROFOR will be maintained. Given my Government's
view that countries in the region, particularly those with
some leverage, have a primary responsibility in terms of
initiatives to resolve this crisis, and given our commitment
not to abandon Bosnia as it tries to defend its sovereignty
and territorial integrity, my delegation will go along with
the present draft resolution. In this context, we appreciate
the readiness of the Governments of France, the United
Kingdom and the Netherlands to provide up to 12,500
additional troops to augment UNPROFOR's strength. It is
the hope of my Government that, while we are improving
UNPROFOR's protection and capability, initiatives on the
diplomatic political track will resume and be pursued with
vigour. For only then will our decision today be
considered an appropriate response to the situation.

In conclusion, we would like to restate our strong
condemnation of all attacks on UNPROFOR personnel by
whosoever committed. The taking of hostages constitutes
an act of terrorism under international law, and it is
unacceptable. We call on the parties, especially the
Bosnian Serbs, to respect the status of United Nations
personnel and to release forthwith and unconditionally
those who are still being held. We also call on the parties
to renounce the military option and to commit themselves
to a resolution of the conflict through political agreement,
for which the Contact Group Peace Plan serves as a good
starting point.

