Mr. Berger (Germany): First of all, I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
briefings to the Security Council on the situation in the
Sahel. I would also like to welcome the report of the
assessment mission to the region (see S/2012/42).

The report confirms a worrying picture of the
situation in the Sahel region and related security,
economic and humanitarian concerns. Responding to
the crisis, Germany is currently carrying out financial
and technical cooperation projects in the region in the
amount of approximately $10 million. We are
particularly concerned that the underlying structural
problems pre-dating the conflict in Libya - mainly
underdevelopment, migration and climate-related
effects - have not or not sufficiently been addressed.

A first analysis of the existing national and
regional measures to tackle those issues shows the
need for enhanced cooperation among the affected
States in the region and a better coordination of the
international community's assistance. Measures to
overcome those shortcomings should address both
immediate requirements and the structural deficits.
They should include support for the ongoing initiatives
of Governments in the region and the strengthening of
existing regional mechanisms.
Continuous dialogue with countries like Algeria
and Nigeria in security matters is important.
Cooperation mechanisms with the new authorities in

Libya should be further strengthened. All international
activities to destroy and control weapons in Libya, to
which Germany contributes, are highly relevant.
Renewed interest in regional cooperation among the
Maghreb countries might also offer new perspectives.

At the same time, the coordination of the
different and ongoing United Nations activities in the
region should be improved. Such measures to address
different shortcomings should also be conceived in
consideration of the European Union Strategy for
Security and Development in the Sahel. That Strategy,
which focuses mainly on Mali, Mauritania and Niger,
combines development and security issues and will be
funded with an additional €150 million. The Strategy
will be implemented in close cooperation with the
Economic Community of West African States and the
African Union.

In that regard, we welcome the fact that the
African Union participated in the United Nations joint
assessment mission, and we appreciate the work done
by the mission. We feel that in the future, the United
Nations Office for West Africa, which is already
working closely with many countries of the region,
could increase its focus on security threats in the whole
Sahel area.

In order to create added value to initiatives
already under way, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General could contribute to encouraging
regional cooperation among the Sahel countries in the
fight against terrorism and organized crime, in close
coordination with concerned African regional
organizations, especially ECOWAS, and other
international partners.

Finally, I would like to welcome the inclusion of
the topic of the impacts of climate change on the
security environment in the report of the assessment
mission. We support the draft press statement
submitted by the representative of France.

