Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): As we are nearing the
end of the month of October, which has been filled
with many challenging events, I would like to
congratulate you and your team on the forthcoming
successful conclusion of your presidency of the
Security Council. The decision to hold today's open
debate is yet another example of the Council's active
involvement in Kosovo activities.

It gives me special pleasure to welcome here the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Harri Holkeri. A skilful master of political dialogue
and compromise, Mr. Holkeri inherited the difficult
task of facilitating political stabilization and multi-
ethnic reconciliation in Kosovo. On behalf of the
Ukrainian Government, I wish him every success in
leading these processes to fruition.

Four years after the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999), the Kosovo case still reminds
us that peace, in its broader sense, is not just an
absence of war, but rather a state of mind, a disposition
for benevolence, confidence and justice. Though the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2003/996) of 15
October 2003 reflects many promising developments
on the ground, I trust we all agree that the current
period is one of the most sensitive and decisive for
international efforts in the province.

An optimist sees an opportunity in every
calamity; however, a pessimist finds a calamity at
every opportunity. To avoid being trapped between
these two controversial approaches, in assessing the
general situation in Kosovo we think we should
acknowledge that, for all its real and perceived failures,
the international presence has achieved important
results in laying a foundation for democratic
transformations in the region. However, the situation
will remain fragile and shaky unless the temptation to
engage in internal political manoeuvres in Kosovo is
replaced by a strong will and a strategic vision for a
multi-ethnic society in which all its people can live in
security and in dignity.

The international community's strategy of
"standards before status", as was said by many
representatives, provides the necessary framework for
the practical and result-oriented work towards this
goal.

We fully support the efforts of the Special
Representative, Mr. Holkeri, aimed at implementing
the benchmarks, improving the rule of law and security
conditions, furthering returns and minority rights and
promoting economic development.

We regret that the initial period of Mr. Holkeri's
activities has been marred by a number of violent
attacks directed against members of the Kosovo Serb
community and United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) law enforcement
personnel. Ukraine deplores and condemns the acts of
terrorism that have taken place in the last few months
in the province and underlines that all such outbursts of
hatred merely undermine the stabilization processes
there.

The major challenge faced by Kosovar society is
the lack of domestic inter-ethnic dialogue as a
prerequisite for stability and civil reforms. The
confidence-building measures in the region require
proactive involvement from all possible actors,
including the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government, local communities, the federal authorities
of Serbia and Montenegro, UNMIK and the
international and regional organizations and donors.

Against this background, my delegation
welcomes the opening of a direct dialogue on practical
issues of mutual interest between Belgrade and Pristina
on 14 October in Vienna as an essential step towards
normalization of their relations and the furthering of
the region's advance to European integration. The role
of UNMIK in facilitating and launching this dialogue is
fully commendable.

However, we cannot but express disappointment
that some interlocutors did not attend the meeting in
Vienna, despite the Thessaloniki commitment.
Therefore let me join previous speakers who called
upon all parties on both sides to participate fully and
without preconditions in the technical consultations as
they move into expert-level working groups. Kosovo
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government should
realize that participation in such dialogue is their
obligation.

Political stability in Kosovo requires democratic,
stable and functioning local institutions. Thus, it is
important to ensure that the transfer by UNMIK of
non-reserved responsibilities listed in chapter 5 of the
Constitutional Framework is conducted in an effective,
gradual and controlled manner and that the Kosovo
Provisional Institutions continue to adopt policies and
legislation which address the concrete and urgent needs
of the local population. In this regard, UNMIK has to
retain its ability to effectively oversee the work of the
Provisional Institutions in process and after the
transfer, while maintaining full responsibility for
reserved areas.
Much remains to be done to provide Kosovo with
effective and sustainable judicial institutions and law
enforcement structures. My delegation also believes
that additional efforts should be made to fight terrorism
and organized crime.

We also look forward to improving the current
situation in the field of sustainable returns and minority
rights. The latest assessment of the situation of ethnic
minorities in Kosovo, made by the mission of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
indicates that

"the changes noted are not yet fundamental
enough to conclude that conditions would exist
for large-scale return of ethnic minorities in the
near future".

However, we believe that the concerted efforts of the
international presence, in close cooperation with
Belgrade and Pristina, will provide yet more impetus to
push the process forward.

Being an active contributor to a Kosovo
settlement, Ukraine reaffirms its commitment to
promoting peace and security in the province and to
ensuring its further stabilization, inter-ethnic
reconciliation and recovery.

