Mr. Gasana (Rwanda) (spoke in French): I would
like to briefly respond to what my colleague, the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
has just said. I was not supposed to take the floor, but
he has pushed me to do so.

I listened to the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo speak about Rwanda. It is
important to mention that the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is 80 times larger than Rwanda - larger
than nearly all of Western Europe - while Rwanda
represents a tiny spot on the African continent. One
would think the opposite is the case. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo is a very large and rich country;
whereas Rwanda is a small, land-locked country that is
trying move on from its many problems.

During yesterday's debate, the President himself
referred to the United Nations Operation in the Congo,
a missison deployed 54 years ago. Rwanda was still
under the colonial yoke at that time. It has been more
than half a century that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has had these problems.

Rwanda is there to help. When I hear the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
accuse countries such as Uganda, it sounds like a total
lack of gratitude to Mr. Museveni, who was the Chair
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region and who tried to help that country. I do not
know if the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo asked its representative to come to the
Council to accuse Uganda, but it is painful to hear him
say such things. I am not the representative of Uganda,
but those of us from the region ought to thank President
Museveni for everything he has done to ensure regional
stability. I will stop there on the issue of Uganda.

I now return to Rwanda. The representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo spared no words
in his statement concerning the illegal exploitation of
the resources of his country. But those resources are
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Why then
does the Democratic Republic of the Congo have such
problems? Let us say that there are those who have gone
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo to steal its
resources. What is the current situation there? We are
ready to help the Democratic Republic of the Congo as
we did after the genocide. We did everything we could
to help the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to stabilize the country. The representative
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo might not
even be in the Council today in his current capacity
if Rwanda and the Rwandan army had not helped his
country.

We are not there to destabilize the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We have absolutely no interest
in destabilizing the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
It is true that more than 600 rebels of the Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23) are in Rwanda. Since last year
the Council has heard me implore and plead for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to come get those
people, but nobody lifts a finger. What do they want us
to do? Should we shoot them? No, we uphold the rule
of law and we respect human rights. Ifthe Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees does
not want to do its work, it is not for us to ask it to do
so. The Democratic Republic of the Congo has asked us
to extradite people. If international courts want access
to these people in Rwanda they should come retrieve
them, as we did with others who belonged to M-23. We
abide by international law.

The time has come for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to stop whining every time it comes before the
Council and to stop bashing Rwanda. The representative
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo comes to the
Council to shout loud and clear in praise of the so-called
Group of Experts and its report (S/2014/42, annex). He
should read the report carefully because it states that
the Forces armees de la Republique democratique du
Congo are collaborating with the Forces democratiques
de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR). Obviously, we have
our own information. Perhaps the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo wishes to retract his
praise?

To summarize, we have no interest whatsoever in
seeing the Democratic Republic of Congo collapse.
We are neighbours and we share many things. We have
shared many good things together, and his Government
knows that very well, as does he. It is not for us to start
smashing things up.

I ask that we end this scurrility of coming time
and again to this Chamber to sow discord. Enough is
enough. It is time to stop. Let us sit around the table,
try to help each other and see how the region could
be peaceful. The representative of the Democratic
Republic of Congo alluded to the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. We are ready to sit
down with the Democratic Republic of Congo. We are
ready to help the Democratic Republic of Congo and
its inhabitants with our meagre resources. We did so
before, we are doing so now and we will continue to
do so.

I do not believe that this is the appropriate forum to
throw stones at Rwanda, which is in a position to help
the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo. As for the FDLR,
it is true that the genocide was committed by Rwandans
against their Rwandan brothers, but unfortunately they
now live in the Democratic Republic of Congo. That
is where they are. The evil resides in the Democratic
Republic of Congo. They are our brothers; we cannot
reject them. When they return, we will take care of
them. We will try to integrate them into everyday social
life. However, if certain mentalities persist and if the
Democratic Republic of Congo continues to help people
who espouse a genocidal ideology, we will never get
beyond this chapter.

If necessary, certain punitive measures will be
taken. However, I hope that today will be the very last
time that we come to the Council to throw stones, as if
we had no other place to solve our own problems in the
days to come. It is for the good of the entire region and
the world. Uganda will not set up a concentration camp
for the M-23. Measures are in place and will be taken,
and that is also the case for Rwanda. A framework is in
place to deal legally with those problems. This is not
the context in which to address those issues.

