I want first to thank Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for chairing the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions and for organizing, together with Estonia, this eleventh open debate. I also want to thank my old friends Karin Landgren and Edward Luck for their presentations. This is always a good opportunity to reflect among us and with the other members of the United Nations on our methods and our performance. As we distance ourselves from our daily work, thanks to the eagle eye of our great briefers, we can better see not only our flaws but also our strengths. I will focus my intervention on the theme of the debate: transparency, efficiency and effectiveness. But before I start, I want to commend Kuwait for the adoption of eight notes by the President (S/2019/990, S/2019/991, S/2019/992, S/2019/993, S/2019/994, S/2019/995, S/2019/996, S/2019/997) to adapt our methods of work. France will continue to engage with members of the Council to improve our methods towards more effectiveness, inclusiveness and transparency. I also want to acknowledge our collective flexibility to adjust quickly to the constraints posed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic - the so-called need for agility pointed out in the concept note (S/2020/374, annex). As we moved to video-teleconference meetings, we have maintained the transparency, as far as technically possible, and the ability for the Council to take decisions. Unfortunately, the only victim in this process is multilingualism. The language regime of the United Nations was established to enable the proper functioning of its deliberative bodies. The legitimacy and efficiency of the United Nations depend on respect for that core value. We are confident that the Secretariat will provide us with simultaneous interpretation in the six official languages as a matter of priority, eight weeks after the beginning of the COVID-19 restrictions. In any case, as French is also a working language of the United Nations, I intend to conduct the presidency of the Security Council in French next month. As an observer and participant in the work of the Security Council over the past 15 years, I recognize that its work is more transparent and open than ever. Almost all the reports of the Secretary-General to the Council are made public. We now spend more time in open meetings than in closed ones. At these open meetings we hear from interested parties, other Members of the United Nations, troop-contributing countries, all relevant United Nations entities and civil society, in particular women and youth. These open discussions certainly help to better inform our decisions. Transparency and openness to other actors and Members must therefore be maintained. Nevertheless, the function of the Security Council is not only to be a forum where different points of views on a specific situation are presented. The Council is an executive body. Its specificity lies in its authority to consider any dispute or situation so as to determine whether they are likely to endanger international peace and security, take a political position or action on a specific situation and adopt binding decisions and mandates that the Secretary-General and his representatives are called on to implement in order to restore or maintain international peace and security. It is a decision-making body that is expected to act to stop wars and mass atrocities. To be effective, it must be driven by a spirit of cooperation and compromise. However, if the Security Council is to be efficient and effective in its executive role, more private discussions are needed. All diplomats know that to reach consensus on difficult issues, direct exchanges behind closed doors are often more conducive to an agreement. Similarly, closed conversations between Council members and the Secretariat on the implementation of Council mandates are more productive than public statements of national positions. Over the past few years, since 2017 to be exact, the Council has held many of its meetings in an open format. From a balance between open and closed meetings, we now spend more than twice as much time in open meetings as in closed ones. But as we have become more open, we have also adopted fewer resolutions and press statements. The total number of texts adopted, without counting condemnations of terrorist attacks, went from around 160 a year in 2016 to 110 in 2019. That is a significant decrease. The number of texts is not the only measure of the Council's performance. There are also political reasons for the difficulty in reaching a position in the Council. But, as we consider transparency, efficiency and effectiveness, we should bear in mind that our practice of holding more public meetings may also undermine the efficiency and the effectiveness of the Council. The time spent in public meetings stating national positions is time that we cannot use to discuss with the Secretariat about its performance, or to engage with one another on a text. We should be aware that a united Council position will always have more influence on political actors in conflict situations than 15, sometimes contradicting, national positions in a public meeting. We should also make more use of private informal formats such as informal interactive dialogues, or informal Atria Formula meetings, or private formal meetings in order to engage directly and constructively with the countries and parties concerned, as we do when we are on a field visit. But if the Council is to be effective, it is important to reaffirm the need for a spirit of compromise. As I have said, the recurrent use of the veto threat cannot be a way of negotiating. I truly hope that we collectively find a better balance between the time spent in public discussions and in closed consultations, and that we focus more of our attention and energy on the effectiveness of the Council in a spirit of compromise in order to reach solutions that benefit the lives of those in conflict situations.
