Mr. Gad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset.
I would like to thank the Kuwaiti presidency of the
Security Council for the month of June for organizing
today's open debate on this important topic. The aim
is to hear the views and proposals of countries, which
is considered in itself a practical way to improve the
working methods of the Security Council. I would
also like to thank Ms. Karin Landgren and Mr. James
Cockayne for their valuable briefings this morning.

The delegation of Egypt aligns itself with the
statement made by the Permanent Representative of
New Zealand.

Egypt welcomes the points set forth in document
S/2017/507, as well as other additional points and
proposals that could contribute to further enriching
note 507. In this regard, we would like to make seven
observations that we deem necessary for improving
the working methods of the Security Council and its
subsidiary organs and Committees.

First, periodic briefings should be made to the
wider membership on the monthly programme of work
of the Security Council in order to give an overview
of the most important meetings, activities and visits
to be carried out by the Council for a given month.
Furthermore, the chairs of the subsidiary organs and
Committees should also present periodic briefings
before the wider membership.

Second, the frequency of public meetings, whether
of the Security Council or its subsidiary organs and
Sanctions Committees, should be increased. Let us not
forget that the Security Council represents the wider
membership, so its meetings and work must not as a
general rule be kept from the wider membership, unless
they concern matters related to the national security of
a State and the State has made a request to that end.

Third, it is important to ensure that the documents
and reports of the Security Council be made available to
the wider membership and in all six official languages
of the United Nations unless they include information
related to the national security of States that do not
wish to make this information available to the public.

Fourth, draft resolutions and presidential statements
that come before the Security Council should be
shared with the wider membership. Countries should
be consulted so as to allow the wider membership the
opportunity to share their Views and proposals on these
drafts with members of the Council.

Fifth, it is important that the Security Council
consult with States and relevant regional and subregional
organizations, especially the African Union and the
League of Arab States, on conflicts covered by the
Council or any of its subsidiary organs or committees.

Sixth, consultation between the Security Council
and the troop-contributing countries to United Nations
peacekeeping operations should be improved, in
accordance with paragraph 91 of note 507.

Seventh, the role of the subsidiary organs of
the Security Council in general, and the Sanctions
Committees in particular, is extremely important and
sensitive because they follow up on the implementation
of sanctions regimes and monitor compliance. It is
therefore important that the working methods of those
organs and committees be periodically reviewed to
ensure that they are able to carry out their functions
in an effective and transparent manner. In this regard,
Egypt calls for increasing the number of open briefings
by the Chairs of those organs and committees, and for
regular sharing of the summaries of their meetings with
States that are not members of the Security Council.

Furthermore, the sanctions list must be translated
into all six official languages of the United Nations,
and the information published on the websites of
related organs and committees updated. The technical
bodies and expert panels ofthe Security Council organs
and committees should consult States concerned when
preparing reports related to those States. It is important
for the Chairs of the subsidiary organs and committees
to invite the States concerned to participate in their
meetings whenever such States are being discussed, in
accordance, inter alia, with paragraphs 101 to 110 of the
annex to note 507.

Proposals for developing the working methods
of the Security Council and its subsidiary organs and
committees are numerous. What matters the most,
however, is having the political will to implement
them. There should be a conviction that improving the
Council's methods will enhance the added value of the
Council and its subsidiary organs and committees, and
increase its credibility before the wider membership,
and, of course, vice versa. In this regard, we call on
members of the Security Council to study note 507 and
its relevant updates and implement any procedures set
forth therein that might improve the working methods of
the Council and its subsidiary organs and committees.

We stress that States elected as non-permanent
members ofthe Security Council must be fully informed
about the procedures contained in the note and its
update. During their membership in the Council, they
must seek to implement those procedures, especially
when they preside over the Council.

In conclusion, I would like to once again thank
the State of Kuwait for highlighting the topic under
discussion today, as it has since the beginning of
its membership in the Security Council and its
chairmanship of the related committee. This open debate
is important and will surely contribute to improving the
performance and efficiency of the Security Council and
its subsidiary organs.
