Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank you
very much, Mr. President, Mr. Secretary-General and
all my colleagues for participating in this very
important Security Council meeting on piracy.
Obviously, we are here because the outbreak of
piracy and the increasing threat to commerce, security
and, perhaps most importantly, to the principle of
freedom of navigation of the seas, are issues that
should concern every nation State and I do believe that
the resolution we have adopted today will help us go a
long way towards a coordinated response to the
scourge of piracy.

We have noted that several factors have been
limiting the effectiveness of our response, although a
number of countries have been responding. The United
States has been part of that response, as has the
European Union, NATO and a number of other
countries represented in this Chamber. However,
because there has been no existing mechanism for
States to coordinate their actions effectively, I believe
that our response has been less than the sum of its
parts.

I would like to announce that the United States
intends to work with partners to create a contact group
on Somali piracy. We envision the contact group
serving as a mechanism to share intelligence,
coordinate activities and reach out to other partners,
including those in the shipping and insurance
industries. We look forward to working quickly on this
initiative.

A second factor limiting our response is the
impunity that the pirates enjoy. Piracy currently pays,
but worse, pirates pay few costs for their criminality.
Their dens in Somalia provide refuge from the naval
ships in the Gulf of Aden and, as we saw with the
hijacking of the Sirius Star, 500 nautical miles from
Mombasa, and with the recent, unsuccessful attacks
even further south, off the Tanzanian coast, pirates are
adapting to the naval presence in the Gulf of Aden by
travelling farther to attack unsuspecting ships.

To make piracy costlier and more difficult to
undertake, the United States, with the agreement of the
Somali Transitional Federal Government (TFG)
believes that the Security Council's authorization
today, that States may pursue pirates into their place of
operation on land, will have a significant impact.
History has demonstrated again and again that
maritime operations alone are insufficient to combating
piracy.
We also have a problem concerning the steps that
must be taken to facilitate the delivery, detention and
prosecution of captured pirates. Through international

law, reflected in the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea, Security Council resolutions 1846
(2008) and 1816 (2008), and the 1988 Convention for
the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of
Maritime Navigation (SUA), the international
community already has sufficient legal authority and
available mechanisms to apprehend and prosecute
pirates, but sometimes the political will and the
coordination have not been there to do so.

This problem of capacity is especially
pronounced in the regional States. Their proximity to
piracy makes them an obvious choice to site
prosecutions, but many lack the necessary judicial and
law enforcement capacities to do so. Thus, we call on
all States, particularly those victimized by Somali
piracy to contribute generously to building the legal
capacity of regional signatories to the 1988 Convention
States. In the resolution, we also ask the United
Nations to explore what can be done to build legal
capacities in those States.

At the same time, as we expect regional States to
play a critical role, victim States also need to bear
equal responsibility for prosecuting pirates. States that
flagged hijacked vessels, whose nationals own hijacked
vessels, or who have crew members on hijacked
vessels must honour their obligations under the 1988
Convention in relation to receiving and prosecuting
suspected pirates.

We must ask the maritime industry to promote
capabilities to enhance ships' ability to defend
themselves. Once a hostage situation develops, the
stakes in military operations increase. Consequently, an
important part of counter-piracy efforts must be
measured in enhancing self-defence capabilities of
commercial vessels, increasing the odds of success
against pirates until war ships arrive.

Finally - and a number of colleagues have
spoken to this - we must address the root cause of the
piracy problem. Piracy is a symptom - a symptom of
the instability, the poverty and the lawlessness that
have plagued Somalia for the past two decades.

The Djibouti peace process has achieved some
political headway in the past few months. I thank the
Secretary-General for his excellent Special
Representative, Ambassador Ould-Abdallah, but the
deteriorating security and humanitarian situation on the
ground is threatening that progress and threatening it
every day. The international community must make it a
priority to work with the TFG, both to stabilize its
internal situation and to work with the Alliance for the
Re-Liberation of Somalia as well as with the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), to help
stabilize the country's security situation.

In this regard, allow me to note that the United
States does believe that the time has come for the
United Nations to consider and authorize the
peacekeeping operation. This has been requested by the
African Union, by countries that are bearing the brunt
of the difficulty on the ground and while the conditions
may not be auspicious for peacekeeping, they will be
less so if chaos reigns in Somalia and we have to turn
at some point to peacemaking.

Prevention is the issue here. The United States
will do everything it can to continue the support of
AMISOM; indeed, the United States provided
$67 million for training and equipping AMISOM. and
deploying it last year. We will continue to do that, and
we will buttress our support to AMISOM. But I am
afraid that the history of support for forces of this kind
is not a very good one. What happens is that we are not
able to sustain the voluntary contributions and the
voluntary training; we are not able to sustain the
mechanisms to ensure that the work is flowing
smoothly. That is why we have a peacekeeping
operation in the United Nations, because it draws on
the full resources of the Member States in a way that is
not voluntary but that is compulsory, to do the work of
this Council.

So the United States will be, with other States,
continuing to raise, in consultations - not yet for
consideration by the Council, but in consultations -
the need for a peacekeeping force in accordance with
the request of the African Union that we do so.

Let me just say finally that we believe that once
peace and normalcy have returned to Somalia, Somalis
can start down a path to real economic development. In
the long run, offering the Somali people an alternative
to piracy and criminality is the best sustainable
strategy for combating piracy. As part of that strategy,
the United States believes in working with the
international community to help Somali fishermen
prosper by preventing illegal fishing and dumping in
Somali territorial waters.

With our meeting and resolution today, we have
sent a strong signal of commitment to combat the
scourge of piracy. This current response is a good start,
but we must do much more to defend the freedom of
navigation and trade. The shipping industry will be an
important partner in those efforts. But let us make no
mistake; it is Governments that must lead. We need to
coordinate our efforts through a common point of
contact. We need to end the impunity of Somali pirates
and to support regional States in building the capacity
to prosecute them effectively, and we need to work to
build security and stability in Somalia so that the
Somali people can finally enjoy the blessings of peace
and the rule of law and development.

