Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to congratulate Egypt on
assuming the presidency of the Council for this month.
We are proud to see Egypt presiding over the Security
Council. We are confident, Sir, that your expertise and
wisdom will have a major effect on ensuring the success
of the Council's work. I also thank you for convening
this open debate on threats to international peace and
security caused by terrorist acts.

I thank the Deputy Secretary-General for his
valuable briefing early in this meeting, as well as other
briefers.

My delegation welcomes the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2016/6 on fighting terrorism. We are
committed to the statement and reiterate our support
for the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy as the Organization's comprehensive umbrella
for fighting terrorism.

Fighting extremist rhetoric and ideologies that fuel
terrorism is among the most urgent challenges facing
the international community today and one of our
main priorities. Indeed, we have taken the initiative
to fight extremism and terrorism in word and deed at
all levels - local, regional and international. In that
regard, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has adopted a
comprehensive counter-terrorism strategy. We have
not only adopted security measures, enacted counter-
terrorism legislation and worked to dry up the financial
resources of terrorism, but we have also diagnosed the
intellectual reality and assessed the root causes of the
proliferation of violent extremism and ideologies. We
have also developed an intellectual security strategy
based on three key pillars: prevention, rehabilitation
and care. We have established the Mohammad Bin Naif
Counselling and Care Centre, which reabsorbs those
convicted of terrorism-related crimes, rehabilitates
them and reforms those at risk of espousing extreme
ideologies.

We have striven to share our pioneering experience
in intellectual security based on the principles and
teachings of Islam, which promote tolerance and
peaceful coexistence, with other States through several
initiatives and international and regional activities. We
submitted a proposal to establish an Arab office for
combating terrorism and extremism that was adopted
at the thirty-first session of the Arab Council of Interior
Ministers, held in Morocco on 13 March 2014. We also
participated with Spain and Austria in opening the
King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz International Centre for
Interreligious and Intercultural Dialogue, in Vienna in
2014, with the aim of combating extremism, promoting

a culture of respect and building peace.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was a pioneer in
urging the international community to fight terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations. We have called on
the international community to adopt a comprehensive
plan, in line with international law, to end terrorism
while maintaining the sovereignty, security and stability
of all States. In that regard, we helped to establish
the United Nations Centre for Counter-Terrorism.
We have taken part in setting the Centre's strategic
priorities, including countering the rhetoric of violent
extremism and developing the strategies necessary to
that end, including on the Internet. We have provided
capacity-building support to Member States. We have
also announced that we will establish a centre to fight
nuclear terrorism in Vienna.

We are facing a wave of intellectual extremism
whose tragic repercussions are being felt around
the world. Those who believe in extremism and
marginalization, urge hatred and the dehumanization
of others, and justify the use of violence against them
are extremists, be they Christians or Muslims, Jews or
Buddhists, Hindus or atheists. The mongers of violent
rhetoric are no less dangerous than those who perpetrate
terrorist acts. Failing to fight them could drive us into
further vicious cycles ofviolence, killing and terrorism.

Some have sought to adopt extremist rhetoric that
distorts the image of Islam and links it to violence. We
have been following with serious concern the increase
in this rhetoric, the ongoing acts of marginalization
which amounts to violence and the terrorism carried
out against some Muslims, which amounts to blaming
Muslims for the indiscriminate acts of some extremists,
including calls for prohibiting Muslims from entering
a certain country and increasing the searches of
Muslims, and other measures of marginalization, which
only multiply the risk of terrorism and facilitate its
proliferation.

Palestine remains the principal cause of our Arab
and Islamic nation. In fact, Israel continues to resort
to all forms of violence and excessive force against
the lone Palestinian people. It has been acquiring
Palestinian lands and it continues with its colonization
day after day. It is imposing its hegemony on Al-Quds
Al-Sharif. Throughout all of this, it is basing itself
on an extremist, terrorist, racist rhetoric that calls for
killing, displacement and destruction. It turns a blind
eye to the dangers of this rhetoric based on violence
and State terrorism. Failing to expressly condemn it,
failing to fight it and failing to hold accountable those
who promote it is closely linked to the growing rhetoric
of hatred, violence, extremism and terrorism by both
parties to the conflict. The ongoing Israeli occupation
of Arab occupied territories in Palestine, Syria and
Lebanon is in itself a terrorist act that denies the Arab
people in this region their legitimate rights.
We have been witnessing a great rise in dangerous
sectarian rhetoric in our Arab region and in the Islamic
world, fuelled by Iran, through which it is trying to
exacerbate conflict and feed sectarian strife. It is
exploiting mosques and the media. It is also exploiting
official statements. This has provided a breeding ground
for the proliferation of extremism, secretarianism and
terrorism. Moreover, Iran continues to support armed
sectarian militias and terrorist groups, such as the
terrorist group Hizbullah in Lebanon.

Syrian authorities continue to perpetrate hideous
crimes through their gangs and forces. It is making use
of foreign groups and chanting sectarian slogans. That
has provided a breeding ground that has fuelled violent
extremist rhetoric. It has contributed to the proliferation
of the so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
and Al-Nusra Front. The failure by the international
community to provide protection for civilians in Syria
is one of the main reasons for the proliferation of
violent extremist ideologies and one ofthe main reasons
driving thousands of young people from all corners of
the world to join the ranks of Da'esh and the Al-Nusra
Front. Therefore, the ruling regime and terrorist groups
in Syria are two sides of the same coin which feed off
each other. It is unrealistic to expect to put an end to
terrorism in Syria without a true transition in power,
in line with the first Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex) and the relevant Security Council resolutions.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate that, first,
terrorism has no justification, regardless of where
and under what circumstances it is carried out.
Secondly, countering terrorist ideologies requires
a comprehensive and coordinated effort. Thirdly,
fighting terrorism requires fighting violent extremist
rhetoric against Muslims and Islam. It requires putting
an end to occupation, refraining from supporting
oppressive sectarian regimes or sectarian militias and
their extreme ideologies. It requires working to achieve
a comprehensive development for all peoples.
The last few years have resulted in massive
human loss and human rights violations caused by
the proliferation of the phenomenon and ideologies
of extremism, violence and terrorism. Those are also
the main reasons that this phenomenon continues to
exist. In order to address them, we must be courageous
and bear the responsibility of listening to the voice
of reason instead of narrow political interests. My
delegation looks forward to continuing to coordinate
and collaborate with the Council in this important work
to ensure the stability and security of the region and to
maintain international peace and security.

