Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I begin
my statement by extending my most sincere condolences
to the Government of China for the casualties suffered in
the bombing of its Embassy on 7 May.

Faced with a serious escalation of the crisis in
Kosovo and the Security Council's inability to take steps
to strengthen its credibility in the maintenance of
international peace and security that would allow us to
achieve a political settlement to end the humanitarian
tragedy and the acts of ethnic cleansing perpetrated by
Serb forces against the inhabitants of that province,
whatever their ethnic origin, there is an increasing need
to support humanitarian action to ease the suffering of
refugees and displaced persons, who have been provoked
by these events to undertake an exodus.

Egypt is fully convinced that the provision of
humanitarian assistance to refugees and displaced persons

 

is within the competence of the Secretary-General. The
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Kosovo and its
grave implications for international peace and security; the
urgent need for the international community to provide
timely humanitarian assistance to the victims of these
events throughout the States of the region and to ensure that
it reach those for whom it is intended; and the need for a
comprehensive assessment by the mission which the
Secretary-General has sent are all reasons that have
compelled Egypt, together with other States members of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference Contact Group on
Bosnia and Kosovo, to endorse the resolution which the
Security Council has adopted today. We are convinced that
it will be supported by all Members of the United Nations.

We believe that the resolution is exclusively
humanitarian in its objectives. We wished to distinguish this
issue from the current political problems and the various
ways and means of solving them, although we made certain
amendments aimed at globalizing the resolution so that it
might be adopted unanimously. However, despite the urgent
humanitarian nature of the resolution, it was delayed for
political reasons, albeit without affecting the unanimity of
the vote today. The clear message which the sponsors of
the resolution - in particular the members of the OIC
Contact Group on Bosnia and Kosovo, including Egypt -
wish to send to the international community is that the lack
of a defined role for the Security Council in the search for
a peaceful settlement, engendered by its inability to
discharge its responsibilities for international peace and
security, cannot justify ignoring the urgent humanitarian
situation in the region. Thus, the international community,
especially the United Nations, must step up its activities to
end the humanitarian suffering of the victims of the
situation and of those States that have sheltered a large
number of refugees and displaced persons, thereby
assuming a significant additional material and logistical
burden.

In this regard, we wish to thank the Secretary-General
for his particular efforts, as well as the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the other
humanitarian institutions involved.

We hope that the Security Council will be able to
overcome its current difficulties and reassert its role in
reaching a comprehensive political settlement of the
situation in order to guarantee the return; security and well-
being of all displaced persons and refugees under
international control. In the meantime, we appeal to the
international community to grant all possible assistance to
displaced persons in Kosovo and the States that have
suffered in the exodus. We hope that this clear message
will meet with the wholehearted approval of the
international community.

