Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Our delegation voted in favour of resolution
2396 (2017). We share the view that the mass outflow
of fighters from areas of armed conflict, first and
foremost from Syria and Iraq, entails additional threats
to security and requires an appropriate response from
the Council. We consider that this document does
not cancel earlier decisions of the United Nations on
fighting terrorism but, rather, complements them.

Of special importance here are the commitments to
criminalize various aspects of terrorist activity as well
as the prosecute or extradite rule, as enshrined in the
anti-terrorist conventions and resolutions of the Security
Council. It is vital to ensure that they are implemented
in full, while being guided by the principles of the
inevitability of punishment and the punishment being
commensurate with the crime. Any attempts to extend
either direct or indirect assistance to returning terrorist
fighters, including providing them with the possibility
to move freely, recruit new members and incite to
terrorism, would be a direct violation of the resolution
that we adopted today.

Rehabilitation and reintegration programmes
cannot be used as an alternative to the criminal
prosecution of these kinds of criminals. We also note
that it is important to develop international cooperation
in order to combat foreign terrorist fighters.

We attach special importance to the provisions of
the resolution on information exchange. In this regard,
a meeting of the heads of special services, security
agencies and law-enforcement organizations is held
every year in Russia, and we also have a databank
on combating terrorism. They both have proved
their worth.

Within the framework of working with returning
foreign terrorist fighters, we need to bear in mind that
one ofthe key aims ofterrorists is to spread the ideology
of terror everywhere. We think that it is only right
that the document we have adopted today represents
a development of many of the provisions of Security
Council resolution 2354 (2017), on countering terrorist
narratives. Overall, we must continue improving the
criminal and legal measures we have in this area. If
we limit ourselves to abstract slogans, the battle for the
hearts and minds of young people will be lost.

We will be able to attain results in countering the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters only if we
act collectively, with States in the leading role, and
by tapping the potential of specialized international
organizations, the private sector and civil society
structures. All anti-terrorist measures should be
adopted in compliance with the norms of international
law and in line with the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations. We expect the new
resolution on countering foreign terrorist fighters to
contribute substantively to that kind of work.

