Mr. Salam (Lebanon): Allow me, at the outset,
to reiterate to the Council that my Government
remains committed to the letter of resolution 1701
(2006) and looks forward to its implementation in its
entirety. In that context, I would also like to say that
all Lebanese parties, whether in the Government or
the opposition, would like the Council to exercise its
leadership in urging Israel to abide by its obligations
under that resolution, that is, to bring a complete halt
to its violations of Lebanese sovereignty, whether on
land, sea or air, and to withdraw forthwith from any
Lebanese territory that it continues to occupy.

For almost two years now, hundreds of thousands
of young men and women across the entire Arab world
have been taking to the streets, seeking freedom,
dignity and good governance. That has laid waste to
the idea of Arab exceptionalism, a pseudo theory
advanced by some pundits to explain the so-called
Arab resistance to democratization, whether based on
the racist cliche' that democracy is incompatible with
Islam or inimical to Arab culture, or on the erroneous
prejudice that Arabs are not yet ready for democracy
or hold democratic values in lower esteem than other
people. That pseudo theory of Arab exceptionalism has
been swept away by the winds of change that have been
blowing in our region.

Unfortunately, some other forms of exceptionalism
continue to survive in our part of the world. While
the day after tomorrow the Security Council will
be holding an open debate on strengthening the rule
of law in the maintenance of peace and security, it is
important to keep in mind that one country in our region
continues to challenge, with unquestioned impunity,
the principles and norms of international law, and to
ignore all resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
and the Council on the situation in the Middle East and
the question of Palestine.

As it happens, that exceptionalism is best illustrated
by the fact that Israel has failed to withdraw from the
Palestinian territories it occupied in 1967, as per its
legal obligations under resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973). It also continues to build settlements in the
occupied territories, in violation of international law,
international humanitarian law, General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions and the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice (see A/ES-10/273).
Indeed, Israel's annexation of Jerusalem, its extension
of the wall close to the Golan Heights and the erection
of the wall itself also constitute similar violations.
Similarly, the punitive blockade to which Gaza has been
subjected represents collective punishment in a form
that violates articles 33 and 55 of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, which govern the conduct of an occupying
Power in relation to a civilian population living under
occupation.

Moreover, since 1967, Israel, as an occupying
Power, has constantly and systematically violated its
basic duties under international humanitarian law. Such
violations have included the transfer of populations, the
annexation of land, collective punishment, the punitive
demolition of houses, the use of torture and political
assassinations. In addition, Israel has been charged with
grave violations of human rights and with a number
of war crimes in its conduct of military operations in
the occupied territories. Nonetheless, it continues to
behave as if it were above the law.

Has the time not come to put an end to such
exceptionalism and to hold Israel accountable for
its international obligations? That is not a rhetorical
question. Let me then repeat, has the time not come
to put an end to such exceptionalism and to hold Israel
accountable for its international obligations?

On 29 October, the Council will hold another open
debate on resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
and security. The Security Council is to be commended
for having adopted a landmark resolution - resolution
1265 (1999) 4 by which it expresses its willingness to
respond to situations of armed conflict where civilians
are being targeted or humanitarian assistance to
civilians is being deliberately obstructed. Since that
time, the Council has begun to mainstream an approach
based on the protection of civilians into its work, and
has enhanced the role of its peacekeeping operations

to that effect in various country-specific situations.
They include the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Somalia, C6te d'Ivoire, Chad, Haiti, Libya, Liberia and
the Sudan.

But when it comes to the Arab-Israeli conflict,
exceptionalism is king. The Security Council has
dramatically failed to respond in any tangible manner
to the offences it has voted to address, namely, the
targeting of civilians in armed conflict, particularly
Palestinian women and children, and the deliberate
obstruction of humanitarian assistance, let alone even
considering sanctions against the perpetrator - Israel,
the occupying Power. Need I recall here that resolution
1325 (2000) called on all parties to armed conflict
to fully respect international law applicable to the
rights and protection of women and girls, especially
as civilians? And yet, when it comes to Palestinian
women, the Council exhibits paralysis, and is unable to
take any concrete action to redress their dire situation.

Palestinian women are particularly vulnerable to
the immediate effects of the Israeli occupation. The
fact is that roadblocks, patrols, curfews, checkpoints
and the construction of the wall all have a negative
impact on the health, education and economic security
of Palestinians in general, and women in particular.
The restriction of movement created by such repressive
measures has seriously impeded their access to health
care, for example. People living in villages around East
Jerusalem need so-called permits to enable them to
reach hospitals. The Israeli human rights organization
B'Tselem documents how such requirements are
particularly problematic for pregnant women, who
need to get to hospital in time to give birth, and how
women have had to give birth at checkpoints because
of the Israeli permit regime, leading to numerous infant
deaths in the process.

Furthermore, according to a UN-Women publication
entitled Suspended Lives." Palestinian Female Prisoners
in Israeli Prisons, an estimated 10,000 Palestinian
women have been arrested and/or detained under Israeli
military orders since 1967. According to the Public
Committee against Torture in Israel, the interrogation
methods used by Israeli agents include

"beating; slapping; kicking; stepping on shackles;
bending the interrogee and placing her in other
painful positions; intentional tightening of shackles;
violent shaking; sleep deprivation; prolonged
shackling behind the back; cursing, humiliating
and threatening the detainee; depriving the detainee
of essential needs; exposing her to extreme heat
or cold; isolation and secrecy; and imprisonment
under inhumane conditions".

The Security Council is clearly failing to live up to
its responsibility to sustain the relevant legal provisions
applicable to the situation of Palestinian women; hence
the survival of yet another form of Israeli exceptionalism.
Unfortunately, the same can be said about the protection
of children's rights. Need I further remind members that
this Council has recognized the paramount importance
of the protection of children in armed conflict, namely
through its adoption ofresolution 1261 (1999), followed
by resolution 1612 (2005), in which the Security Council
established a monitoring and reporting mechanism for
grave violations committed against innocent girls and
boys? But Palestinian children have been deprived of
that elaborate protection system.

According to a recent UNICEF bulletin, of the total
amount of killings and injuries perpetrated against
Palestinian children, 84 per cent have been at the hands
ofthe Israeli security forces. That bulletin addresses the
illegal detention of children who are subjected to acts
"tantamount to torture by the Israeli army and police"
and who experienced being "hand-tied, blindfolded,
strip searched, verbally abused, subjected to physical
violence". In that regard as well, the Council is failing
to live up to its responsibility to sustain the relevant
provisions applicable to the situation of Palestinian
children; hence the survival of yet another form of
Israeli exceptionalism. In that context, advocating that
international and humanitarian law has not applied to
Palestine since it is not a State only adds insult to injury.

The time for ending all forms of Israeli
exceptionalism is long overdue. The time for recognizing
the State of Palestine and granting it full membership
of our Organization is long overdue as well. An interim
step in that direction would be to secure non-member
State observer status for Palestine during this General
Assembly session.

