Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon (Republic of Korea): I would
like to thank Ambassador Quinlan for his briefing
today on the work of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), and
for his leadership of that important Committee. The
briefing was highly informative and helps to clarify
the obligations of Member States under the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

At the outset, we welcome the Geneva agreement
between the group of the five permanent members of
the Security Council and Germany (P5+1) and Iran to
work towards resolution of the Iranian nuclear issue.
While we commend the efforts of all of the relevant
parties, what is now critical is faithful implementation
of the measures under the agreement. In that regard,
we welcome the joint statement on a framework for
cooperation between the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) and Iran with respect to verification
activities. We recognize the importance of the IAEA's
role in resolving all present and past issues relating to
the Iranian nuclear programme, and in that regard, we
expect Iran to fully cooperate with the Agency. Noting
the efforts of the Iranian Government in contributing
to that recent progress, we hope that Iran will further
utilize that momentum and restore the confidence of
the international community by fulfilling in their
entirety the measures stipulated in the joint plan of
action reached with the P5+1.

Similarly, it is important that Iran complies with
its international obligations under the relevant Security
Council and IAEA resolutions. As was made clear in
today's briefing, the Security Council measures remain
in full effect. Until the Council decides otherwise, the
Committee must continue to carry out its mandate.
It must, therefore, continue its consideration of the
recommendations of the Panel of Experts and should
also respond to alleged violations appropriately and
swiftly.

It is regrettable that the Committee has not received
any response from Iran to the letters it sent in April
and May concerning Iran's missile launches and its
intercepted arms shipment in Yemen. Given the current
constructive spirit, we look forward to Iran's prompt
and sincere response to those letters.

I would also like to take this opportunity to express
our appreciation for the joint open briefing convened by
the Chairs of the relevant Sanctions Committees with
the Financial Action Task Force. It was very helpful
in raising awareness, and we look forward to similar
briefings in the future.

In conclusion, we sincerely hope that the
implementation of the agreement and the trust-building

between the P5+1 and Iran will lead to final resolution
of the Iranian nuclear issue. It is our hope that such
a process will also have a positive influence on other
outstanding non-proliferation issues.

