Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation thanks France and Minister
Le Drian for organizing this open debate on preventing
and combating the financing of terrorism and for its
leadership on this important issue. We also welcome
the participation of Vice-Minister Fachir of Indonesia. I
also want to take this opportunity to thank the briefers,
Mr. Voronkov, Mr. Billingslea and Ms. Buku, for
their enlightening presentations, which help us better
understand the changes in the global architecture for
countering the financing of terrorism.

Equatorial Guinea associates itself with the
statement to be made by Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed
this afternoon, on behalf of the African Union.

Resolution 2462 (2019), which the Security Council
just adopted unanimously, is a key tool in our efforts to
eradicate terrorism, its financing and money-laundering.
We see it as one of the ways of attacking the pillars of
terrorism. The Republic of Equatorial Guinea strongly
condemns terrorism. We firmly believe that terrorist
acts are unjustifiable and constitute one of the most
serious threats to peace and security in the world. As
the Council has noted in resolution 1373 (2001), among
others, preventing and combating the financing of
terrorism is central to ensuring that the responses of the
United Nations, regional and subregional organizations
and States to terrorist threats are effective and efficient.

In Central Africa, we are concerned about the
spread of terrorism due to the presence of terrorist
groups such as Boko Haram and the Lord's Resistance
Army, among others; the potential transit of foreign
terrorist fighters returning to their countries; and
the growing collaboration between terrorist groups,
transnational organized crime on land and at sea and
armed groups. That expansion is facilitated by access to
resources and funding, which increases the complexity
of the fight against terrorism. Like other regions,
Central Africa is vulnerable to money-laundering and
terrorist financing. To address that vulnerability, the
States of the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community (CEMAC) adopted regulations against
money-laundering and terrorist financing in 2010.
Those regulations are currently being revised to better
align them with the requirements of Council resolution
1373 (2001) and other relevant resolutions.

Equatorial Guinea is also a member of the Action
Group against Money Laundering in Central Africa,
which is a specialized body of CEMAC and an associate
member of the Financial Action Task Force. At least
11 types of terrorist financing have been identified in
the region and recommendations for their limitation
and elimination have been proposed.

Equatorial Guinea condemns the entire range of
terrorist financing, including by means of the abusive
use of non-profit organizations, new methods of
payment and money-transfer companies, the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, kidnappings and
human trafficking, as well as the exploitation, sexual
abuse and rape committed by those groups.

Owing to the subregional threat, we have no doubt
that national efforts to suppress and eradicate the
sources of terrorist financing should be coordinated
with regional and international efforts. In that regard,
Equatorial Guinea has ratified the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism. Following CEMAC regulations, Equatorial
Guinea established the National Agency for Financial
Investigation in 2007 and is investing in its effective
operationalization so that it can prevent and control
financial terrorism. We believe that it is important
for Governments to cooperate with the private sector,
civil society and other sectors, while maintaining full
respect for State sovereignty and laws. At the same
time, we reiterate that the most effective way to prevent
terrorism, violent extremism and conflicts is through
investment in sustainable development.

Terrorism can be defeated only through a sustained
and comprehensive approach involving the effective
participation and cooperation of all States. That
requires using all the necessary means, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations and, to the extent
possible, international law, including applicable human
rights law, refugee law and international humanitarian
law standards.

In that regard, we recognize the importance of
the role of financial sanctions in disrupting terrorist
activities. We therefore commend the work of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism, and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999), concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities, and
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011), on the Taliban, and their
respective analytical and monitoring teams.

We also recognize the important work of the Office
of Counter-Terrorism and others, such as the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL
and the Financial Action Task Force for their support
to States in training and technical assistance in the
implementation of resolutions and other financial
counter-measures. We encourage increased cooperation
and coordination among the various United Nations
entities in that regard, as well as their support to
regional and subregional bodies, such as the African
Union and CEMAC.

In conclusion, we reiterate that all States must be
united in the fight against terrorism in all its forms.
Equatorial Guinea reiterates its full commitment to
cooperate in that crucial work.

