Mr. Vilovic' (Croatia): First of all, let me thank
you, Madam, and your team for successfully
conducting the Council's work during this month. At
the same time, we would like to commend Bosnia and
Herzegovina for selecting this important topic as the
subject for this open debate. We are confident that,
based on Bosnia and Herzegovina's wide experience in
this field, the Council will have a successful debate and
achieve mutual understanding on this important
subject.
My delegation has aligned itself with and fully
supports the statement delivered on behalf of the
European Union. However, allow me to take part in
this exceptionally relevant and timely debate by adding
a few short comments in my national capacity.

One of the main purposes of every functioning
State should be the prompt, efficient and sustainable
delivery of core services to its citizens. Armed conflict
annihilates not only this basic function of the State but,
unfortunately, much more precious assets as well:
human lives, health and dignity. It is thus only natural
that post-conflict recovery start with emergency relief
and humanitarian assistance. At the same time, it
would be reasonable, if not necessary, to include in this
process, from its very beginning, appropriate
investment towards the recovery of the social network,
on which everyday life depends. Genuine and
sustainable peace can be achieved only through
thorough rebuilding of core national institutions and
their functions, as well as their employment on behalf
of all social, religious and ethnic groups.

As we have heard time and again today, national
ownership is the key tenet from which all peacebuilding
efforts should start, and to which they should ultimately
return. Thus reliance on and strengthening of local
capacities, no matter how scarce, are fundamental
preconditions for successful peacebuilding. Such an
approach introduces a unique perspective otherwise not
available to outsiders, consolidates necessary national
governing structures and policies and paves the way for
greater acceptance of a peacebuilding mission by the
local population. It strengthens the hope that a
peacebuilding dividend will be distributed among the
local population and that peacebuilding efforts will
survive long after the first appearance of signs of
possible and expected donor fatigue.

In this context, Croatia is following with great
interest what we hope will become a new and
widespread practice of incorporating all peacebuilding
efforts into a single national strategy instrument that
encompasses all relevant peacebuilding programmes
and activities. At the same time, Croatia believes that,
on the other side of the equation, the international
community, the United Nations and its agencies and all
other stakeholders should attentively follow suit by
unifying their actions under a proclaimed agenda,
clearly dividing their roles and responsibilities and
ensuring appropriate coherence and coordination in
order to deliver as one.

ll-21268
From the very beginning, Croatia has strongly
supported the establishment of the Senior Advisory
Group tasked to undertake a review of international
civilian capacity in order to strengthen the availability,
deployability, coherence and appropriateness of
civilian capacities based on an assessment of existing
capacities. We very much look forward to the
upcoming report on this issue.

We all agree that timely, flexible and predictable
funding plays a crucial role in any peacebuilding effort.
In that context, Croatia looks forward to further
strengthening of a strategic partnership between the
United Nations and the World Bank. We await with
special interest the Bank's 2011 World Development
Report on the theme "Conflict, security and
development".

Croatia is heartened to see that broad cross-
regional support for stronger peacebuilding is steadily
increasing, encompassing Governments, international
organizations and civil society. In that context, my
country sees particular importance in further support
to, and strengthening of, often feeble but steadily
growing civil societies in countries that have recently
emerged from conflict. Very often, civil society is
precisely the necessary link between relevant
international stakeholders and the strategy endorsed by
the local population that requires activation in order for
peacebuilding efforts to fully bear fruit.

Croatia recognizes and supports the Council's
intention to further strengthen coherence among
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts
in its work. In that regard, we particularly welcome the
Council's practice of transforming some former
peacekeeping missions into integrated peacebuilding
missions. This practice perfectly fits the mandates and
activities of other stakeholders in charge of
peacebuilding, especially the Peacebuilding
Commission, and opens the door for their further
fruitful cooperation. In that context, let me add our
hope that the Peacebuilding Commission's relevant
knowledge and experience with respect to specific
issues of countries on the agendas of both the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission will find a
path to the Council's deliberations.

Croatia welcomes the Secretary-General's detailed
overview of the progress achieved in implementing his
agenda for action set out in his progress report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict

ll-2l268
(S/2010/386), which was recently presented to the
Council (see S/PV.6396), and particularly the
recommendations contained therein. We equally fully
support the Secretary-General's report on women's
participation in peace-building (S/2010/466) and his
strategic seven-point action plan introducing necessary
practical suggestions for more active engagement by
women in peacebuilding processes. In that regard, we
offer our support to the ongoing efforts aimed at
mobilizing resources for initiatives that address
women's peacebuilding needs, advance gender equality
and empower women in peacebuilding contexts.

Finally, let me express once again our
appreciation for the excellent report on the review of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture
(S/2010/393, annex), which was presented recently by
the three co-facilitators and adds substantially to our
comprehension of the complex issue of peacebuilding,
opens new avenues for its further exploration and
offers many valuable recommendations.

In conclusion, I would like to express our
conviction that the new momentum witnessed in the
field of peacebuilding, as well as the many valuable
proposals and recommendations that have resulted
from the regular and periodic reviews of peacebuilding
activities, will not be wasted but will soon lead to new
synergy between all relevant actors and yield eagerly
awaited results.

