Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting and
the delegation of the United Kingdom for its work in
promting the adoption of resolution 2379 (2017). We
also extend our greetings to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs ofthe Republic ofIraq, Mr. Ibrahim Abdulkarim
Al-Jafari, who is joining us at today's meeting. I also
welcome Ambassador Nadia Murad, who is also at
this meeting.

Bolivia voted in favour of the resolution adopted
today because it believes that the fight against
Da'esh, as led by the Iraqi people, deserves the full
support not only of the Security Council, but also of
the entire membership of our Organization. We wish
to express our most sincere recognition of the brave,
self-sacrificing and determined struggle waged by the
Iraqi people and security forces in general and continue
to wage in order to definitely eradicate Da'esh from
the Republic of Iraq. It is a battle they are fighting on
behalf of all of us.

It is important to bear in mind that the brutality of
Da'esh continues to take the lives of innocent people.
It is not only a regional threat, as we saw with the
attack perpetrated on 14 September, in which more
than 80 people lost their lives in southern Iraq; it is
also a global threat, as we recently saw in Barcelona,
Afghanistan, Egypt, the United Kingdom, Belgium
and France.

We believe that the resolution just adopted must
undoubtedly be implemented in the framework of
full respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Iraq, and as a
complement to the efforts of Government institutions,
so that the Da'esh perpetrators of atrocities - which
include crimes against humanity, violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law * can be
duly investigated, tried and punished.

We hope that the work and evidence collected by the
investigative team will contribute to bringing justice to
the Iraqi people and to all the victims of the atrocities
committed by Da'esh around the world. We also hope
that this work will make it possible to bring to justice
the perpetrators of illicit trafficking and the destruction
of cultural heritage, such as the 21 June attack on the
Great Mosque of Al-Nuri, whose incalculable historical
and cultural value is an irreparable loss for the historical
heritage of Iraq and of humankind as a whole. It is an
unfortunate testament to the savagery of Da'esh.

Bolivia once again condemns in the strongest terms
any act of terrorism as criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of where, when and by whom it is committed;
and reaffirms that all States must fight terrorism by all
means, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and international law.

Reconciliation is not synonymous with forgetting;
reconciliation is not synonymous with impunity.
Reconciliation is synonymous with satisfaction with the
right to truth, the right tojustice, the right to reparations
and the right for these acts to never be repeated.

