Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): We appreciate the decision
to dispatch a Security Council mission to the Central
Africa region. The mission encouraged the ownership
initiative of Africa for peace and security at a very
critical moment for the region, when the first summit
meeting of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region of Africa, which embodies that initiative,
was taking place. The subsequent disturbance in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
however, has seriously damaged the prospects for
achieving peace and stability in the region. I therefore
wish to discuss three points that Japan considers
important in that connection.
First, we are deeply concerned about the reported
incursion of Rwandan troops across the border of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We must urgently
seek to establish the facts, since the event, if it actually
occurred, jeopardizes the efforts of the Security
Council and the international community to bring
about peace in the Great Lakes region. The
Government of Rwanda should first have recourse to
such political means as the Joint Verification
Mechanism or the tripartite mechanism to address its
security concerns.

The immediate and active cooperation of the
Government of Rwanda in getting the Joint
Verification Mechanism operational is an absolute
requirement. At the same time, the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation or
resettlement of members of the former Rwandan Army
(ex-FAR) forces and Interahamwe in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must be accelerated, and we
therefore urge the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to make every possible effort to
disarm and repatriate those soldiers as expeditiously as
possible, in cooperation with the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) and the newly deploying
brigades, in particular.

Secondly, with regard to Burundi, we first of all
commend and support the role played by the Regional
Peace Initiative and the African Union in promoting
the peace process. It is important for all the parties
concerned to make further efforts to advance the
process, in accordance with the newly established
schedule, so as to enable the indirect election of the
new President to be held and, thus, the process to be
completed next April. We condemn the Forces
nationales de liberation (FLN) of Agathon Rwasa for
continuing to reject the peace process and fighting
against the Forces armees burundaises. We also
strongly condemn the Gatumba massacre. Such a
tragedy must never be repeated in this region. We
welcome in this regard the intention of the Government
of Burundi, after its national investigation, to refer the
matter to the International Criminal Court. I expect
those efforts to lead to the identification of those
responsible for the massacre and to ensure that they are
brought to justice.

Thirdly, with regard to the activities of the
peacekeeping operation, it is important to note that the
Security Council mission visited United Nations
peacekeepers in both the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Burundi to make assessments on the
ground. Based on the experience gained through that
mission, the Security Council should seek to conduct
more in-depth discussions on how peacekeeping
operations can contribute to making elections
successful in those countries and can then be drawn
down in accordance with a clearly defined exit
strategy.

In this connection, I must mention that the
instances of sexual abuse alleged to have been
committed by members of MONUC betray the trust
and confidence of the local population and seriously
undermine the credibility of the Security Council and
the United Nations as a whole. The Secretariat must
not suppress the facts in this case. All information
should be disclosed, and strict disciplinary measures to
prevent any recurrence should be taken at once.

In closing, I cannot overstate the importance of a
regional approach to the peace and stability of the
Central African region. The Security Council should
consider how to mobilize and optimize the military,
political and socio-economic tools available to the
international community in order to promote overall
peace in the region. Japan, for its part, has actively
participated in the discussion and, as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council from next year, stands
ready to discharge its enhanced responsibilities in this
regard.

