Mr. She Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I should like first of all to
undertake the pleasant task of congratulating you,
Mr. President, on your skill and knowledge in guiding
the work of the Security Council for this month of
October.

My delegation would like to join in the
unanimous tribute to the French delegation for its work
in presiding over the Council last month and to
congratulate it for the outstanding way in which it
handled the tragic events that plunged the United States
of America and the world into mourning as a result of
the horrendous attacks on New York, Washington DC.
and Pennsylvania, which caused incalculable human
and material loss.

The Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo was among the first to condemn those acts
of terrorism, and we join with the United States of
America and other States throughout the world in
trying to combat that scourge in all of its forms.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to thank very sincerely the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, on his recent historic visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. That visit was necessary in that
it made it possible for the highest-level United Nations
official to see for himself the tragedy in which the
Congolese people are caught up.

My delegation would also like to thank him for
his personal investment in the quest for a lasting
solution to that war of aggression, in particular by
promoting summit meetings between the heads of State
of the countries concerned. I encourage him to continue
his efforts in that direction, as well as to explore other
approaches conducive to the speedy attainment of
peace.
The award of the Nobel Peace Prize to the
Secretary-General, which represents a great honour for
Africa, was well deserved; it was the crowning moment
of an entire career dedicated to the tireless search for
peace in the world.

Finally, my delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General for having nominated as the head of
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), Mr.
Amos Namanga Ngongi, a native of Cameroon, in
Central Africa, who I am sure has a perfect knowledge
of the region, as well as of the mentality of the people
there. I am convinced that Mr. Ngongi is a worthy
successor to Ambassador Kamel Morjane, and I do not
doubt for a moment that he will be up to the task of
responding to the expectations for peace to which his
illustrious predecessor happily gave rise.

I say to him "Be assured, dear brother, of my
Government's full, sincere cooperation as you carry out
your difficult tasks. Allow me to express to you, Mr.
Special Representative, our gratitude for your excellent
introduction of the ninth report of the Secretary-
General on MONUC's activities."

In his speech at the beginning of this month at the
annual conference of his party, Mr. Tony Blair, Prime
Minister of the United Kingdom, referring to a "moral
duty" to provide international military and
humanitarian assistance to any country in need,
stressed that if the world continued to ignore the
suffering of the African nations, like the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, ravaged by war, that would
incite anger and frustration that could threaten global
stability.

My delegation endorses those words. My
Government has always affirmed the urgent need for
serious, in-depth reflection leading to all necessary
measures to restore confidence and bring about a return
to normality in the Great Lakes region, in order finally
to root out chaos and despair.

At a time when the peace process is entering a
crucial, decisive phase, we must together tackle the
remaining problems that impede the urgently needed
implementation of the Lusaka peace process, in the
best interests of the people of the Great Lakes region.
The problems or obstacles relate to: disengagement;
demilitarization of Kisangani; the disquieting situation
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo; the inter-Congolese dialogue; phase III relating
to the withdrawal of foreign troops and disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and
reintegration programmes; and the humanitarian
situation and the economic recovery of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Concerning the disengagement of forces on the
ground, we welcome the effective cessation of
hostilities along the line of confrontation. We agree
with the Secretary-General about the implementation of
phase II of MONUC deployment, but there were
certain failings in carrying out the Kampala
disengagement plan and some Harare sub-plans
regarding the new defensive positions. The new
defensive positions of the Congolese armed forces in
Emate-Loa, Abunakambo, Losambo and Djefera are
still being illegally occupied by the Mouvement pour la
liberation du Congo (MLC), which, in violation of the
Kampala plan and the Harare sub-plans, retains
administrative and police powers.

For its part, the Rassemblement congolais pour la
democratic (RCD) continues to administer Pweto
without any right to do so, despite MONUC's presence.
I am still convinced that all these questions and the
other substantive problems are not insurmountable and
that appropriate solutions can be found in cooperation
with MONUC and the Joint Military Commission.

With regard to the demilitarization of Kisangani,
in the statement to the press on 11 October 2001 by its
President, the Security Council called on the RCD-
Goma to demilitarize Kisangani, as demanded by the
relevant Security Council resolutions. My delegation,
which appreciates the fact that the Security Council has
recognized the dominant influence of Rwanda on the
RCD-Goma, would have preferred that the Council
demand with the same firmness the withdrawal of
Rwandan troops from the town. At the risk of boring
the Council, my delegation will keep repeating that it is
essential that Kisangani and its population, who
continue to suffer enormously from the pain of war and
its aftermath, cease to be the symbol of the martyrdom
of an entire nation. Failure to demilitarize the town
risks strengthening the growing humiliation of the
Congolese people. History gives ample evidence that
such feelings bring a grave threat of extremist
uprisings, as the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom
stressed.

Once again, I appeal to the Council to take the
steps referred to in paragraph 28 of resolution 1355
(2001) to bring these two recalcitrant parties,
signatories of the Lusaka Agreement, to respect their
obligations and stop defying with impunity the entire
international community, through the Security Council.
In order to remove any pretext that Rwanda or the RCD
may use, the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo reiterates solemnly before the Council its
commitment not to occupy Kisangani and its environs
once it has been truly demilitarized. It is up to the
Security Council to take all the necessary steps to make
this demilitarization effective.

I turn to the disturbing situation in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
situation is indeed very disquieting and should be the
focus of attention in the Security Council. It is marked,
as the ninth report of the Secretary-General
emphasizes, by an increase in massive human rights
violations by the RCD and the Rwandan patriotic army,
the intensification of fighting and the strengthening and
concentration of Rwandan and Ugandan troops in
Kanyabayongo, where they are clearly preparing to
confront one another as they did before at Kisangani.

Members will recall that when the Harare sub-
plans were being implemented, Rwanda offered
unilaterally to withdraw by 200 kilometres, instead of
the 15 kilometres in the Kampala plan. With the
reinforcement of its troops, we can finally understand
Rwanda's secret plan, which was really to perpetuate
its domination of the people of Kivu. This explains the
resumption of hostilities in Kindu, Fizi and other parts
of the region. It also explains, as is clearly described by
the Secretary-General in his ninth report, the refusal of
the Rwandan army to authorize the MONUC sector
commander to investigate the fighting of 29 September
2001 in Kindu.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo makes the
Government of Rwanda and the RCD responsible for
all the massive violations of human rights, and for the
violence against MONUC personnel, in the part under
its control. My Government wishes to make the
Council aware, before it is too late, of the humanitarian
tragedy that could result if nothing is done to stop the
fourth confrontation of Rwandan and Ugandan troops
on the territory of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

I come now to the inter-Congolese dialogue. My
delegation has just come from Addis Ababa, where on
15 October the inter-Congolese dialogue was solemnly
opened. All the participants expressed their desire to
succeed in dialogue and overcome their differences.
They agreed by consensus to resume the peace talks in
the upcoming weeks in South Africa with all delegates
present. I wish here to refer to the comments my
Government made on 6 October 2001 regarding the
proper holding of the inter-Congolese dialogue, as
follows.

In keeping with the spirit and the letter of the
Lusaka Agreement, as repeatedly stated by His
Excellency Major-General Joseph Kabila, President of
the Republic, it has been agreed that a totally inclusive
dialogue should be organized in order to bring about
national reconciliation. However, with the same format
at Addis Ababa as at Gaborone, the national dialogue
lost its inclusive character, which the President of the
Republic and the entire Congolese people favoured.
Legitimate claims by certain representatives of civil
society who felt that they were unjustly excluded must
be properly addressed. The political opposition, as well
as civil society, as defined in chapter 5 of the Lusaka
Agreement, is not represented in all its diversity. Other
specific problems, particularly involving the Mayi-
Mayi resistance and the RCD-ML, have not been
resolved either. The facilitation seems to be running
into material problems, which must be resolved.

It should also be recalled that one of the
objectives of the Lusaka Agreement to be attained by
the inter-Congolese dialogue is to restore a new
political order as a result of free, democratic,
transparent elections. It is up to us, Congolese, to
resolve all the major issues concerning the life of the
State and the governance of our nation, in particular:
the form of the State; its political regime; the nature of
our economy; and national reconstruction. The Council
will easily understand that from the point of view of
my Government it is imperative to carefully prepare for
the dialogue so that its conclusions can be accepted and
be applicable to everyone. We are particularly happy
that the facilitator has finally recognized that the
Government's position is defensible and in keeping
with the spirit of Gaborone, and that in its latest
statement the Council has called on all participants for
support.

My Government is very grateful to the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) for having taken
the necessary steps to provide support to the facilitator.
We welcome with satisfaction the announcement made
by the OAU that it will open a liaison office in
Kinshasa, as well as a liaison mechanism with the
Office of the facilitator.

I assure the Council that my Government is
strongly committed to implementing two chapters
enshrined in the Lusaka Agreement - that is to say,
the political chapter for holding the inter-Congolese
dialogue without excluding anyone - and here the
Addis Ababa meeting will have been a very important
stage in this process - and the military chapter, with
the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration (DDRRR) programme.

I will now speak about phase III on the orderly
withdrawal of all foreign forces, as well as the DDRRR
programme. The holding of the national dialogue gives
rise to a lot of hope on the part of the Congolese
people, who aspire to peace. But there can be no peace
unless Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi withdraw their
forces from our national territory. How can one
implement the resolutions of the dialogue in the
context of occupation? The dialogue would be
pointless if other aspects of the Lusaka Agreement,
particularly the withdrawal of foreign forces, are not
implemented. Indeed, we note here that the
Government and its allies have made a lot of tangible
efforts to speed up the implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement, in particular concerning the withdrawal of
all of the Namibian forces and a total halt to any troop
movements.

On the eve of the work now under way in the
Security Council, withdrawal movements have been
occurring, accompanied by much international media
attention, and we need to make sure that this
demonstration is not just being used as a propaganda
tool to delude the international community about the
real intentions of those involved. With regard to one of
the parties in particular, the theatrical alleged
withdrawal of some of its military forces is not at all
comparable with the significant reinforcement of that
party's troops in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo's territory. Any withdrawal
movement and any deployment must be observed. That
is why my Government can only support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General contained in
paragraph 98 of his report, in which he asks, the
Security Council to authorize MONUC to start phase
III of its deployment, in keeping with the new concept
of operation that he has defined.

However, concerning the optimal implementation
of phase III, my Government continues to stress the
need for an increase in the number of military
personnel of MONUC committed to this job beyond the
limit established by Security Council resolution 1291
(2000). Similarly, the international community must
encourage Uganda to complete the repatriation of its
forces, and it must demand that Rwanda withdraw its
troops in keeping with Security Council resolution
1304 (2000).

For its part, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is unilaterally trying to find a solution to the
DDRRR programme of Rwandan citizens, whose
presence in the country continues to be used by the
Rwandan Government as a fallacious pretext - even
an alibi - to justify its occupation of Congolese
territory by its regular troops. My Government has thus
started to disarm and canton the 3,000 individuals from
armed groups of Rwandese origin in Kamina, in
keeping with the provisions of the Lusaka Agreement,
Chapters 9.1 and 9.2, with Security Council resolution
1355 (2001) and with the Kampala and Harare plans
and sub-plans on the disengagement and the
redeployment of armed forces.

By proceeding with this operation, my
Government has once again demonstrated our resolve
pursuant to the provisions that I mentioned before. It is
up to the Rwandese Government to reciprocate
concretely by actually withdrawing its troops from my
country. These gestures could restore the climate of
trust that our war-torn populations sincerely hope for.

My Government is prepared to be totally
transparent on this question. For that reason, it has
authorized the international community, through
MONUC, to have total freedom of movement
throughout the free territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and to allow visits to the
various military barracks to convince themselves of our
resolve to settle this question. In fact, it is planned that
a MONUC team visit the Kamina base today, as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
recalled a little while ago, to identify Rwandese
nationals located there. It is also my Government's
intention to give that team every possible assistance
required for the visit.

Concerning the humanitarian situation and the
economic recovery in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, apart from points that are directly related to the
polemical aspects of the settlement of the war of
aggression in our country, the Secretary-General's
report covers several other aspects that are highly
important for our country. As concerns the looting of
natural resources and other forms of wealth in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which is in
violation of our national sovereignty, this phenomenon
is going on at a frenetic pace. My Government urges
the group of experts that was set up to study the matter
to continue its investigations and to complete its work
within the deadline set, in order to enable the Council
to take all necessary steps to put an end to all illegal
activities of natural resources exploitation, which fuels
this war of aggression. The Council has repeatedly
expressed its concern at this phenomenon and has
stressed the importance it attaches to the conclusions
that will appear in the final report to be submitted
shortly to the Council. To this end my Government
assures the Council of its full cooperation with the
group of experts.

With regard to human rights, my Government
regrets the resignation of Mr. Roberto Garreton from
his post as Special Rapporteur for human rights for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I pay tribute to Mr.
Garreton. He has been instrumental in raising
awareness among the Congolese regarding questions
relating to the defense of human rights. I wish him
every success in his new post.

Nevertheless, despite great progress human rights
problems in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
still acute, particularly in the eastern provinces of the
Republic, which are under occupation. In order to
tackle the defense of these rights, the Council should
authorize MONUC to considerably increase the number
of human rights specialists. These people, in
coordination with the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the specialized agencies, could work out
policies and activities aimed at accompanying the
efforts already made by the Government in order to
protect these rights throughout the territory of the
Republic.

The humanitarian situation is highly precarious
for the Congolese, who suffer from the scourge of war,
and for the millions of refugees who have fled
situations of breaches of the peace in their countries.
Humanitarian corridors have been identified by
MONUC and by the Security Council mission, which
honoured us with a visit last May. We really need to set
up a system to protect the existing humanitarian
corridors and to create other corridors, too, particularly
in making sure that there is free circulation and that the
roads, rivers and railroads are protected from Kinshasa
to Kindu, from Kisangani to Kindu, from Bunia to
Kindu, from Bukavu to Kindu and from Lubumbashi to
Kindu.

More than Katako-Kombe in the province of
Kasai Oriental, Kindu, the former Port-Empain in
Maniema province, serves, because of its
infrastructure, as a genuine centre of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and an export port for
Congolese products. A deployment of MONUC in that
city would promote and strengthen the economic
functioning of Kindu in the best interests of the people
of Maniema and Nord-Kivu and Sud-Kivu.
The efforts of the World Food Programme (WFP),
particularly in northern Katanga, are highly
commendable. The WFP is one of the United Nations
agencies that would definitely benefit from the
proximity of a United Nations logistical base in Kindu.

Turning to medical services, I wish to convey my
deepest gratitude to the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF) and to the international community for
the vaccination campaigns, particularly against
poliomyelitis. Furthermore, as the Secretary-General's
report stresses, MONUC and the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) are now
finalizing a prevention programme based on an
information and education campaign. The United
Nations should draw on the experience of the current
leaders of UNAIDS, some of whom have been
intimately involved over the last 15 years in national
programmes to combat this pandemic. These leaders
understand the particular situation of the Republic of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and they are in
a good position to provide assistance in combating
endemic diseases and pandemics, such as malaria or
the HIV/AIDS virus.

UNICEF is also very much present in helping to
protect children.

With MONUC, UNICEF has been involved in the
demobilization and reintegration of vulnerable groups,
including child soldiers. As the Secretary-General
underlined in paragraph 56 of his report, planning, in
close collaboration with the Minister of Social Affairs
and Family, for a global strategy for dealing with child
soldiers and street children is well-advanced for
Kinshasa and other provincial cities.

With respect to the link between poverty,
development and the current armed conflict, it is
evident that the conference on peace, security,
democracy and development in the Great Lakes under
the aegis of the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity is becoming a necessity, in fact, an
inevitable necessity.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo believes
that a fair and lasting solution is within our reach. We
must search for it and find it through frank and sincere
dialogue, within a bilateral framework, naturally, and,
even better, within the framework of that international
conference on peace, security, democracy and
development in the Great Lakes region. The conference
is urgently needed, not only to enable the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to recover its lost stability and
basically rebuild a State on healthy and democratic
foundations, while being mindful of the most
fundamental rights of its citizens. The conference
would also promote human rights, good governance,
national reconciliation, democracy and the economic
recovery of the entire Great Lakes region.

The conference will also promote the creation of
an integrated network for education, transportation and
tourism, given the interdependence of the economic
structure of the countries of the Great Lakes region.
The conference will also be able to take a decision on
the resumption of activities of a regional regulating and
stabilizing organ, as was in its time the Economic
Community of the Great Lakes Countries (CEPGL),
and even plan programmes for regional development in
the framework of the management of the period
following the war of aggression.

Before I conclude, I must reiterate the firm
commitment of my Government to following through
unreservedly with the national reconciliation process
begun on 15 October 2001 in Addis Ababa and with its
commitment to cooperating for a better conclusion to
the process of disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration, and repatriation or resettlement
(DDRRR).

My Government recommends that the Security
Council agree to the request of the Secretary-General
to rapidly deploy phase III of MONUC. My
Government urges the Council to demand the total
demilitarization of Kisangani, as desired by the
inhabitants of that long-suffering city.

Finally, in the search for a lasting peace for the
entire Great Lakes region, my Government is going to
continue to commit itself to the Arusha process for
Burundi, and we renew our encouragement and total
support for the facilitator, Nelson Mandela.

I thank you, Sir, and all members of the Council
for their unflagging attention displayed in the quest for
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Thank
you for your attention. I remain at your disposal for
any questions or concerns you wish to raise.

