Ms. Al-Mulla (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): On
behalf of my Government, I congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the current month. I also pay tribute to the
efforts of your predecessor, our friend, the
representative of China, for his wise leadership of the
Council's work last month.

I also take this opportunity to thank the Council
for its prompt response to the Arab Group's request to
convene this meeting to discuss the heinous crime
committed by the Israeli Government in assassinating
Sheikh Ahmed Yassin and others. That deplorable
action was one of a series of assassinations targeting
the Palestinian people and their national icons. It is a
policy pursued by a Government that is said to be
seeking peace and not violence, and which claims to be
a Government of peace, not a Government of war. We
denounce this immoral and criminal act perpetrated by
a country that is a party to the 1949 Fourth Geneva
Convention.

Kuwait strongly condemns the terrorist operation
perpetrated by the Israeli Government at dawn on
Monday, which caused the death of Sheikh Ahmed
Yassin and seven others. The Israeli military
establishment was not content to launch one rocket; it
launched two more. That operation was a crime that
revealed once again the barbarity of the Israeli
occupation, which has mercilessly assassinated an old
man while he was leaving, after his dawn prayers, the
mosque where he prayed every day.

Kuwait once again extends its condolences to the
family of the victim, his colleagues and the brotherly
Palestinian people.

Kuwait considers the assassination of Sheikh
Ahmed Yassin to be an atrocious war crime, to be
added to the list of crimes committed against humanity
by Israel, in violation of the principles of international
law and in complete disregard of its commitments
under the Fourth Geneva Convention. Israel is also
disregarding the position of the international
community, which has consistently denounced the
policy of assassinations and extrajudicial killings
pursued by Israel and its other policies of aggression
carried out against Palestinian civilians in the occupied
territories.

Kuwait fully supports the statement issued by the
Gulf Cooperation Council in which it denounced this
heinous crime, which clearly exemplifies Israel's
policy of State terrorism. Kuwait joins those who have
stressed the need for providing international protection
to the Palestinian people.

Kuwait calls upon the Security Council to assume
its responsibilities, to condemn this crime and to adopt
the necessary measures to force the Israeli Government
to put an end to its illegal practices and policies. The
Council should prompt Israel to respect the resolutions
adopted in accordance with international law and put
an end to Israel's efforts to undermine international
efforts to achieve a just and comprehensive peace
based on the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, in particular resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 1397 (2002), as well as the Arab peace
initiative and the principle of land for peace. The
Council should also call upon Israel to withdraw fully
from all occupied Arab territories, including the Syrian
Golan Heights and the Lebanese territories.

In conclusion, I wish to underline the fact that
Kuwait has always supported the demands of the
Palestinian people, in particular the right to self-
determination and the right to establish an independent
State on its own land, with Al-Quds as its capital.

We call upon the Israeli Government to listen for
once to the voice of reason and to renounce its policies
of provocation, which create more tension, provoke
hatred and lead to violence and extremism in the
region. Instead, it should courageously seek peace,
which would require an end to the occupation, and
enter a dialogue through negotiations, rather than
employ a policy of killings, ongoing destruction and
the violation of the resolutions of the international
community.

Israel's continuation of its policies prompts us to
wonder about the outcome of international efforts to
combat terrorism at a time when Israel is deliberately
and openly practising State terrorism before the eyes of
the entire world, without any intention of ending the
bloodshed.

