Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like first of all to warmly
congratulate you, Mr. President, on having organized
today's discussion. This meeting and the discussion we
are embarking upon are a clear demonstration that the
international community today values the contribution
that players other than States can make to preventing
and settling conflicts around the planet. That in itself is
a welcome development.

Over the past 15 years civil society has regained
its role, and today the companies, unions, associations,
and academic institutions - in short, the NGOs in
their totality - are receiving deserved
acknowledgement of their place in one of the founding
missions of our Organization: the role of civil society
in conflict prevention and the peaceful settlement of
disputes.

How does civil society play that role? First of all
by participating in discussion. When there is discussion
in a society criticizing the excesses of public
authorities, experience shows that it is much more
difficult for a Government to distance itself from the
rule of law and, more generally, from good governance.
The support provided by the international community
to strengthening civil society has therefore become one
of the most meaningful elements of the in-depth action
to prevent conflict.

But civil society does not have the same political
legitimacy as institutions. They need to gain that
legitimacy, which cannot be done overnight. I am
encouraged, however, by the progress made worldwide
in acknowledging civil society's role, even in the most
fragile countries.

Let us not forget in this respect the role of women
and their associations in preventing crises by
minimizing their worst effects and by taking action to
remedy them. How many times have we been struck by
their contribution in the Great Lakes region - a
contribution that has been recognized by the Council
and one that France fully supports.

Nevertheless, we must recognize in this
discussion that, like political society, civil society can
also be acting wrongfully. The non-governmental actor
is sometimes, unfortunately, the proxy for an
unscrupulous State. At other times, though thankfully
not often, it can even be the vector of violent, criminal
action, as the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Tanzania has just underscored in his statement. And in
some cases, too, one of the monstrous manifestations
of civil society can be an actual mafia.

However, thankfully, civil society is most often a
powerful aid to peace. I was simply observing that we
should always remain vigilant. Our Council is fully
committed to the role of civil society in post-conflict
situations.

In the wake of the decision taken by our heads of
State and Government to establish a peacebuilding
commission, I would like to highlight one point: no
just, lasting peace can be established through the
efforts of the State alone. The case of Mozambique,
moreover, illustrates this point. Private actors can
contribute, as in Mozambique, in the settlement of
conflicts. The robustness of any peace agreement
depends on the extent to which the emerging society
remains active, critical, involved, independent - in
short, a civil society.

We also need to pay tribute to the efforts of
NGOs in the implementation of reconstruction
programmes, such as those in the field of demining, to
which the Danish Minister for Foreign Affairs alluded,
or in the difficult matter of reintegrating child soldiers
in wounded, weakened societies that are often torn
apart by years of conflict.

Finally, let me reiterate France's support for the
various institutions which enable civil society to be
associated with the work of the Security Council and to
express our desire to see them strengthened and used
more often. I am thinking in particular of the Arria
formula, but also of the meetings organized during
Security Council missions. In the field of conflict
prevention, the knowledge of societies which NGOs
possess is a valuable asset, as the Council has rightly
realized.

In terms of the Arria meetings, we need to think
about making them more interactive. My delegation is
prepared to participate with NGOs in brainstorming on
this subject.

Let me also take this opportunity to reiterate the
proposal already made by France in this forum with
respect to the monitoring of civil society via annual
reports on the most vulnerable countries.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that France
welcomes the fact that the Security Council today has
publicly reaffirmed the extent to which civil society is
an essential part of any peacebuilding endeavour.
