Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): Let me commence by
expressing our gratitude to the French presidency of the
Security Council for having convened this important
meeting to review the implementation of the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel. I would like to
thank the Secretary-General and other briefers for their
comprehensive briefings. We welcome the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2013/20) made earlier today, which
once again demonstrated the Security Council's
determination to address the complex security and
political challenges and advance peace, stability and
development in the Sahel region.

A coherent, comprehensive, and coordinated
approach and consistent engagement from regional and
international actors remain vitally important. We are
grateful to the Secretary-General, his Special Envoy
for the Sahel, the Special Representatives for West and
Central Africa and the relevant United Nations missions
and entities operating on the ground for their support
for the countries of the region and their contribution
to ensuring progress towards the implementation of the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.

Azerbaijan also commends the efforts of
the countries of the Sahel and relevant regional
organizations, including those aimed at enhancing
interregional cooperation and coordination. In that
regard, we welcome the recent ministerial meeting
on the integrated strategy, held in Bamako under the
chairmanship of Mali. We take positive note of the
decision taken at the meeting to set a coordination
platform of the Sahel strategy and the announcement
regarding the establishment of a flexible technical
secretariat to support coordination efforts in the region.

National capacity-building, strong early warning
mechanisms and harmonized approaches are necessary
for effectively addressing cross-border threats facing
the region. We are encouraged by the determination
of the States of the Sahelo-Saharan region to intensify
cooperation and coordination with a view to developing
inclusive interregional border security and collective
anti-terrorism strategies. The recent second regional
conference on border security between the Sahel and
Maghreb States, hosted by Morocco in Rabat, was a
timely and important forum to that end.

Further promotion of national reconciliation and
intercommunal dialogue is another essential task.
In that context, we support the ongoing national,
international, regional and subregional efforts to
promote the ongoing political processes in Mali and
welcome the commitment of the Malian Government
to address the root causes of the multifaceted crisis in
that country.

The continued international support for national
Governments in the region is required, with a view to
enabling them to address the most pressing needs of the
affected populations and to implement resilience-based
approaches to sustainable development. We welcome
the recent joint visit to the region by the Secretary-
General and the President of the World Bank and
the announcements of planned funding in support of
national and regional efforts.

In conclusion, I would like once again to underscore
the importance of the continued strong commitment
of the international community to the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, unity and political independence of
the countries of the Sahel region.
