Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): Let
me join colleagues, Sir, in wishing you every success
in your stewardship of the Council and in thanking
Ambassador Akram and his colleagues for what they
did in the month of May.

I should like to begin by thanking Special
Representative Klein for his report and Chairman
Bryant for the way in which he set out the positive
developments which have taken place in Liberia. I
think we owe the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL), the Special Representative and the
Transitional Government a particular debt for the way
in which they have taken a very grave situation through
to the progress that can be recorded today.

As the Security Council, we can take pride in
what the United Nations has been able to contribute to
the developments in Liberia. I look forward personally
to being in Liberia within three weeks' time to see
first-hand - with the Security Council mission - how
those developments have taken place and to explore
with the Special Representative how the United
Nations is acting coherently to tackle the problems,
how to give him the support he deserves, how we
position the United Nations effort in Liberia against the
effort in the region as a whole and how the effect of
developments in one country impinge on those efforts,
but also how, in aggregate, we can be quite confident
that we are doing everything we ought to do to support
him in his courageous efforts and that we can report
back to the Council that the United Nations is playing,
with maximum effect, the part it ought to play.

Against that background, I should like to quickly
make three points. First, we welcome the progress
made on security sector reform despite a fragile
situation in Liberia. The security situation is holding.
The United Kingdom very much welcomes the
establishment of a Rule of Law Implementation
Committee to coordinate the reform of the police, the
judiciary and the correctional system. The progress
made so far demonstrates that the rule of law and how
it applies in practice are actually basic to taking a State
in the condition in which Liberia found itself towards
the destination we would all like to see. To support
that, of course, there needs to be rapid agreement with
regard to the restructuring of the armed forces and to
the establishment of reforms outside Monrovia, in
other regions of the country.

Secondly, we welcome UNMIL's efforts with
regard to disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation or resettlement (DDRRR), which are
crucial to the development of Liberia. Mr. Klein's
efforts to relaunch that programme and to get it firmly
on track are very much to be encouraged. What we
need is a concerted effort to ensure that the necessary
financing and the necessary programmes are in
place - as he has argued - for long-term, sustainable
rehabilitation and reintegration.

My last point is to address the question of
sanctions. We have heard an impressive case from
Chairman Bryant as to why sanctions should be lifted.
That has been endorsed by the Special Representative,
and we must be mindful of that. We are also aware of
the history and of why we came to be in a position to
need sanctions. I welcome the Chairman's suggestion
that experts might visit soon in order to validate the
progress which has been made and, as I understand it,
to assess that progress against the conditions which
were attached in the first place: the reasons why we
needed sanctions. I think it is absolutely right that we
should do that and that the review - which is intended
in any event - should be a positive sign of
encouragement of what has been achieved. Then we
shall see where that leaves us on the sanctions. Clearly,
we need to recognize progress and to provide every
encouragement. But, on the other hand, we need to
ensure that there is no abuse. I think the objectives are
shared. The question is how we do that in a way that
will tap the economic benefits that we want to see,
which are crucial, as we have heard.

There is an apparent contradiction, however, in
seeking to lift sanctions on exports of diamonds and
then saying, "By the way, we will not export, because
we need a voluntary restraint arrangement until we
have Kimberley certification". I think the case would
be stronger if we could demonstrate that the Kimberley
Process was being fully implemented, and that
therefore the logical thing to do was to put in place the
lifting of sanctions. But that is a detail. I think that the
principle that we should look at it rigorously, both
against the conditions and against the case the
Chairman has made and the progress he has achieved,
is absolutely right. The United Kingdom will take part
constructively in that discussion.

I end where I started: we very much look forward
to the Security Council demonstrating its commitment
to Liberia and the region, especially by starting the
voyage in Accra. We will work with the Economic
Community of West African States to demonstrate, too,
our support for regional organizations carrying on the
good work.

