The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2018/1109, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Cote d'Ivoire, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, France, the Netherlands, Peru,
Poland, Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the United States of America.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it.

I shall now make a statement before the vote in my
capacity as representative of Cote d'Ivoire.

I am particularly delighted to take the floor at
this meeting of the Security Council, which serves
as the framework for our adoption of draft resolution
S/2018/1109, on police, justice and corrections. Cote
d'Ivoire welcomes the forthcoming adoption of the
draft resolution, the result of its exemplary cooperation
with the Kingdom of the Netherlands. We thank all
the States members of the Council for their positive
contributions and broad commitment to the maintenance
of international peace and security.

It will be recalled that in May, our two countries'
shared commitment and our joint efforts to promote
international peace and security led to the adoption
of resolution 2417 (2018), in which the Council called
the attention of the international community to the
link between armed conflict and food insecurity.
cote d'Ivoire considers the draft resolution to be
adopted by the Council today extremely important,
in that it addresses issues that are at the heart of our
recent history. The restoration and strengthening of
the capacities of our police, judicial and correctional
institutions were major achievements in the cooperation
between my country's Government and the United
Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire, and were among
the factors that led to the universally recognized
success of United Nations action in my country. In our
desire to share the many lessons learned in its 13-year
experience of peacekeeping, Cote d'Ivoire has therefore
undertaken the crucial task of helping to ensure that
this project comes to fruition. We hope that the draft
resolution will guide United Nations peacekeeping now
and in the future.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Cote
d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, France,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Netherlands, Peru, Poland,
Russian Federation, Sweden, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America

The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft

resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2447 (2018).

I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.

I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.


