Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me first to express my condolences to
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and its people and
Government on the passing of the Crown Prince. We
would also like to convey our condolences and our
solidarity to the people and Government of Turkey,
who have been struck by the recent painful earthquake.
Both countries are sister nations and neighbours of my
country, and all that happens in either country also
affects us as if it were happening in Syria. The opposite
is also true.

My delegation wishes to express its great
appreciation to you, Madame President, for having
convened this open meeting to address the situation in
the Middle East. This is an important topic, which we
debate with the aim of putting an end to Israel's
occupation of the Arab territories and its aggressive,
inhumane and systematic violations of the rights of
those who live there, in contravention of international
law and international humanitarian and human rights
law. These practices continue with the full knowledge
of those who claim to protect those laws.

All of us here know that the item on the agenda
today, "The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question", is primarily concerned with the
Arab-Israeli conflict and the question of Palestine, and
not with other matters that do not fall within the
historical definition of the item's title. Unfortunately,
instead of merely focusing on the content and objective
of this agenda item, attempts are made to introduce
other, unrelated subjects in order to weaken the agenda
item under discussion, silently ignore the question of
Israel's commitment to ending its occupation of the
occupied Arab territories, and minimize the importance
of the application to the Council for the full
membership of Palestine in the United Nations. In this
context, we note that the facts show that the events,
crises and tensions in our region are closely linked to
the Arab-Israeli conflict.

Today's exercise arises from efforts to lessen the
international political and diplomatic pressure on Israel
and certain countries that oppose Palestine's just
demands - supported unanimously by the
international community - seeking first and foremost
the creation of a Palestinian State and an end to the
settlement activities. Some countries are attempting to
destabilize the region, which would lead to regional
war and have a catastrophic effect on all the States of
the region, without exception.

How can they do this? The answer is simple.
They are inciting various Arab States against one
another, under varying pretexts. They are also
attempting to change the reality of the Arab world by
opening up internal Arab fronts, which in the final
analysis can serve only Israel's interests. And in regard
to the so-called Arab Spring, the question we should
ask is how we can reconcile the beauty of the notion of
spring with the bloodshed, war, aggression, hostilities
and interference in the internal affairs of other
countries. Is this the definition of spring?

We meet today at an important moment in the
history of the Arab-Israeli conflict. It is unacceptable
and incomprehensible that the Security Council should
remain idle in the face of Israel's inhumane and
aggressive policies. In this context, the Council today
has a significant opportunity to prove that it can play
its part, as set forth in the Charter, by accepting the just
and internationally supported request of Palestine; by

recognizing an independent Palestinian State within the
4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital;
and by granting it full membership of the United
Nations according to international law developed
within this Organization through nearly 1,000
resolutions.

Along with implementing policies that are
contrary to international law, Israel, the occupying
Power, refuses to return the occupied Syrian Golan to
Syria and refuses to respect the resolutions of
international legitimacy adopted on this matter,
especially resolution 497 (1981), which states that the
annexation of the occupied Syrian Golan is null, void
and illegal. Israel continues to practice terror and
oppression against the Syrian authorities under
occupation in the Golan. Furthermore, the occupying
forces are waging an ongoing campaign to break the
ties that link those within the Syrian Golan to their
homeland by building the racist wall of separation east
of Majdal Shams, in line with the new Israeli political
and security policy to undermine any possibility of
peace negotiations, including over the occupied Syrian
Golan.

We have transmitted to the Secretary-General and
the Council official complaints in this matter, calling
on the United Nations, particularly the Council, to
shoulder their responsibilities and take measures to
compel Israel to immediately halt its blatant violations
of international law and relevant United Nations
resolutions, particularly resolution 497 (1981). Today,
unfortunately, we reiterate that those calls have not
been answered. We were again offended by the absence
of any mention in the Under-Secretary-General's
briefing of the occupied Syrian Golan.

The achievement of just, comprehensive and
lasting peace can come only with Israel's full
withdrawal to the 4 June 1967 borders and with the
creation of an independent Palestinian State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. We must also address the
matter of the Palestinian refugees, as stated in General
Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 1948. We cannot have
partial, phased or delayed solutions to this question.
Peace in the region is at a dark impasse due to the
arrogance of Israel, supported by the United States and
certain European nations that provide unlimited
support. This has created a deep sense of frustration
and anger among the Arab and Palestinian peoples.

The only obstacle to peace in the region is Israel,
and Israeli officials admit this themselves. One
example among many are the remarks by Major
General Uri Saguy, former head of military
intelligence, who took part in the 2000 Shepherdstown
talks organized by Bill Clinton, in his recently
published book The Frozen Hand: Why Israel Fears
Peace with Syria More Than War, Mr. Saguy contends
that Israel has done everything it could to destroy any
settlement with Syria, and that former Prime Minister
Ehud Barak aborted the peace process with Syria. We
all know that President Clinton addressed this topic in
his memoirs, revealing Israel's responsibility for the
failure of the negotiations with Syria.

We are very concerned and regretful when we see
certain permanent representatives speak on the subject
of the Middle East and my country's situation with
similar animosity and provocativeness, calling for an
uprising against our country's legal Government so as
to foment chaos and destabilization and manipulate our
people's destiny. We find it strange that those countries
that falsely proclaim their desire for Syria's security
and stability refuse to encourage national dialogue or
serious ongoing comprehensive international reforms
in Syria within six months. Along those lines, we
would note that to follow up the recent comprehensive
reforms in Syria, in recent days my country has
established a committee to draft a new, advanced and
modern constitution that will reflect the aspirations of
the Syrian people. In a few days, a preparatory
commission on national dialogue will be established by
presidential decree. It will be presided over by Syrian
President Bashar Al-Assad himself.

While my delegation will not use this opportunity
to reply to statements made by some colleagues, we are
nevertheless convinced that today's agenda item has
nothing to do with their manipulation and manoeuvres,
whose aim is merely to distract attention from the
tension resulting from Israel's continued occupation of
territories in Palestine, southern Lebanon and the
Syrian Golan. While the world turns a blind eye to the
daily crimes of settlement activities and the violation
of law and hundreds of Security Council resolutions,
my country strongly condemns the diplomatically
inappropriate comments made by the observer of the
European Union and a number of other speakers on the
subject of my country and its political leadership.

My country respects the principles and ideals of
the United Nations and its role as a legal point of

reference. We will therefore abstain from responding to
the comments to which I have referred, which are
beyond the realm of political, diplomatic and courteous
convention and violate the principle of
non-interference in the internal affairs of Member
States. My delegation will not proceed in that manner
against representatives who have judged or criticized
our country or characterized the regime in negative
terms. Out of respect for our colleagues and for the
Security Council, we would prefer to proceed in
keeping with appropriate diplomatic and political
language.

