I would like to begin by thanking Germany and all the other co-organizers of today's high-level event for taking up the important issue of climate and security and putting it high on the Security Council's agenda. Georgia aligns itself with the statement to be submitted on behalf of the European Union (see annex 18). Let me add a few remarks in my national capacity. Climate change-related security risks have already become an everyday reality for millions of people around the world. There is growing evidence that climate change is a risk multiplier with the potential to threaten sustainable development and exacerbate conflict and instability. It can aggravate already-fragile situations, including through heightening competition for scarce resources, such as land and water, depriving populations of their livelihoods and inducing forced displacement. But the worst is yet to come, especially if we take a close look at the science. According to the latest report of the World Meteorological Organization, we are witnessing record global sea levels, coupled with the highest atmospheric concentration of greenhouse gases and the hottest decade on record. These are existential challenges that can be addressed only through joint and resolute action, including by implementing our commitments under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We believe that addressing security impacts of climate change should be on the Security Council's conflict-prevention agenda. In this context, we appreciate the progress made by the Council in recent years towards greater recognition of the adverse effects of climate change on the stability and security of regions, which has been reflected in a number of thematic and country-specific resolutions. To play its part in this shared endeavour, Georgia is fully committed to the objectives of the UNFCCC and aligns itself with the findings of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change that the warming of the global climate system is unequivocal and the risks of dangerous climate change impacts will rise sharply if planetary warming exceeds 2°C from pre-industrial levels. We are also convinced that the Sustainable Development Goals - among which addressing climate change is embedded in Goal 13 - and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change are the mutually reinforcing multilateral instruments for preventing impending cataclysm. With this in mind, we have prioritized Goal 13 at the national level and updated our nationally determined contribution under the Paris Agreement, aimed at reducing national emissions and adapting to the impacts of climate change. In addition, on 16 June, Georgia deposited an instrument of acceptance of the Doha Amendment to the Kyoto Protocol. Lastly, to further reinforce our commitment, on 23 January, the Government established the Climate Change Council. The main purpose of the Council is to ensure the efficient implementation of the UNFCCC, the Kyoto Protocol thereto and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. In conclusion, let me reaffirm Georgia's commitment to multilateral efforts to address the impact of climate-related disasters on international peace and security and to our shared endeavour of mitigating the impact of climate change.
