Mr. Fathalla (League of Arab States) (spoke in Arabic): To begin with, I would like to congratulate the
Republic of Malaysia on its presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We wish Malaysia every success
and are grateful for its convening of this important
meeting on the topic of children and armed conflict.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the Secretary-General for his report, contained in
document S/2015/409, which the League of Arab States
considers extremely important. However, we would
have wished the report to be clearer in naming those
responsible for grave violations against Palestinian
children in its annexes. We hope that today's meeting
can help to produce a comprehensive vision for
strengthening efforts to protect children during armed
conflict, and, most importantly, to ensure that they are
not forced to participate in conflicts, whether as part of
regular Government armed forces or non-State armed
groups.

Our region has found itself in exceptional
circumstances in recent years, with many children in
Arab States, particularly Iraq, Syria, Palestine, Libya
and Yemen, living in very difficult conditions. That
has made the members of the League of Arab States
more determined than ever to continue to take the
route of implementing international agreements and
instruments concerning children and preventing any
form of violence against them. The League believes we
must protect children in armed conflict and is therefore
actively working to improve its cooperation with the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict. To that end,
the Secretaries-General of the League and the United
Nations signed a cooperation agreement on the margins
of the high-level segment of the General Assembly at
its sixty-ninth session, resulting in a plan of action that
includes programmes and activities aimed at protecting
children affected by conflict and strengthening their
rights. The activities include a high-level forum to be
held on the margins of the Arab Summit scheduled for
March 2016. At that time we will launch a comprehensive
Arab strategy for protecting children affected by armed
conflict and reintegrating them into society.
I would like to shed some light on various facts
cited in the Secretary-General's report relating to
grave violations against Palestinian children living
under Israeli occupation. First, the percentage of deaths
among Palestinian children is the third highest in the
world; an average of 10 Palestinian children are killed
every day, and more than 1.8 million Palestinians in
Gaza are suffering under occupation and have been
collectively punished as a result of the blockade
imposed on Gaza since 2007. That has harmed the
more than 80 per cent of families in Gaza that rely on
humanitarian assistance, on top of the destruction in
2014 of at least 543 Palestinian schools. All of that has
an impact on Palestinian children and on the possibility
that they can be nurtured and grow to be good citizens
in a safe society.

Concerning the situation of children in Gaza, there
must be serious and sincere efforts made to rebuild the
Gaza Strip and guarantee children their basic right to
live in dignity and safety. There must be accountability
for crimes and grave violations of international
humanitarian law. Children need to be able to live
in dignity and safety, and when we talk about grave
violations of international humanitarian and human-
rights law, we are also talking about violations of the
four Geneva Conventions and the other international
instruments that guarantee the safety and security of
peoples living under occupation.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the support
of the League of Arab States for the work of Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, regarding
the promotion and protection of the rights of children
affected by such conflict. The League supports the
"Children, Not Soldiers" campaign launched last year
by Ms. Zerrougui with a view to ending by 2016 the
recruitment and use of children by any Government
armed forces, and we are working and cooperating
with the United Nations to persuade three Arab States
to respond positively to the campaign, leaving all
Arab States free of that dangerous phenomenon as
well as of children's participation in wars and armed
conflict. We welcome the efforts being made to end
child recruitment by Government forces and we are
establishing various frameworks for cooperation in
achieving that noble goal. However, we should also
focus on the Violations committed by non-State armed
groups against children, since most of the parties listed
in the annexes to the Secretary-General's report are
non-State actors. We must stand together to face this
danger to international peace and security, and that is
the primary responsibility of the Security Council.
