The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Central African Republic, in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the consideration, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Poukre-
Kono (Central African Republic) took a seat at
the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the
Central African Republic and the activities of the
United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in the
Central African Republic, document S/2005/4l4.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council heard a briefing by
the Representative of the Secretary-General,
General Lamine Cisse, on the situation in the
Central African Republic and the activities of the
United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in
the Central African Republic (BONUCA). It

reiterated its full support for the action of the
Representative of the Secretary-General.
"The Security Council is deeply gratified by
the successful holding of the presidential and
legislative elections, and welcomes the
establishment of the newly elected institutions
whose stability is necessary to ensure lasting
peace in the Central African Republic.

"The Security Council acknowledges the
efforts by the Central African defence and
security forces to guarantee satisfactory security
conditions during the electoral process, and
commends the Multinational Force of the Central
African Economic and Monetary Community
(FOMUC), France, the European Union, China
and Germany for providing decisive support to
them.

"The Security Council appreciates the vital
role played in the process by FOMUC to date,
and expresses its support for continuing efforts by
FOMUC to back the consolidation of the
constitutional order, which has thus been re-
established, and the rebuilding of the rule of law.
In this regard, it welcomes the decision of the
States of the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community to extend the mandate of
FOMUC.

"The Security Council invites the
Government of the Central African Republic, and
all the political and social forces, to consolidate
the national dialogue and to ensure national
reconciliation with a View to achieving
sustainable development in their country.

"The Security Council calls upon
international donors and the international
financial institutions to continue to assist the
Central African Republic generously. It
emphasizes that their support will be
indispensable for the country's economic and
social recovery and encourages them to
formulate, in close consultation with the United
Nations system and the Government of the
Central African Republic, a concerted
development strategy.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to explore, in close
consultation with the authorities of the Central

African Republic and the country's development
partners, the possibility of setting up a follow-up
committee or enlarging the Committee of Foreign
Partners to Follow Up on the Electoral Process in
order to support the reconstruction efforts
the

initiated by the Central Africans. It invites the
Secretary-General to report to it on his
consultations through his Representative in the
Central African Republic, no later than 31
October 2005.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
at the insecurity reigning in the north and the
west of the country owing to the presence of
armed groups in these regions, and invites
relevant States to consult with subregional and
regional organizations and with BONUCA on the
action required to respond collectively to the
threat posed by these armed groups to the
stability of the Central African Republic and
certain countries of the subregion.

"The Security Council expresses also its
deep concern at the continued deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in the Central African
Republic, in particular in the north of the country.
It calls upon the international community to
contribute generously to the humanitarian needs
of the Central African Republic."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2005/35.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.45 p.m.

