Mr. Fischer (Germany): Sir, we welcome your
initiative to hold this debate in the Security Council. In
the past two years, we have seen a renaissance of
multilateral conflict management. The worldwide
growth of United Nations missions makes that plain.
Regional organizations, such as the European Union
and the African Union, are also making ever more
significant independent contributions in the field. That
is a development we very much welcome. It shows the
growing readiness of the international community to
effectively engage even in conflicts that have long
been neglected. A central precondition here was the
recognition - achieved, not least, thanks to the United
Nations - that military stabilization has to go hand-in-
hand with the reconstruction of shattered societies and
State structures. Together with the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809), it provided the decisive impetus -
meaning that today, even in the earliest phase of
conflict management, considerations and planning
stretch beyond the political and military aspects. Our
commitment in Afghanistan, in the Balkans and in
many multidimensional peacekeeping missions around
the world bears witness to that new comprehensive
approach.

Peacekeeping that brings together military and
civilian aspects means a much greater burden for the
international community in terms of finance and
personnel. But we must be ready to shoulder that
burden. After all, only credible and long-term
engagement can be successful; anything else only
entails far greater risks.

But we must also be aware that each peace-
building mission is a massive intrusion for the society
concerned. Therefore, a high degree of experience and
cultural awareness is needed. That is especially true of
civilian components such as building State and judicial

structures, clearing up human rights violations,
drawing up a new constitution or organizing and
holding elections. We never start from scratch; we
must respect and use local traditions and structures. At
the same time, we must never lose sight of central
United Nations standards such as the rule of law,
democracy and human rights.

Here, I see a vast opportunity for cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
such as the African Union, the European Union (EU)
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. They have more homogenous membership
structures, are anchored in the same cultural areas and
communities of values, and are thus essential partners
when it comes to crisis management in their particular
zones of interest - above all, to make a Security
Council mandate more acceptable in a country and in
the wider region. The EU is doing just that in the
Balkans.

We need great persistence and much staying
power if our peace-building is to have a sustainable
impact. We have to give the young people in crisis
regions hope for the future. We have to re-establish
structures in the State and in society that can withstand
the unavoidable strains following the withdrawal of a
peace mission. But we must also live up to the people's
expectations for a rapid and clear improvement in their
situation. Those expectations may not always be
realistic, but disappointments can greatly hamper the
acceptance of peacekeeping missions. In Afghanistan,
the Taliban, Al Qaeda and others opposed to the peace
process systematically exploit the frustration of the
population to discredit the peacekeepers as unwelcome
occupiers. We have to find a happy medium between
short-term expectations and long-term commitment to
make clear the benefits of the mission as quickly as
possible.

Here, we should make increased use of quick-
impact projects. The United Nations has had positive
experience with that instrument and has greatly
increased the relevant financing. Take, for example, the
United Nations Mission in Liberia. It is important that
civilian and military experts be able to provide the
people with rapid and visible assistance, even if it is
too early for reconstruction efforts to bear real fruit.
That is what we have seen in Afghanistan. We can win
the people over by repairing a damaged bridge or
school, digging a well, providing health advice or
setting up a local radio station.

We have been working for some time to minimize
the Organization's reaction time to crises and to
coordinate and more efficiently implement our national
contributions to military missions. The same is true of
civilian components. We should thus develop and
rapidly implement a coherent tool kit for civilian
peacekeeping. The United Nations should assume the
central task of coordination.

A challenge that we all need to tackle at home is
the training and mobilization of civilian experts in
crises and reconstruction. After all, we now need more
and more civilian personnel for international peace
missions. That is the only way to ensure that the United
Nations can quickly fall back on urgently needed
police trainers, judges or lawyers. And, unlike military
personnel, those experts are not usually ready and
waiting, but rather are employed by authorities and
companies. That is particularly true of the police. Thus,
here, we should, above all, push ahead with
establishing a standby system as well as rapid-
deployment units.

Finally, we must better coordinate the United
Nations system's contribution to the civilian
components of peace missions so that we can fully tap
its potential. But, for that to work, financing must also
be resolved. We need to break new ground here. A call
also goes out to the Bretton Woods institutions. We
should certainly treat the costs of civilian crisis
management as a normal component of a peace
mission.

