Judge Meron: It is an honour to appear before the
Security Council once again. I would like to congratulate
Spain on its presidency of the Security Council this
month. I also remain deeply grateful to the Security
Council's Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals, for its support of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and to Uruguay
for its able leadership of the Working Group. Finally, I
would like to express my sincere thanks to Mr. Miguel
de Serpa Soares, Under-Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs and United Nations Legal Counsel, Mr. Stephen
Mathias, Assistant Secretary-General for Legal Affairs,
and their colleagues in the Office of Legal Affairs for
their ongoing and critically important assistance.

Lessthantwoweeksago,weopenedtheMechanism's
new premises for the Arusha branch. Her Excellency
Ms. Samia Suluhu Hassan, Vice-President of the
United Republic of Tanzania, presided over the opening
ceremony, with Mr. De Serpa Soares representing the
Secretary-General. The new premises would not have
been possible without the exceptional generosity of the
Government of Tanzania. The success of the project
is also due in very large part to the dedication of the
Mechanism's Registrar, Mr. John Hocking, and his
staff. I would like to take this opportunity to express
my deep gratitude to Mr. Hocking for his exceptional
service to the Mechanism since 2012, and to extend
my sincere welcome to Mr. Olufemi Elias, who was
recently appointed to be the next Registrar.

The new premises include a dedicated archive
facility, which will enable the archives of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and the Mechanism to be housed together at the Arusha
branch, as the Council has directed. I should note that
the Government of the Republic of Rwanda, at a senior
level, recently informed me of its firm View that the
archives should be physically located in Rwanda, while
at the same time accepting United Nations management
and ownership of the archives, as set out in the
Mechanism's statute. Our new premises in Arusha
are minimalist in design and efficient in their use of
resources, and they reflect best practices in myriad
ways as, indeed, we strive to do in all aspects of our
work in the Mechanism. It is significant in that regard
that the premises were completed under budget, for
we recognize that the Mechanism stands not only as
a symbol of accountability and the rule of law but as a
new model of, and for, internationaljustice - a modest,
efficient and cost-effective model that must succeed if
international justice and the fight to end impunity are
themselves to succeed in the long run.

As detailed in my written report (see S/2016/669),
the past six months have seen the Mechanism make
good progress on a number of fronts, from its cases
to the development of its regulatory framework. In
the appeal cases of Karadeie and Seselj, briefing is
ongoing before the Mechanism's Appeals Chamber,
while the pretrial conference in the Stanisie and
Simatovie retrial is anticipated in the first quarter of
2017. Of the 214 judicial decisions and orders issued
during the reporting period, nearly 40 per cent related
to requests for access to confidential information, just
one of the many ways in which the Mechanism provides
assistance to national jurisdictions. That work has been
supported by an exceedingly lean staffing structure
in Chambers. The Mechanism has also taken steps to be
fully self-standing by the end of 2017, while continuing
to carry out key functions such as the protection of
vulnerable witnesses.

The Mechanism is able to do a great deal on its
own, but it is also dependent upon cooperation from
others. The Mechanism is deeply grateful for the
assistance provided to it by the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia and for the support provided
by its host States. The Mechanism also remains reliant
upon cooperation from Member States when it comes
to the apprehension of the remaining fugitives, the
enforcement of sentences and the identification of a
resolution for the difficult situation involving those
acquitted or released individuals currently present in
Arusha. I call upon all Member States to support our
efforts in that regard.

It is in that context that I am compelled, by virtue
of my role as President, to raise the serious matter of
the continuing detention of Judge Aydin Sefa Akay, a
situation that is having an impact upon the effective
discharge of the Mechanism's mandate, and about
which I previously briefed the members of the Council.
Judicial independence is a cornerstone of the rule of
law, and it is a long-standing and consistent practice to
afford international judges privileges and immunities
in order to protect the independent discharge of their
judicial functions. The statute of the Mechanism,
adopted by the Council - acting under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations - follows that same
practice in according the judges of the Mechanism
diplomatic immunity for those periods of time in which
they are engaged in the business of the Mechanism. As
a result of that legal framework, Judge Akay enjoyed
diplomatic immunity from the time of his assignment
to the Ngirabatware proceedings, on 25 July 2016, and
will continue to enjoy such immunity until the end of
those proceedings. To my great regret, notwithstanding
the diplomatic immunity to which Judge Akay is
entitled, he remains detained and unable to carry out
his duties as ajudge on that case.

Some may believe that, from the Mechanism's
perspective, the situation could be resolved by my
replacing Judge Akay on the bench of the Ngirabatware
case, thereby enabling that case to proceed. Let me be
clear: that option is simply not open to me as a matter
of law and justice. I do not consider it possible, under
the circumstances, to reconcile full respect for the
fundamental principle of judicial independence with
the removal of Judge Akay from the bench to which
he has been assigned. I therefore respectfully call
upon the Members of the Council to do their utmost
to bring about a timely and satisfactory resolution to
that situation.

In conclusion, I wish to assure the Government
of Turkey that, in raising the matter of Judge Akay's
detention before the Council, I do nothing more than
what I am compelled to do to fulfil my duties as the
President of the Mechanism, that is, to defend the
institution and the law governing it. It pains me to do
so. I wish to underscore my full respect for the right
of all States, including Turkey, to address legitimate
law enforcement concerns in accordance with the rule
of law. At the same time, all States must respect their
obligations arising from Council resolutions adopted
pursuant to Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter.
In that context, I appeal to the Government of Turkey,
with its strong legal traditions stretching back for
many centuries, to release Judge Akay in the spirit of
humanitarianism so as to enable him to perform his
judicial duties in the Ngirabatware case. In doing so,
the Government of Turkey would not only demonstrate
its support for a Chapter VII tribunal but would play a
Vital part in enabling the Mechanism to carry out the
important mandate entrusted to it.

