Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): First ofall, Rwanda strongly
condemns the attack on the United Nations compound
in Mogadishu. We offer our deepest condolences to the
bereaved families.

I would like once again to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this debate and providing the concept
note that serves as the basis for our discussions today
(S/2013/334, annex). I would also like to thank Deputy
Secretary-General Eliasson, Ms. Anstey, Mr. Annan
and Ms. Grynspan for their comprehensive briefings.

In the past three months, beginning with Rwanda's
presidency in April, and during the presidency of Togo
in May, the Security Council has been engaged in a
series of debates on the prevention of conflict. In that
spirit, we believe it is right that the Council should
pay attention to factors such as the mismanagement
of natural resources that have been a cause of war and
used to fuel conflict. Debates such as this will better
enable the Council to understand the links between
conflicts and natural resources and thus to enhance
United Nations intervention measures in such conflict-
prone areas.

There is no doubt that natural resource endowments
have been an economic backbone enabling the
Governments of various countries to advance their
development agendas and lift their citizens out of
poverty. That can be true for States that have learned the
art of effective stewardship of the public good. We have
systems in place to ensure the transparent and equitable
distribution of resources. It goes without saying that in
some parts of the world, including my region, Africa,
that those resources have been a blessing for some and a
curse for others. Many parts of Africa remain in abject
poverty, with poor economic growth and consequently
a lower standard of living. The argument that the more
resources a country has, the greater its economic
growth and prosperity will be, does not hold true. Why
is that the case?

The challenge lies in how efficiently the available
resources are utilized to improve the living standards
of the population. It is imperative that all aspects of the
management and exploitation of natural resources are
pro-people. The fact of the matter is that the exploitation
of resources in Africa has benefited multinational
corporations rather than the development of local
communities. Conflict is inevitable where investment
in natural resources increases rather than decreases the
gap between rich and poor and benefits the elite rather
than the population as a whole. The result, in the long
run, has always been that marginalized groups seeking
redress from injustice come up against those who profit
from business ventures. Conflicts then emerge through
clashes between Governments, militia groups and other
actors struggling for resource ownership and control.

Rwanda is of the View that rebuilding governance
and the rule of law, combating corruption, improving
transparency and accountability, and encouraging
the participation of disenfranchised populations can
indeed lead to the effective and equitable management
of natural resources.

It is unfortunate that the illegal exploitation of such
resources can be a factor in prolonging and in some
cases fueling conflict, both in the area of exploitation
and, in some cases, across the borders of neighbouring
countries. We have a scenario in the Great Lakes
region where genocidal or terrorist armed groups such
as the Forces democratiques de libe'ration du Rwanda
and the Lord's Resistance Army have used the illegal
exploitation of resources in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to cause the insecurity in that country to
affect its neighbours, including Rwanda. Such events
demand the attention of the Security Council so as
to ensure that a country's mismanagement of natural
resources does not become a source of financial aid to
criminal elements.

The United Nations system and peacekeeping
operations, together with regional and international
actors, can provide collective support and effective
management of the extractive industries. It is crucial
that the United Nations country teams work diligently
to support implementation of voluntary initiatives such
as the Kimberley Process, the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative, the Global Reporting
Initiative, the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development Guidelines for Multinational
Enterprises and the United Nations Global Compact. To
ensure accountable management of natural resources,
for example, the Government of Rwanda has set up a
verification mechanism to help identify the origins of
mineral resources on its territory. The country's geology
and mines authority has set up a mineral tagging and
selling scheme aimed at curbing the illegal trade in
conflict minerals such as tin, tantalum and tantalites.
The Government ensures that minerals from Rwanda
are verified and traceable right from their source to
smelters. We encourage countries in the region to adopt
similar measures that can contribute to the transparency
of mineral trading in the region.

Through its various configurations, the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) can use its leverage
to ensure that natural-resource considerations are
mainstreamed into its deliberations. In particular,
the PBC can promote the importance of effective
management and incorporate relevant findings into
the integrated peacebuilding strategies developed with
countries on its agenda.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Rwanda's
call to the United Nations to focus more on institution-
and capacity-building for countries in need, and to
ensure that the utilization of natural resources promotes
national development, peace and security, with full
respect for such countries' sovereignty and right to
control and exploit their natural resources.

