Mr. Assaf (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to thank the Presidents and Prosecutors
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their briefings.
Lebanon highly appreciates the efforts of the two
international Tribunals to achieve the completion
strategy as soon as possible.

Lebanon notes the progress made in the various
trial Chambers, but at the same time is aware of the
difficulties that, as predicted, have prevented the
completion of certain tasks. Lebanon therefore
supports any necessary measure taken by the Security
Council to enable the two Tribunals to complete their
proceedings as soon as possible, without compromising
due process. Moreover, my country encourages the
referral of more cases to national courts that meet fair
trial standards, which would reduce the workload of
the ICTR and the ICTY and expedite the
implementation of the completion strategy.

Lebanon commends the cooperation
demonstrated by most States with both Tribunals,
especially the States of the former Yugoslavia and the
States neighbouring Rwanda, and calls on them all to
cooperate fully with the two Tribunals. The role of
these States is fundamental to locating, arresting and
handing over fugitives, as are the potential evidence
and information available to those States.

Lebanon also appreciates the efforts of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
chaired by Austria, and hopes that a residual
mechanism will be established to ensure the
completion of the Tribunals' efforts. Such a mechanism
must guarantee witness protection, fugitive
apprehension and the preservation of the Tribunals'
archives, which will constitute a valuable framework
of reference for international criminal law.
The establishment of these two Tribunals after the
end of the cold war was a qualitative leap that
confronted the phenomenon of impunity. The
Tribunals' successful completion of their tasks will lay
the groundwork for holding criminals accountable and
for strengthening the rule of law at the international
and national levels. The Tribunals are also an important
gateway towards closing a painful chapter in the past
history of Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia, as well
as towards strengthening national reconciliation,
guaranteeing stability, deterring future crimes and
providing justice for victims and easing the suffering
of their families.

Lebanon will continue to support every effort to
ensure the success of the international justice system.

