Mr. Griffiths: I thank you very much indeed, Sir, for giving me the opportunity to brief the Security Council. The last time I did so (see S/PV.8725), I warned that the military situation in Yemen was growing increasingly dire. Today, I see the country at a critical juncture. The parties to the conflict will either move Yemen towards de-escalation and the resumption of the political process, or, I fear, towards greater violence and suffering that will make the path to the negotiating table more arduous. The most alarming military escalation has taken place in Al-Jawf, the governorate to the east of Sana'a. I am deeply concerned about the rationale driving these escalations and the impact of the violence on Al-Jawf's people. Thousands of families have been displaced by the recent fighting, as I think we will hear from Mr. Rajasingham, and are in critical need of shelter and assistance. This escalation could trigger conflicts in other governorates and drag Yemen downwards into a new and irresponsible cycle of violence. This would have devastating humanitarian and political consequences. It would gravely endanger civilians and delay the long- awaited and much-needed political process aimed atbringing this war to a comprehensive close. The parties must therefore exercise maximum restraint to prevent such a terrible outcome. It is imperative that they uphold their obligations under international humanitarian law. Indiscriminate attacks affecting civilians or civilian objects are unlawful and reprehensible. Over the last week, I travelled to Yemen to stress the need to stop the fighting. In Ma'rib, I met with local Government officials, political parties, tribal chiefs, civil society leaders, including women and youth, and persons displaced by the conflict. Let me, through the Council, thank the Governor of that governorate, Governor Al-Arada, for all his support and hospitality shown to me on that day. I listened to the concerns of all those I met about the military escalation and the humanitarian challenges, and I assured them of the commitment of my Office to supporting peace in Yemen. I heard from the people in Ma'rib a strong demand for peace, but not a peace that would be dictated from a position of military dominance. In Sana'a, from which I have just come, I also discussed the need to stop the fighting in Ma'rib governorate. I met with Ma'rib tribal representatives and communal figures living in Sana'a to listen to their views and concerns about the conflict in Ma'rib. To be very clear - I wish to be very clear - there is no justification for military escalation in Ma'rib. Ma'rib must not become the next epicentre of Yemen's tragic conflict. The governorate of Al-Hudaydah continues to experience clashes, particularly in the city and in the southern part of the governorate, and civilian casualties are, regrettably, increasing. Developments since yesterday's distressing and indeed tragic incident at the joint observation post in the city of Al-Hudaydah threaten to undermine the de-escalation mechanism put in place and the achievements of the Redeployment Coordination Committee. Under the leadership of my colleague General Guha, the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA), approved, of course, by the Security Council, is working to mediate and restore trust between the parties after yesterday's events. I call on both parties to work through the established mechanisms to recover that calm. I should add that UNMHA continues to face movement restrictions. For example, its patrols have not been granted access to the city of Al-Hudaydah since 20 October 2019, which, naturally enough, hampers the implementation of its mandate. I am also observing with much concern the violence elsewhere in the country. Clashes have continued in the Nihm district of Sana'a governorate - and we have discussed that in the Security Council before (see S/PV.8725) - and in the governorates of Al-Dhale'e, Shabwah, Taiz and Saada. In short, as we have discussed before, there is a real risk of a protracted military escalation across much of Yemen. We must do all we can to support the parties in containing and reversing the current trajectory. As Council members know, since the start of the escalation in January, I have been calling publicly for the parties to agree to an immediate and unconditional military de-escalation and to work with my Office to achieve that goal. It is imperative that the parties agree to participate in a public, accountable, nationwide de-escalation mechanism that quiets the tempo of war and steers Yemen off this precarious path I have been describing. I repeated this call when I was in Ma'rib on 7 March, and I have received initial, positive responses from the parties. These reactions must now translate into tangible commitments on the ground. Any de-escalation discussion should also be reinforced by efforts to resume the political process, whichisalso asubject we have discussed inthis Chamber. The de-escalation and the political tracks should be supported and enhanced by an expeditious move to seriously address certain issues that have tangible effects on people's lives and, as confidence-building measures, build confidence between the parties. I would like to add that I join the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in its statement condemning the death sentences handed down by a court in Sana'a to 35 Yemeni parliamentarians earlier this month. To say the least, the fragmentation and politicization of the judiciary and other institutions is a serious cause for concern. Despite the alarm I am expressing today, I also want to share with the Security Council the messages I have heard from Yemenis that reassure me that, despite all the foregoing, the expeditious resumption of a peaceful political process remains within reach. On 26 and 27 February, my Office convened a group of Yemeni public and political figures here in Amman - and I am grateful for the Government of Jordan for allowing that meeting to go ahead - and these figures expressed a shared view that a durable peace can only emerge from a negotiated political settlement. Many participants called for the prompt resumption of a comprehensive political process with no preconditions. Several expressed a frustration, which I share, that the political process has been stalled since the last round of official peace talks, which took place in Kuwait in 2016, three and a half years ago. Over a third of the participants at that meeting were Yemeni women leaders. During my meetings with them, they emphasized the importance of including in political negotiations a diverse array of Yemenis, including women, youth, and tribal and social leaders. I completely agree with that call and that need and that requirement, and I will continue to work to get the parties to ensure the full representation of women in political consultations. Indeed, I raised the matter earlier today in Sana'a. Despite this bleak season, the parties have indeed exhibited some willingness to continue engaging in confidence-building measures with a humanitarian purpose. As Council members know, the parties are taking important steps towards finally implementing the agreement that they reached in mid-February, again in Amman, on a large-scale exchange of prisoners. My Office has continued to work with them, as has the International Committee of the Red Cross, to fulfil that promise. Meanwhile, the World Health Organization continues its efforts aimed at ensuring that the medical air-bridge flights, which have Cairo as their next destination, operate, thereby allowing Yemeni patients to travel abroad for medical assistance that they cannot receive in Sana'a. But much more must be done. All parties bear a responsibility to ease the impact of war on civilians. They must work assiduously on prisoner exchanges and on opening and securing access roads in Taiz, Al-Hudaydah, Ma'rib and elsewhere; we discussed that very issue in Ma'rib with the Governor to whom I have referred earlier in my briefing. The parties must also work on ensuring the payment of public-sector salaries across the country. Sana'a's airport must be opened for commercial flights to alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people. These are crucial humanitarian measures - and none of them are particularly new - and they must not become the subject of politicization. However, there is a limit to how much we can achieve in the absence of that political process to which I referred. We must maintain the focus - and I pledge that we will - on reviving a process that ushers into Yemen an inclusive transition away from conflict. As Council members know, we have consulted widely among Yemenis - and will continue to do so - on the key elements of such a transition. Several common themes have emerged, and I have communicated them publicly to the Security Council before, but they bear repeating, if you would allow me, Mr. President, so as to ensure that the people of Yemen know what is on offer and in prospect. During a transition, power will need to be shared among different political and social components, including women, of course, and civil society, in the spirit of partnership and consensus. Transitional security arrangements will need to be agreed in order to provide for the security of Yemen's people and to lead towards the State's monopoly over the use of force. Lastly, the Yemeni people will need guarantees of humanitarian relief, reconstruction and economic recovery across the country to ensure that the suffering caused by the war is relegated to the past. We all hope that that will soon become the reality for Yemen.
