Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
would like to express my thanks to you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting, and to Mr. Egeland for his
briefing and to associate the United Kingdom with the
statement to be delivered later by Luxembourg on
behalf of the European Union.

Despite significant gains in the evolution of
international humanitarian and human rights law, and
despite the best efforts of national Governments, civil
society actors and international organizations, we have
collectively failed to protect civilians in situations of
armed conflict, as we have been starkly reminded by
Jan Egeland's briefing today. Of course, the issues are
highly complex and challenging. They encompass a
wide range of conflict prevention and resolution, as
well as peacebuilding, issues. Those include re-
establishing justice and the rule of law, social
reconciliation, political mediation and economic
development.

The summit to be held this September to review
the Millennium Development Goals will provide an
unprecedented opportunity to make progress on all
those fronts and to take a bold step towards the
realization of the goals enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations - goals directly aimed at preserving
human dignity in a safe and secure world. That is why
an ambitious and successful outcome for the September
summit is of the utmost importance for my
Government. And that is why the subject of today's
debate is of direct relevance to the work of the
Council.

For the purposes of this debate, I would like to
draw attention to four key protection gaps, which we
believe demand the Council's immediate attention.

The first gap pertains to physical protection:
protection for humanitarian convoys, protection for
camps for internally displaced persons and protection
for areas of unrest, to prevent displacement. While
Security Council peacekeeping mandates have come a
long way in incorporating protection concerns, we need
to take a step further, especially in terms of civilian
policing, and to ensure that those enlisted to provide
protection have the capacity and the expertise to do so.
But capacity is in itself not enough. Member States
must have the political will to agree and implement
action, and to do so promptly and robustly, to help save
and protect lives.

The second is the gap in responses to sexual and
gender-based violence, and the fact that such crimes
are often committed with total impunity and are not
investigated, or those responsible prosecuted. We
believe it particularly important to sustain effective
national legal and judicial systems. That is why we
support the Secretary-General's call for a dedicated
Rule of Law Assistance Unit as part of the proposed
Peacebuilding Support Office. In circumstances where
national systems fail, the international community has
a special role to play, including through the
International Criminal Court, in order to hold
perpetrators of such crimes to account. But of course, I
rally to the simple proposition that primary
responsibility for protection, for looking after victims
and for delivering justice must rest with national
Governments.

The third gap is in conventional arms exports. We
already have treaties and mechanisms to curb the
proliferation of chemical, biological and nuclear
weapons. But we have yet to tackle head-on the
proliferation of conventional arms - weapons that
account for so much misery and destruction across the
world. The British Government is committed to work
with others to secure a legally binding treaty on the
international trade in conventional arms, building upon
the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and the United
Kingdom's own transfer-controls initiative.

My last point regards the gap in the safety and
security of humanitarian personnel. There can be no
justification for deliberately targeting humanitarian
workers or abducting them against their will. We
condemn such acts in the strongest terms. The fact that
the physical protection afforded by humanitarian
emblems has diminished in recent years serves only to
underline the need for States to take concrete and
urgent action. That is why the Security Council passed
a resolution on the subject last year. We urge all those
who have not already done so to sign and ratify the
1994 Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel, and to do so without delay.

Listening to Jan Egeland's sober catalogue of
violence against civilians, the international community
has to ask itself whether those situations should
continue to be tolerated passively. Do we carry on
taking comfort in the alibi that we cannot comment on
the internal affairs of sovereign States, however
extreme the violations, however grave the injustice
and, sometimes, when the State is itself the
perpetrator?

In my opening remarks, I referred to our
collective failure to protect civilians in armed conflict,
because the United Kingdom firmly believes that the
international community has a collective responsibility
to protect. That is why we think it is vital that we reach
agreement on that concept at the millennium review
summit. As the Secretary-General said in his report:
"Our declared principles and our common interests
demand no less" (A/59/2005, para. 132).

