Mr. Ramirez Carreflo (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting on
the work of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006), the report of which was
presented by Ambassador Roman Oyarzun Marchesi
in his capacity as Chair of that subsidiary body. We
would like to extend our appreciation and recognition
to Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi for the work he is
doing. We would also like to extend our condolences
with regard to today's plane crash, which has affected
dozens of Spanish citizens.

Venezuela welcomes the progress that has been
achieved with regard to the Joint Plan of Action and the
negotiations between the P5+l and Iran, as well as the
commitment of all the parties to continuing the round
of negotiations aimed at achieving a broad and final
agreement. We encourage all the parties to seize this
historic opportunity to set their differences aside and
resolve the Iranian nuclear issue in a diplomatic and
peaceful manner by reaching a long-term comprehensive
solution by consensus.

We are pleased to see that the cooperation between
Iran and the International Atomic Energy Agency has
continued, as noted in the Agency's laterst report.
Venezuela reaffirms the sovereign right of the Islamic
Republic of Iran and other developing countries to use
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in accordance
with article IV of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons.

We believe that the most important task in the next
stage of negotiations between the P5+1 and Iran is to
build on the positive momentum and to not give way to
the provocations of other actors and extremist views,
but rather to concentrate instead on trying to resolve
the differences on the basis of dialogue and negotiations
that will lead to the lifting once and for all of the
sanctions regime imposed on the Islamic Republic of
Iran. We also welcome the fact that the Committee's
report indicates that there were no new incidents
reported during the period under consideration.

We hope that the diplomatic efforts undertaken
in other forums with regard to the implementation
of the safeguards related to the Iranian nuclear issue
will have a positive effect on the Committee's work.
Venezuela attaches great importance to the efforts
undertaken by the international community in favour
of disarmament and the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. We affirm our full support for the
strengthening of the international system applicable to
these areas through compliance with the obligations
under those legal binding instruments. We support the
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
Middle East, as exists in Latin America, in accordance
with the decisions adopted with regard to the indefinite
renewal of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. In that regard, we call upon the
Security Council to make efforts to ensure that all the
countries of the region adhere to thit legal instrument.

For my country, weapons of mass destruction
constitute a threat to international peace and security
and, therefore, their elimination is a priority issue for
humankind.

