Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): We wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting today, which, in our View, will be
 

very helpful in enhancing the transparency of the Security
Council's work. We wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his report and Under-Secretary-General Miyet for his
briefing. We also wish to thank Ambassador Dahlgren of
Sweden for his briefing on his visit to Sierra Leone. Based
on information given to us by our embassy in Sierra Leone,
the Swedish Ambassador's visit to Freetown, Sierra Leone,
elicited considerable favourable response.

The Chinese delegation agrees generally with the
Secretary-General's analysis of the situation in Sierra
Leone. We commend the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG)
and the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNOMSIL) for their roles in stabilizing the situation in
Sierra Leone. We also commend and support the Sierra
Leone Government for adopting the dual-track approach for
the smooth achievement of national reconciliation.

China is deeply disturbed by continuing reports that
large amounts of arms have been flowing illegally from
Liberia into rebels hands in Sierra Leone. The Security
Council should attach great importance to this, since it not
only violates the provisions of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, but has also caused harm to large numbers of
innocent civilians. We propose that the Security Council
sanction Committees on Sierra Leone and Liberia carry out
the necessary investigation and propose measures for
improving the effectiveness of the implementation of the
arms embargo. We hope that these two sanctions
Committees can strengthen their coordination and
exchanges in order to strengthen the implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

China supports the Secretary-General's
recommendation for the extension of UNOMSIL's mandate
for six months. We hope that when security conditions
permit, the second group of military observers can be
dispatched as soon as possible. In connection with the
recommendation on expanding UNOMSIL's civilian staff,
we propose that the views of the Sierra Leone Government
be sought.

