Mr. Brito (Portugal): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the
European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia - and the associated countries
Cyprus, Malta and Turkey align themselves with this
statement.

The European Union is pleased to again have the
opportunity to express its views on the evolving
situation in the Great Lakes region, and in particular on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We commend
the efforts of the Security Council, notably through its
valuable recent mission to Kinshasa and Lusaka, and
we welcome and endorse the recommendations
contained in its report. The European Union hopes that
its recommendations will lead to effective progress
being achieved on the ground. However, we remain
concerned that the parties have not yet shown the
necessary commitment to implement fully their
obligations, and we cannot avoid having the impression
that some of the issues we need to address here today
have been addressed before, without significant
progress being achieved on the ground.

The European Union is strongly committed to the
implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and welcomes
recent developments, notably the Kampala
disengagement plan and the last summit of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), in Algiers.
However, strong political will and unequivocal
commitment from the parties is necessary to guarantee
peaceful implementation. Recent events in Kisangani
demonstrate the fragility of the present ceasefire. It is
therefore incumbent upon this Council to maintain
diplomatic and political pressure on the belligerent
parties to comply with their agreed commitments,
building on the success of the statement agreed by the
Security Council mission with the parties on the
ground.

The European Union reaffirms its willingness to
continue to support the Joint Military Commission
(JMC), the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and the
rapid deployment of its phase II, provided that the
parties give the necessary guarantees for it to carry out
its mandate effectively. I recall in this regard that the
European Union has already provided the amount of
1.2 million euros in support of the JMC.

The European Union reiterates its deep concern at
the ongoing illegal exploitation of natural resources, in
particular minerals, in violation of the sovereignty of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We welcome
the Secretary-General's proposal for the creation of an
expert panel, as mentioned in Security Council
resolution 1291 (2000).

The European Union reaffirms its strong support
for the inter-Congolese dialogue, a key element of the
restoration of the rule of law, democracy and the
national sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We hope that the inter-Congolese dialogue will
be fully transparent, representative and free of all
external interference. We fully support the work being
carried out by former President Sir Ketumile Masire
and are considering further ways of assisting him in
discharging his difficult task.

We are all well aware of the number and
complexity of the political, economic and social factors
at the root of the conflict in the Great Lakes region of
Africa. For progress to be achieved, a continued
realistic, integrated and coherent approach by the
international community, using different types of
instruments appropriate to the prevailing
circumstances, needs to be maintained. To this end, the
European Union's envoy to the Great Lakes region has
continued to work with the parties, other mediators and
the United Nations to ensure the effectiveness and
efficiency of the international community's efforts. In
this light, the European Union believes that it is
appropriate to continue to consider the idea of a
conference on peace, security, democracy and
development in the Great Lakes region, to be organized
by the OAU and the United Nations, whose preparatory
work should start as soon as the main elements of the
Lusaka agreement have been implemented.

The European Union will work with MONUC and
the JMC, together with the parties to the Lusaka
Agreement, other donors, the United Nations, the
World Bank and interested African countries on options
and possible solutions for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of forces involved in
the armed conflict, including non-statutory forces. The
European Union also remains committed to continuing
to work within the European Union/Southern African
Development Community working group on illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons to prevent
arms from flowing into conflict zones in the Great
Lakes region.

The European Union is also committed to
providing humanitarian assistance and assistance for
the return and reintegration of refugees and displaced
persons and to adopting specific measures for the
regions most affected by the conflict.

