Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me thank
Special Representative Tanin for his briefing today. I
would also like to thank Deputy Prime Minister Dacie

and Ambassador Citaku for their statements before
the Council.

Let me start by congratulating Kosovo on the
conduct of the 6 October elections. We hope that the
change in the political spectrum will bring about an
effective Government able to continue the reforms.

Since this is not only the last meeting ofthe Council
on the situation in Kosovo this year, but also the last
such meeting with Poland in its seat, let me make some
brief general remarks to reinforce the messages that we
have been conveying over the past two years.

First, as concerns the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), let me
repeat the call for a strategic review of the Mission.
With each statement more time passes since the last
strategic review, and the need for a fresh assessment
of the Mission's comparative advantage becomes even
more apparent.

The historical role of UNMIK cannot be overstated.
It played a crucial role in bringing a bloody conflict to
an end but since then, the situation on the ground has
changed beyond recognition, while other international
presences have overtaken substantial parts of the
Mission's mandate. We express our deep appreciation
for UNMIK's historical role and commend the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
and the Kosovo Force for their efforts in fostering a safe
and secure environment and the rule of law.

Poland is vitally interested in the stability of the
Western Balkans. We continue to view the normalization
of relations between Belgrade and Pristina as the key
not only to unlocking the potential of both countries
on their way to European integration but also to the
stability of the whole region.

We would like to see the meaningful resumption
of the European Union-facilitated dialogue and call
on both sides to show commitment towards reaching
a legally binding agreement on the comprehensive
normalization of relations.

In that context, we encourage Kosovo to remove
punitive tariffs on goods from Serbia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We hope that the new Parliament and its
Government will do that swiftly. We equally encourage
Serbia to desist in its actions aimed at undermining
Kosovo's international position. We call on both sides
to show goodwill and openness.

In terms of our assessment of the overall picture
in Kosovo, while commending the progress towards
reforms and in strengthening the rule of law, we also
not that more remains to be done.

It is incumbent upon the political elites, regardless
of their affiliation, to continue their efforts to create a
just and inclusive environment and lay solid foundations
for the future prosperity of all citizens.

Let me conclude by saying that Poland regards
Kosovo as being fully capable of managing its own
future. We will continue to follow with interest and to
remain engaged in the developments in the country and
the region, ready to extend our assistance and share our
experiences, as we have done so far.

Since this is the last meeting under the auspices of
the South Africa presidency, allow me to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your leadership and very
professional and efficient conduct of other work during
the month of October.

