Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary- General for Yemen, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under- Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their briefings. I also welcome the representative of Yemen to this meeting. We are encouraged by the good news _ that Mr. Griffiths reported at the beginning of the meeting about the release of more than 1,000 individuals. That is avery important step in facilitating the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement. However, we continue to have grave concerns about the escalation of hostilities in recent days in Yemen, where a number of people have been killed, including women and children. We condemn the attacks and join other members in expressing our deepest condolences to the families of the fallen. We support the statement made by Mr. Griffiths on 8 October in that regard. Furthermore, the significant increase of $450 million in financial contributions from donors is a positive sign. However, we are concerned by reports that the current budget is inadequate for United Nations humanitarian operations in the closing months of 2020. The economic crisis, the prolonged conflict, food insecurity and other issues have had dire impacts on the humanitarian situation in Yemen. Moreover, the oil from the SAFER tanker, reported to be leaking into the Red Sea, constitutes an alarming threat to Yemen and the Gulf region. It is therefore important to immediately grant the United Nations technical team access to the tanker for assessment and repair. Against that backdrop, allow me to highlight the following points. First, we urge all concerned parties in Yemen to heed the calls for a ceasefire. It is imperative that all parties immediately put an end to military activities in the country, with a view to halting the disproportionate civilian suffering, facilitating humanitarian assistance and resuming peace talks. We cannot emphasize enough that there is no military solution to the situation in Yemen. Council members and the relevant parties should therefore support the efforts of the Special Envoy in working with the Government of Yemen and the Southern Transitional Council to agree on a joint declaration on a nationwide ceasefire across Yemen. Secondly, safe and unhindered access _ for humanitarian efforts in Yemen should be ensured. We also urge the relevant parties to fulfil their obligations under international law, including international humanitarian law. At the same time, we call for further efforts from the international community, the United Nations and donors to find a way out for funding for Yemen. Against the backdrop of the 2020 pledged contributions, it is necessary for the United Nations to work in advance with the parties involved to begin planning for the donor conference for Yemen, to be held in 2021. Thirdly, we urge all parties to fully uphold and implement the Stockholm Agreement and the Riyadh agreement with United Nations mediation. In that process, we reaffirm our support for Yemen's sovereignty, unity, independence and _ territorial integrity. The meaningful participation of women in the political process should be also ensured and further promoted. In conclusion, we commend Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and the United Nations team for their tireless efforts and support their proposals on peace in Yemen.
