Mr. Benomar (spoke in Arabic): Following a month
in Yemen on my twenty-third mission, I have just
returned to New York in order to address this Council.
I left Sana'a in the middle of facilitating talks on the
southern question - a thorny issue on which agreement
has proved elusive thus far.

It is paramount to underscore to the Council
that the transition process in Yemen has reached a
critical juncture. While the historic National Dialogue
Conference is on its way to concluding its work with
far-reaching recommendations to guide Yemen's
future course, the country is facing serious political,
economic, humanitarian and security challenges, and
key issues have yet to be resolved.

Nevertheless, there are achievements to be
celebrated in Yemen. The National Dialogue
Conference, the first ever exercise of its kind in Yemen,
and indeed in the region, has given rise to a peaceful,
inclusive and meaningful dialogue amongst diverse
actors, bringing in new actors to the political process
such as youth, women, civil society representatives, the
Houthi movement and the Hiraak southern movement.
The Conference has not only provided the opportunity
for delegates from previously marginalized groups
to participate in serious and deliberative discussions
about the future of Yemen, but has also convened
former parties to conflict to negotiate solutions and
address historical grievances in order to move towards
a brighter and democratic future for all Yemenis.

The Dialogue has made extraordinary progress since
it was launched on 18 March. Over the past six months,
565 delegates, representing a wide cross-section of
Yemeni society, have engaged in constructive, open and
substantive deliberations on the key challenges facing
the country. The focus on principal and controversial
issues relevant to Yemen's governance have laid
the foundation for a new social contract and a legal
framework based on dignity, equality, human rights
and the rule of law. In fact, the work of the National
Dialogue is nearly 90 per cent complete. Six of the nine
working groups have completed their work.

Taken together, the recommendations developed
during the dialogue provide a blueprint for building a
more peaceful, just and prosperous Yemen. They include
measures to ensure more open, accountable governance;
greater participation of women in decision-making;
and improved protection of human rights. Indeed, last
week my team supported a conference entitled "Women
Partners in Dialogue, Partners in Building and Decision
Making," during which I had the opportunity to meet
with the women's caucus; they informed me of their
satisfaction in achieving key objectives of the National
Dialogue. Foremost among these are acknowledgment
of and protection for women's human rights; integration
of these rights in the new constitution to ensure
equality; and a guarantee of 30 per cent women's
representation in three branches of Government. This is
quite extraordinary, particularly in a part of the world
that suffers from an evident deficit on women's rights
and gender equality.

In particular, the efforts of the working groups on
Sa'da and the South have helped to identify the roots of
conflicts and the grievances of the people affected by
war in those parts of the country. This will allow the
State to mitigate the conditions that gave rise to past
conflicts and to redress the grievances that emerged
out of them. In fact, the Sa'ada working group has
reached agreement on some 70 conclusions and related
implementation guarantees.

All delegates deserve praise for their hard work,
dedication and tireless efforts to achieve the objectives
of the National Dialogue. I wish to pay special tribute
to the contributions of the delegates representing youth,
women and civil society, whose energy, creativity
and enthusiasm in many ways served as the engine
that propelled the dialogue forward. The inputs and
ideas put forth by countless citizens throughout the
country - through their participation in town hall
meetings, public discussions and through the media
7 also contributed greatly to enriching the dialogue
process.

It is, however, important to recall that the
Conference is but one step in the transition. The
National Dialogue was never intended to resolve all of
Yemen's challenges. It was designed as part of a wider
and longer-term political transformation process. As
the Council is well aware, there have been delays in
implementing the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC)
Initiative and Implementation Mechanism, which have
impacted the already tight time frame. This is a result
ofa combination of the fact that some tasks simply took
longer than foreseen, and the fact that there have been
acts of obstruction at times.

Consequently, the timetable has inevitably
shifted. Only several months remain to complete
work that has taken other countries years. The work
includes completing the National Dialogue, drafting
and adopting a new constitution, and organizing and
conducting general elections. All this implies complex
negotiations, technical preparations and public
consultations with a view to building consensus. What
is more vital is that progress continues to be made by
achieving the milestones of the transition laid out in the
Implementation Mechanism.

The difficulties facing the National Dialogue
Conference in its waning weeks have underscored the
imperative of addressing the Southern question in a fair
manner. In recent weeks, the Hiraak southern movement
suspended its participation in the Conference for nearly
a month, contending that its legitimate grievances
and aspirations were not being adequately addressed.
Indeed it is beyond contention in Yemen that the South
has suffered nearly two decades of discrimination and
marginalization. However, the Hiraak was persuaded
to return to the National Dialogue, following additional
commitments by President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi
Mansour and the Government to speedily implement
confidence-building measures in the South. In this
context, the Hiraak and other constituencies agreed to
negotiations to resolve the controversial issues of state
structure and the status of the South.
Since 10 September, at the request of the parties I
have been facilitating talks aimed at finding a consensual
solution to the Southern question. Throughout these
discussions, I have stressed that the Yemenis are the
decision-makers. They are the ones who will live with
the long-term consequences of the choices they are
about to make. I am pleased to report that progress is
being made, based on the various proposals put forward
by the different constituencies towards agreeing on a
set of principles with a view to building a new federal
State structure, although discussions continue with
regard to the number and delineation of the federal
units. Consensus has been sought on a number of
delicate issues, including natural resources, power-
sharing, and allocation of authority to federal, regional
and local levels.

The commitment of southerners to supporting the
new vision of a federal Yemen is largely contingent on
timely and unambiguous action by the Government
to redress past injustices and on guarantees that
there will be no return to the past. Toward this end,
it is essential that the outstanding elements of the
confidence-building measures - known as the 20+ll
points - be implemented without delay and, insofar
as implementation depends on longer-term processes,
that the timeline for their implementation be clearly
articulated.

In this connection, I welcome the action plan of the
Government of National Unity, led by Prime Minister
Mohamed Salem Mohamed Basendwah, to implement
the 20+ll points, its apology to the people of the
South and Sa'ada for past abuses committed in their
respective conflicts, and the continuing work of the two
commissions to address the unlawful or illegitimate
seizure of land and property and the unjust dismissals
from the military and civil service in the South. I am
particularly pleased that Qatar has pledged $350 million
to support restitution and compensation claims for the
South, which comes at a critical time. I sincerely hope
other countries will follow suit.

The recent difficulties encountered in the National
Dialogue must not be allowed to jeopardize the gains
achieved thus far. These gains must be preserved and
forward momentum maintained with a timely move
to the next stages of the transition. The final phase
of a political process of this nature and magnitude is
rarely easy, as parties reach the stage where they must
make tough decisions on sensitive and complicated
issues, and the National Dialogue is not immune to this
phenomenon. Unfortunately, as the Council is aware,
there are efforts to turn back the clock that undermine
confidence in the political transition. In this connection,
continued compromise and good will are required from
all parties.

There are potentially disruptive currents
percolating in the country. At this stage, however, I
am hoping that all stakeholders will cooperate in good
faith to bring about a fruitful conclusion to the National
Dialogue, and that it will be unnecessary for me to brief
the Council to the contrary. As affirmed in resolutions
2014 (2011) and 2051 (2012), all parties must commit
to resolving their differences through dialogue and
consultation, to rejecting acts of violence to achieve
political goals, to refraining from provocations, and
to cooperating in the implementation of the Transition
Agreement. By signing the Transition Agreement, the
parties recognized that a peaceful transition should
represent a complete break with the past and a complete
transfer of power to new governance in Yemen.

Given the emerging consensus on federalism,
there is increasing debate among Yemenis about the
need for what they are now calling a constituting or
establishment period to provide the necessary time
with clear benchmarks, resources and capacity for
transitioning towards a federal State. Indeed, some
parties have developed proposals for such a constituting
period, focusing on the need for more inclusion and
power-sharing. These debates have also raised questions
about the timing and character of elections.

The National Dialogue was never designed to
address all of Yemen's challenges at the same time.
The Conference was meant to conclude with a broad
consensus on a set of principles on nine core topics
that would provide guidelines for the process of
drafting a constitution, which is one more step in the
transition. Some issues will require work beyond the
National Dialogue through auxiliary channels for
genuinely inclusive negotiations that go hand-in-hand
with the process of drafting a constitution. Moreover,
subsequently, other issues will still need to be addressed
through subsequent legislation, Government policies,
plans and programmes.

To sum up, the National Dialogue Conference is
not a panacea or an end in and of itself, but a vehicle
through which Yemenis can lay the foundations for
more inclusive politics, agree on broad principles and
initiate processes for resolving protracted conflicts.
It appears that some people do not want the National
Dialogue to reach an agreement until there is clarity
and consensus on all aspects of the constituting period
and the future federal State structure. In our opinion, it
is important to address those matters one step at a time,
with the aim of concluding the National Dialogue as a
matter of priority. The people of Yemen look forward
to that outcome in order to ensure that the transitional
political process advances.

Those political developments are transpiring against
a backdrop of serious humanitarian, economic and
security challenges. Yemenis have high expectations for
a peaceful transition, yet today some 13 million people,
more than half the entire population, require some form
of humanitarian aid. The main causes of vulnerability
in Yemen, such as poverty, chronic malnutrition, water
shortages and inadequate government services, all
arise from a lack of development. The Government of
National Unity, in its efforts to address the underlying
causes of a humanitarian crisis and to tackle serious
underdevelopment of the country, should be given all
the support it needs. I take this opportunity to welcome
a presidential decree to establish an anti-corruption
board and approving an action plan for the elimination
of clandestine workers and double-dippers.

In parts of Yemen, the security situation remains
volatile, while Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula still
posing a major threat. Just last week, that group carried
out major attacks in Shabwa governorate, resulting in
dozens of deaths. Assassinations of senior military
officers and kidnappings continue to take place. In the
north over the past few weeks, scores of people have
reportedly been killed after clashes between opposing
armed groups in Sa'ada and Amran governorates. We
are monitoring this trend closely, and are engaged with
the main actors.

The relentless campaign against public
infrastructure continues. There have been frequent and
increasing acts of sabotage and attacks on infrastructure,
electrical cables, and oil and gas pipelines, costing the
Government tens of millions of dollars. The Yemeni
people demand that those responsible for such criminal
acts be brought to justice swiftly.

Nevertheless, as I have said before, and it is worth
saying it again, to date Yemen remains the only peaceful
country in negotiated transition among those of the Arab
Spring. The National Dialogue Conference is the most
genuine, transparent and inclusive deliberative political
process anywhere in the Arab region. This model for
dialogue and deliberation for establishing democratic
governance based on the will of the people can inform
other transitional processes in the Arab world and
beyond. This is a remarkable achievement of which the
Yemeni people should be proud, since they have shown
the Arab world what can be done when people commit
to peaceful change.
In conclusion, it is imperative for the National
Dialogue to reach consensus in order to enter the next
transitional phase. Much credit must go to President
Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour, who despite
all odds, has shown his persistent and unwavering
commitment to steering and ensuring the conclusion
of a transitional political process. He deserves all our
support. The world is watching Yemen to see whether
it will continue along the promising path on which it
has set out. Once the National Dialogue Conference has
been concluded, the implemention of the agreements
reached will pose other challenges. In that regard, I
heard one consistent message during my most recent
visit - Yemenis are still counting on the Security
Council to uphold its unanimous support as they move
towards the next stage.

The strong, sustained support of the international
community - in particular the Gulf Cooperation
Council, the European Union, the Friends of Yemen and
the Security Council - has always been critical. I would
like to commend the leadership role of Mr. Abdul Latif
A1 Zayani, Secretary General of the Gulf Cooperation
Council. I would also like to thank the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, the co-chair of the Friends of Yemen, for
being the first and largest donor to honour its pledges.
We also wish to thank the diplomatic community in
Sana'a for its efforts and active support. Yemenis are
counting on the international community to continue
supporting the country. At the United Nations, we
will continue to provide all the necessary knowledge,
support and advice, in close cooperation with our
partners, to ensure a successful transitional political
process in Yemen.

