The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.

I, too, wish to thank Rosemary DiCarlo and Jean-
Pierre Lacroix for their enlightening briefings. I
thank in particular Mr. Lacroix for the information he
provided on his mission to the region.

At the outset, I wish to reiterate France's full support
for the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF), which is carrying out a difficult mission in
a deteriorating and volatile security context and in a
country, Syria, that has been devastated by a war whose
atrocities France has consistently denounced.

I shall focus on three main points.

First, France's position on the American decision
to recognize Israeli sovereignty over the Golan is clear.
All of the 28 States members of the European Union
(EU) clearly stated today that their joint position is
unchanged. The EU, in line with international law and
resolutions 242 (1967) and 497 (1981), does not recognize
Israeli sovereignty over the occupied territory of the
Golan. That statement reflects the one we made along
with our European partners in the Council yesterday.

France does not recognize the Israeli annexation

of 1981, which was recognized as null and void by
several Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 497 (1981), adopted unanimously. Under
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), the Golan is
and remains an occupied territory. The recognition
of Israeli sovereignty over the Golan runs contrary to
international law, in particular the obligation of States
not to recognize an illegal situation.

Any attempt to move away from international law
and the Council's resolutions and to replace them with
unilateral decisions is doomed to failure. Not only will
this approach not lead to peace in the region, in Syria or
between Israel or Palestine, but it will also significantly
weaken the order based on international law, which all
of us here support.

As we indicated yesterday regarding the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict: any unilateral initiative that
contravenes international law and the resolutions of
the Council is doomed to failure. The Council must
ensure respect for these fundamental principles, which
underpin international peace and security. To that end,
I regret that the American decision undermines our
collective action.

Secondly, in a tense context, at a time when
the threat of regional escalation is high, the role of
UNDOF is crucial. The deteriorating security situation
makes its role in ensuring respect for the ceasefire
both more difficult and more necessary than ever
for regional stability. The report of the Secretary-
General (S/2019/248) notes that there have been several
worrisome developments in that respect. First, there
has been firing from both sides of the ceasefire line
since the Syrian regime retook control of the southern
part of the country last summer. The exchanges of fire,
rockets and missiles of 29 November, 20 January and
11 February are of particular concern in this respect.

Military activities are continuing, in violation of
the Disengagement of Forces Agreement, in the areas
of separation and limitation. This continues to pose
the threat of an escalation between Israel and Syria,
in particular through the increased, unauthorized
presence of the Syrian armed forces in the area of
separation. The report notes also that there were several
crossings of the ceasefire line, also in violation of the
Disengagement Agreement.

In addition, reports of the presence and activity
of pro-Iranian armed groups, including Hizbullah, in
the area of separation and beyond are of concern. They
raise fears of increased instability in the area. The
situation in the Golan must be prevented from fuelling
further conflicts. In that particularly difficult context,
I commend UNDOF's efforts to gradually redeploy
to the east of the ceasefire line. We therefore reiterate
our support for the Secretary-General's request to
provide UNDOF with the appropriate technological
means to carry out its mission. It is also important
that UNDOF be appropriately staffed. The parties,
who have consistently reaffirmed their commitment to
UNDOF, must allow the deployment of the equipment
necessary for ensuring the security of the Force and the
personnel needed to carry out its mandate. I reiterate
the commitment of France to ensuring the Force's
freedom of movement and the safety of its personnel.
Movement restrictions imposed on UNDOF on both
sides of the area of separation prevent it from fulfilling
its mandate. The security situation poses a direct threat
to its personnel, which is why the plan to redeploy
UNDOF to the east of the ceasefire line must consider
that risk of increased exposure.

Thirdly, it is the responsibility of the Council,
first of all, to avoid that recent developments lead to
uncertainty about the future of UNDOF. Council
members must therefore unambiguously reiterate their
commitment to its mandate. We call on the parties to
respect all their commitments under the Agreement on
Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces of
1974 and - I repeat - to allow the deployment of the
required equipment and personnel. It would be useful
for countries exercising influence over the parties to
call on them to do so. In addition, the role ofthe Force in
maintaining the ceasefire and preventing an escalation
of tensions must be upheld and strengthened. That is the
goal of the Force Commander's liaison efforts between
the two parties. In that regard, in consideration of the
latest developments in the situation in the Golan, we
could collectively consider ways to strengthen the role
that UNDOF plays in deconfliction as a liaison between
the two parties.

In conclusion, I reaffirm that France's commitment
to fostering the return of lasting peace in Syria and
the region, based on international law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, will not waver,

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

