Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Eliasson, Mr. Maurer and Mr. Karokhail for their
briefings.

As we commemorate World Humanitarian Day,
allow me to pay tribute to the efforts undertaken by
humanitarian workers in conditions that are often
dangerous to their lives. We commend the initiative
of the United Kingdom to convene this meeting,
which provides us with an opportunity to remember
and pay tribute to the humanitarian aid workers who
have lost their lives to save the lives of others. Today
civilian populations, as well as humanitarian workers,
are paying the toll for the wars around the world and
are often the target of the parties to a conflict. The
wars in Syria, Somalia, South Sudan, the Central
African Republic and Iraq today serve to highlight the
shortcomings in United Nations actions and also the
need to step up efforts in order to provide maximum
protection. While humanitarian workers and those of
the United Nations carry out their missions, that often
means that they themselves become helpless victims,
which is a source of discouragement, and it also means
that people feel abandoned.

United Nations action needs to be effective with
respect to civilians, and that is being challenged.
The high number of humanitarian workers who have
been killed is a logical consequence of this state of
affairs. However, the Security Council's role with
respect to the protection of civilians is reaffirmed and
continues to be one of major concern. In its presidential
statement of 12 February 1999 (S/PRST/1999/6), the
Security Council underscores the close nexus between
systematic general violations of civilian rights and
the breakdown in international peace and security.
The recurrent Council debates of recent years, along
with those held by international legal bodies under
the Geneva Conventions of 1949, its 1977 Additional
Protocol II and the 1994 Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel, should have
helped to improve the situation.

However, one would note that many challenges
persist. The attacks against civilians and United
Nations personnel are instead growing in scope. That
is an additional reason for the members of the Council
to wonder about the shortcomings of United Nations
actions in terms of improving the situation. Clearly, the
difficulties in providing assistance to civilians continue
to be many, and defending and protecting civilians in
countries in armed conflict and protecting the lives
of humanitarian workers unfortunately do not enjoy
the same means and resources internationally. The
protection of civilians is at times complex and can be
impeded when there are differences within the Council,
as is the case currently with respect to Syria or Ukraine.

On the other hand, the issue of the protection of
aid workers - and no one disputes this - can be
greatly improved by implementing the existing legal
and political mechanisms. Proposals of the Secretary-
General exist to do that. The 1994 Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel is
one route. That Convention requires Member States
to not only prevent attacks against civilians but also
urges that they be prosecuted and that perpetrators be
appropriately punished. Similarly, the implementation
of the Geneva Convention of 1949 and its Additional
Protocols need to be implemented. Resolution 1502
(2003) is important in that it calls on the Secretary-
General to include in status-of-forces agreements,
status-of-mission agreements and host country
agreements between the United Nations and the host
countries the necessary key measures under the 1994
Convention, particularly with respect to preventing
attacks against United Nations operations personnel.

What is key today is to prevent attacks of this kind
and to prosecute perpetrators. Similarly, there is no
follow-up system with respect to measures envisaged
against perpetrators of those acts internationally or
internally.

In conclusion, States need to be aware of their
responsibilities and act with awareness of the
consequences. The Security Council needs to focus
its efforts in the areas of prevention while restoring a
true dialogue with the countries involved in order to
prosecute perpetrators of crimes against humanitarian
workers and United Nations and local personnel.

