Mr. Doss (spoke in French): Four months ago,
the Security Council extended the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC),
emphasizing three essential tasks: the protection of
civilian populations; the disarmament, demobilization
and repatriation or reintegration of Congolese or
foreign armed groups; and support for the
Government's efforts to reform the security sector.
Although progress has not been consistent across all
these areas, we have, however, made considerable
progress. Today I would like to outline some of the
elements key to the implementation of our mandate and
also describe the challenges we face.

(spoke in English)

As regards the first priority of the Mission, we
have pursued and reinforced our earlier efforts to
enhance the effective protection of civilians. These
efforts have been directed at two key objectives: first,
increasing MONUC presence and situational awareness
in the areas most vulnerable to violence; and secondly,
working with the Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo (FARDC), the Congolese
army, to improve conduct and discipline during
forward operations.

To achieve the first objective we have multiplied
the deployments of the Joint Protection Teams (JPT).
Eighty-seven Joint Protection Team missions have been
deployed, including 22 since the beginning of this year,
and as in the past, they have assisted the Blue Helmets
in identifying, preventing and reacting to security
10-31160
threats, often through the establishment of local early
warning committees.

Additional military bases, many of them located
in very remote areas, have been established in the
Kivus and the areas of Orientale Province affected by
the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), bringing their total
number to 73; this has been accompanied by more
frequent patrolling in the most security-sensitive areas.
The deployment of these bases and the JPT missions is
guided by the Rapid Response and Early Warning Cell,
established at MONUC headquarters as well as in the
field. These draw on information from a variety of
sources and try to identify trends and emerging threats
in order to direct our military resources towards
prevention or response actions. The effective
protection of civilians relies on this capacity to analyse
and anticipate threats and to prevent them from
materializing.

As regards the second objective, in line with
President Kabila's declared zero-tolerance policy and
the provisions of the policy governing MONUC
support to the FARDC, MONUC now provides
assistance to the 18 battalions specifically designated
to carry out operations against the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR) in the
context of Operation Amani Leo, and only when such
targeted operations have been jointly planned to take
account of civilian protection. In agreement with the
High Command of the FARDC, the officers
commanding these strike battalions and the chain of
command have been screened to make sure they do not
have a history of human rights violations, and they
report directly to the North and South Kivu operations
commanders of Operation Amani Leo.

The FARDC has taken some important measures
to curb indiscipline and to fight impunity. Operational
military courts have initiated around 42 trials over the
past year and have condemned at least 25 officers and
soldiers. The number of soldiers prosecuted for serious
offences has increased substantially, but this is an area
that still needs significant improvement, and MONUC,
through the Joint Human Rights Office and the Rule of
Law Section, is providing support for joint
investigation teams and prosecution support cells in the
FARDC. These initiatives warrant further assistance,
and MONUC is working with partners to mobilize such
assistance. Nevertheless, discipline is likely to remain
a constant concern as long as the structural problems of
the Congolese army are not fully resolved. These
10-31160
include persistent delays in the payment of salaries,
insufficient supplies and a very low level of training of
many troops, especially those who have been
integrated from the various armed groups. These are
issues that need to be addressed as part of the security
sector reform effort.

The humanitarian situation in the Kivus and parts
of Orientale Province remains of deep concern, with a
large number of internally displaced persons, high
levels of sexual violence against women and attacks on
humanitarian workers. But security has gradually
improved in several territories in the Kivus and the
economic tempo is picking up in consequence; close to
one million internally displaced persons (IDPs) have
returned to their areas of origin, and all the major IDP
camps around Goma have now been closed.
Unfortunately, however, violence against civilians is
increasingly perpetrated by criminal elements in both
North and South Kivu, which points to the need for an
enhanced police presence to secure public order.

MONUC's support to the Government in its
struggle against the armed groups has focused on the
FDLR, the ex-Interahamwe Rwandan forces, which is
now the major source of violence and instability in the
Kivus. Due to steady military pressure from the
FARDC and outreach from the MONUC's
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation or resettlement (DDRRR) team - the
reintegration support team - the FDLR continues to
suffer a steady erosion in the number and capability of
its forces. The recent actions by the authorities in some
European countries against the FDLR expatriate
leadership are welcome and will help the efforts on the
ground in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
dismantle the FDLR.

Despite this progress, we cannot afford to relax in
our common endeavour to end the menace of the
FDLR. The FDLR leadership remains at large and the
group is still carrying out violent reprisals against
civilians, as well as abductions. As a result, the Amani
Leo strategy has been designed to encompass both
protection and offensive dimensions and must be
sustained to ensure that the population is secured and
that targeted operations against the FDLR command
continue.

Elements of the Congres national pour la defense
du peuple (CNDP) have continued to maintain parallel
administrative structures and tax collection in Masisi
3
territory. This has provoked serious tensions with local
communities as well as threats against MONUC by
some former CNDP military commanders now
integrated in the FARDC. A number of the provisions
of the 23 March agreements - the amnesty law and
the release of political prisoners, the treatment of the
war-wounded, the signing of the tripartite agreement
for the return of refugees from Rwanda and the
appointment of territorial administrators - have been
implemented by the Government. But other provisions
are still outstanding, notably the announcement of the
outcome of the commission on military ranks, which
has created dissatisfaction among officers who have
been recently integrated into the FARDC from the
armed groups.

The LRA attacks in Orientale Province remain a
serious concern as well. While we agree with the
Congolese authorities that the number of LRA
combatants has been significantly reduced, the
extraordinary brutality of the LRA and the practice of
turning abductees into new fighters continue to
destabilize the territories of Haut- and Bas-Uele in
Orientale Province. The FARDC, with the support of
MONUC, has established security perimeters around
the main population centres and secured the main roads
through frequent patrols. But the LRA is an elusive
enemy, and we cannot discount the possibility of
renewed attacks against population centres and isolated
communities, using hit-and-run tactics, as has been the
case in the more remote areas, and notably, just before
Christmas, in the area of Tapila, with disastrous
consequences for that community.

As long as the LRA commanders remain at large
and are able to operate across borders in three
countries, the group will continue to pose a serious
protection challenge. The Governments of the countries
affected, together with the international partners, need
to work closely together in order to eliminate the LRA
threat once and for all, which requires greater real-time
intelligence sharing, enhanced air mobility and special
force operations to interdict the movement of the
armed bands.

In the meantime, MONUC's efforts to sensitize
the LRA rank and file have led to some surrenders -
53 since the beginning of last year, which is a
significant number considering the overall size of the
group still present in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. This is encouraging, although the LRA
continues with abductions to fill some its gaps, so the
struggle against the LRA must continue.

Small-scale rebel activity is present in southern
Ituri in Orientale province, where MONUC is working
closely with the FARDC to restore lasting security in
the affected areas and to facilitate the deployment of
the police. In recent weeks, we have assisted more than
2,000 villagers to return home after they fled military
operations in this area.

In the north-west of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, a new and unanticipated challenged
emerged late last year. A long-simmering ethnic
conflict over fishing rights in northern Equateur
province escalated with an attack of the rebels on the
provincial capital Mbandaka on Easter Sunday. The
attack was repelled by Government forces with the aid
of MONUC. Unfortunately, the losses suffered by the
civilian population and the security forces were quite
high and, tragically MONUC, lost one soldier and two
contractual agents.

The capacity of the national security forces to
respond to such threats in remote areas is still limited
because of capacity constraints. The Mission must be
prepared therefore to offer logistic support, if requested
and within the limits of its resources, to counter armed
threats to the constitutional order or to help contain
conflicts with the potential of escalating and
threatening the security of civilians.

As indicated in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/l64), a set of laws has been submitted to
Parliament covering defence and army regulation,
together with a law for the National Police. We hope
that this legislation will be adopted during the current
session of Parliament as a basis for moving ahead with
the reform plan for the army that was developed by the
Government last year.

Even in the absence of this legislative framework,
there has been some progress in police training and
deployment along the main axes in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as in army
training by several bilateral partners. Key decisions
have also been made concerning the establishment of
garrisons in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Work is progressing on three sites in South
Kivu and will soon start in North Kivu, These are
important steps, but additional, harmonized efforts will
be required to help build the capacities of the
10-31160
Government to fully ensure the protection of the
population in years to come.

In pursuance of the mandate that the Security
Council has given MONUC in resolution 1906 (2009),
we have established an ambassadors' forum in
Kinshasa to facilitate a regular dialogue among
partners and with the Government on various aspects
of security sector reform, while emphasizing that the
Government itself must take the lead role in
coordination. We have encouraged the Government to
engage its international partners in a strategic dialogue
based on the army reform plan developed by the
military authorities so as to dispose of a nucleus of
well-trained forces that will take over MONUC's
residual security responsibilities as its forces leave the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We have also
encouraged the Government to develop a national
security policy and to build the capacities for national
security coordination, including the oversight of the
various components of the national security
architecture.

I would now like to speak about MONUC's
reconfiguration and drawdown. In paragraph 2 of
resolution 1906 (2009), the Security Council has
referred to "critical tasks that need to be accomplished
before MONUC can envisage its drawdown without
triggering a relapse into instability". These tasks were
assessed by the technical assessment team led by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations that visited
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in March. The
findings of the team have been summarized in the
Secretary-General's report before the Council.

In the light of the team's findings, Under-
Secretary General Le Roy, in his meetings with
President Kabila and Prime Minister Muzito, urged a
prudent approach to MONUC's drawdown. The
President explained his vision for the future of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, emphasizing the
need for the country to rely on its own capacities, and
in that context presented a much briefer timetable to
implement the drawdown, indicating that he would
wish for the drawdown to be completed by June 2011.
The essential elements of those discussions are
outlined in the report of the Secretary-General, and
there is no need for me to repeat them here.

In acknowledgement of the President's vision, the
Secretary-General's report recommends that the first
stage of the drawdown be initiated before 30 June

2010, subject to the Council's concurrence. MONUC
believes that this is operationally feasible. Following
that stage, a review of the security situation in areas of
MONUC deployment would be conducted by a joint
Government/MONUC coordination mechanism to be
established for that purpose. The first such review
would take place in September this year and a second
in March next year. These reviews would focus on
progress on military operations against armed groups,
the deployment of security forces to assume MONUC
protection task, and the establishment of State
authority in areas freed of armed groups. They would
be the trigger for the planning of subsequent phases of
the drawdown, based on the principle of national self-
reliance put forward by President Kabila.

During the Council's forthcoming visit to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, I am sure that
members will engage with the Government in order to
determine how the drawdown can be best shaped and
implemented without compromising the achievements
of the past decade, for which we have all worked so
hard.

As regards the Mission's reconfiguration, again
the Secretary-General's report puts forward a proposal
which is meant to anticipate and address the remaining
critical tasks. The protection of civilians under
imminent threat of violence should remain a primary
concern of the Mission. Protection requires continued
support to build State capacity, reinforce the rule of
law and bolster compliance with international
humanitarian law, human rights and refugee law.
Strengthening the National Police is a critical
dimension of the work to extend and reinforce
protection. We are pleased, therefore, that the
Government has requested MONUC assistance in this
area.

As regards the military dimensions of security
sector reform, the Government has made it clear that it
wishes to largely rely on bilateral aid for building up
the capabilities of the army. However, the Government
has also indicated that it would welcome MONUC
assistance to train and deploy three military police
battalions and build capacity for military justice, which
would further enhance our ongoing protection work.

As indicated in the Secretary-General's report,
MONUC should also progressively shift its focus and
structure towards post-conflict stabilization and peace
consolidation, based on an expanded partnership with
the United Nations country team. The Integrated
Strategic Framework, which we are currently
discussing with the Government, is intended as a road
map to help us move in that direction, in line with
Congolese priorities.

We have already worked closely with the United
Nations country team to provide coordinated support
for the implementation of the Government's
Stabilization and Reconstruction Plan for conflict-
affected areas, which is gaining momentum and
producing results on the ground. A recent strategic
evaluation of the International Security and
Stabilization Support Strategy, conducted in
cooperation with key donors, is recommending
increased support in order to sustain What needs to be a
long-term undertaking to accompany the transition
towards development.

The sustainability of the peace process will
eventually depend on the success of these efforts to
stimulate recovery and reconstruction and to ensure the
effective presence and authority of the State and the
consolidation of democratic structures. But endemic
poverty, lack of employment for demobilized
combatants, the competition for economic resources -
including land and minerals - and the return of
internally displaced persons and refugees are all
potential sources of tension and violence that need to
be carefully managed. This is why we need to reshape
the Mission to enhance the capacity of the United
Nations system and MONUC to assist the Government
to address these challenges during and after the
drawdown. These issues are the key to consolidating
the peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and not only in the East.

President Kabila has reassured the Congolese
public of the Government's firm intention to hold
elections in 2011. The Government is currently
reviewing the calendar with the inter-institutional
6

forum. We have been informed that a timetable for the
elections is to be published shortly, together with an
indication of what support will be requested from the
international community and MONUC. The legislature
is currently working on the legislation needed to
prepare those elections. The adoption of that
legislation, in particular as concerns the delineation of
local constituencies and the national elections
commission, is urgent in order to adhere to the
constitutional calendar.

As we reflect on the future, I would now like to
recall some words from the past.

"The end of all political effort must be the well-
being of the individual in a life of safety and
freedom. In the case of the Congo, as elsewhere,
the means to this end are, in the first place, the
independence, peace, integrity and prosperity of
the country." (A/PV.906, para. 16)

(spoke in French)

Those words were spoken 50 years ago by
Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjold. They are still
relevant today as the Democratic Republic of the
Congo prepares to commemorate the fiftieth
anniversary of its independence. From the beginning,
the United Nations has been a partner and friend of the
Congo. I am confident that this relationship will
continue as the country begins a new era of sovereign
independence.

