First, I would like to thank Acting Assistant Secretary-General Rajasingham for his briefing. As we recently marked World Humanitarian Day, we pay tribute to all humanitarian workers for their sacrifice. These unsung heroes do a remarkable job each and every day, especially for the Syrian people. Resolution 2533 (2020) is a devastating blow for Syria, which is on the brink of a widespread coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak, with a severely weakened health infrastructure. The loss of the Bab Al-Salam crossing point interrupted direct access to parts of northern Aleppo. Unfortunately, the Security Council failed to reauthorize the most direct, effective and highly monitored route to reach 1.3 million people. Since the closure of the Bab Al-Salam crossing point, my Government, together with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, is striving to respond to the immense humanitarian needs in the north-west. We have been working to increase the capacity for Bab Al-Hawa crossing point. However, access from Bab Al-Hawa will be limited and the United Nations will need to address the additional costs and challenges related to longer distances. Let me repeat once again that the so-called cross-line access is not an option for the north-west and can never replace cross-border humanitarian deliveries. On the pandemic front, the means and measures to combat a possible outbreak is insufficient. The Al-Assad regime and its backers have conducted at least 530 attacks on hundreds of health facilities and destroyed the basic infrastructure of the country. It is estimated that Syria has the capacity to treat only 6,500 cases of COVID-19, due to its limited health-care capacity. As of today, at least 60 doctors in Syria have lost their lives to COVID-19. A high number of fatalities among health-care workers is an important indicator of widespread communal infection and lack of protective equipment and training. Yet, due to a lack of reliable information, we do not know the severity of the situation in regime-controlled areas. Our humanitarian partners emphasize that, due to medical aid channelled in from Turkey, north-west Syria is the best-prepared region to mitigate the effects of an outbreak. However, the rapidly rising number of cases since the first COVID-19 case was recorded in the region is concerning. In addition, the lack of access to water and sanitation exacerbates the effects of the pandemic. The Security Council has listened to the lies of the regime representative on the Allouk water station. Now let me set the record straight - water pumps serving the station operate on electric power from the Tishrin Dam, which is under the control of the terrorist organization Kurdistan Workers' Party/People's Protection Units (PKK/YPG). Since last November, electricity to the Allouk station has been regularly and deliberately cut by the PKK/YPG. Thanks to our repeated demarches towards those who have influence on the PKK/YPG, electricity flow to Allouk has been resumed, and the pumping of water from the station has been recently restored. However, its sustainability and the provision of water to Al-Hasakah at full capacity depends on the uninterrupted supply of electric power. We are ready to work with the United Nations in order to find a durable solution. The Secretary-General reports that insufficient potable and farming water supply in Al-Bab also affects water access for the local population and the ability to maintain health and hygiene standards. We should not let terrorist organizations and the Al-Assad regime use water resources as a weapon to further weaken the Syrian people for their separatist and malicious agendas. We should be vigilant against attempts by the regime and the PKK/YPG to gain legitimacy by exploiting the pandemic as a pretext. The PKK/YPG seeks to consolidate its power throughout the north-east by oppression and economic incentives, such as so-called oil contracts and legislation to confiscate property. Let me be clear - Turkey will never condone such attempts. We continue our efforts to preserve the ceasefire in Idlib, despite violations by the regime. Idlib is the last refuge for Syrians fleeing Al-Assad, and it should be protected at all costs. As always, Turkey reserves the right to use force to respond to any attack by the regime or radical groups. Maintaining the ceasefire is essential for improving the humanitarian situation, facilitating the return of internally displaced persons to their homes and reviving the political process. The only way to end the Syrian conflict is through the United Nations- mediated political solution process, in line with resolution 2254 (2015). With that understanding, we have been focusing on the stabilization of the situation in Idlib and the establishment of a credible, balanced and legitimate Constitutional Committee. We welcome the convening of the third session of the Constitutional Committee on 24 August in Geneva. Turkey will spare no effort to ensure the success of the Committee, which is a milestone in the political process. We expect the international community to support the Committee's viable functioning and to not allow the regime to backtrack. Last week marked the seventh anniversary of the 2013 Ghouta chemical attack, where the Al-Assad regime massacred hundreds of civilians in a single day. The horrifying images still haunt us to this day. That was neither the first nor the last time the murderous regime used chemical weapons against its own people. In each and every incident in Syria, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) has arrived at the same stark conclusion: the regime is responsible for chemical attacks against civilians. The report (S/1867/2020) of the OPCW's Investigation and Identification Team on the three chemical attacks that took place in March 2017 in Ltamenah is just the latest documentation of the ever- growing record of the Syrian regime's crimes against humanity. I will not respond to the regime representative's lies and fabrications. I wonder how they can continue to believe that they can deceive the international community with their lies. We believe that they will be held accountable for their heinous crimes, and their atrocities against the people of Syria will be recorded in the darkest pages of history.
