The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of Japan for his kind words addressed
to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Costa Rica.

Allow me to express my country's satisfaction upon
exercising the presidency of this principal organ of the
United Nations. This constitutes and honour and a great
responsibility for Costa Rica.

Last 14 December marked the second anniversary of
the signing of the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Strict compliance with
that Agreement has been the essential basis for the
reconstruction and pacification of Bosnia. That Agreement
is the only possible way to bring about true and just
peace for all the inhabitants. The fratricidal war and
indiscriminate genocide that afflicted that nation have
been overcome thanks to cooperation and the
implementation of the Agreement, making it possible to
restore peace, separate the combatants and protect
innocent civilians from criminal attacks motivated by
fanatical nationalism. For this reason, the commemoration
of this second anniversary is a propitious time for the
Security Council to take stock of the present situation in
the light of the implementation process of the peace
agreements and to identify those priority areas of the
implementation on which the national parties and the
international community should focus their attention.

My delegation is pleased to recognize the progress
achieved on the road to peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We are pleased to see the growing climate of safety,
which constitutes an indispensable prerequisite for

 

reconciliation. Likewise, we are gratified at the growing
climate of tolerance, democracy, freedom and economic
progress, which are indispensable for the country's
reconstruction. We would especially like to emphasize the
advances made in recent months with regard to national
public instruments in connection with currency, travel
documents and diplomatic representation, in which the High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ambassador Carlos
Westendorp, has played a decisive role.

Despite these achievements, the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina still presents serious problems that must
be overcome. The various authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina should show a firm and clear commitment to
build up the governmental and administrative structures that
are necessary and indispensable to guarantee democracy,
respect for human rights, reform of the police force and the
return of refugees and displaced persons. In this regard,
those authorities should fulfil to the letter the commitments
they entered into two years ago.

My delegation attaches the greatest importance to the
question of respect for human rights. Mechanisms should be
created and implemented to ensure that all persons living in
the country enjoy fundamental rights. We are similarly
concerned about the tragic situation of refugees and persons
displaced by the conflict who are prevented from returning
to their homes because neither the authorities of the
Federation nor those of the Republika Srpska have taken
the necessary legal measures to allow their return.

Likewise, Costa Rica considers that the authorities of
the various entities, and in particular those of the Republika
Srpska, should make every possible effort to promote
tolerance, understanding and reconciliation among the
various ethnic, religious and cultural groups living in their
territories. In this regard, it is essential that they redouble
their efforts to educate the population about the basic
principles of tolerance and national reconciliation. My
delegation cannot fail to mention the importance of
international cooperation aimed at creating an educational
programme that will inculcate those principles in the
people.

A fundamental aspect of the whole process of
pacification and national reconciliation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is the question of combating impunity. The
situation of missing persons and the carrying out of
exhumations is a source of concern. The suffering of the
relatives of victims because of uncertainty and because of
the impunity of criminals should be the subject of the
greatest attention. My delegation acknowledges the efforts
made in this regard by the Office of the High
Representative and the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991.
Nevertheless, it is a source of deep concern that the
parties to the General Framework Agreement and some
States are not fulfilling their international obligations to
cooperate unconditionally with those bodies. My country
believes that they should all cooperate with those
international bodies without any restrictions, provide them
with complete and immediate information and allow them
unrestricted access to those places where there are mass
graves in order to conduct the necessary exhumations.

My country also considers that the normalization and
reconciliation of the population of Bosnia and
Herzegovina will be extremely limited until all war
criminals are brought to justice. The authorities of the
various entities of Bosnia and Herzegovina should bring
suspected criminals on their territories to justice. In
particular, they should cooperate with the International
Tribunal by arresting indictees, facilitating the compiling
of evidence and fully obeying the orders of the Tribunal.
Impunity must disappear from Bosnia and Herzegovina.

My delegation is pleased about the increase in the
number of refugees and displaced persons who have
returned to their places of origin; but we are concerned
that their general situation has not improved significantly.
We call particular attention to the fact that some persons
have been relocated against their will to places other than
their original homes. In addition, we believe that
shortcomings in safety, access to personal documents and
guarantees for the return of property are obstacles to the
return of those refugees and displaced persons. It is
essential that the authorities of the various entities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina remove those obstacles.

In this context, and particularly with regard to
impunity and the need to deepen the process of judicial
and political reform, Costa Rica expresses its agreement
with the extension of the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. This is an essential step towards
full reconciliation, and my delegation will vote in favour
of the draft resolution before us.

All this leads us to the question that, in our
judgement, should be the focus of this debate. We have
taken stock of the situation prevailing in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and we can underline significant and

 

undeniable advances in the difficult task of consolidating
pacification and promoting national reconciliation. At the
same time, it is clear to us that there continue to be serious
and difficult obstacles. This is naturally the responsibility
of the national parties, but it also falls to the international
community to continue to play an active and leading role in
the task of implementing what has been agreed.

We are satisfied at the recent statements of those
countries with links to and interests in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Political commitment is essential, as is
maintaining the levels of participation and international
assistance in the difficult task of physical and institutional
reconstruction. Bosnia and Herzegovina cannot be
abandoned to the incarnations of the new international
economic reality at this crucial stage. The country must
ensure its reconstruction with international support after the
end of the conflict. Only in that way will we be able to
ensure the true sustainability of the peace agreements and
guarantee through them the irreversibility of what has been
achieved and the country's successful integration into
today's world.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

