Mr. Cardi (Italy): It is hard to be the next speaker
at this emotional moment.

Italy believes that the international community
should continue to take every action to ensure that the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) remains
a positive element in the global effort against the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. At the
same time, we believe in the importance of the full and
thorough implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
Good-faith implementation of both the JCPOA and
resolution 2231 (2015) will benefit regional security.

In this perspective, we appreciate the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/515) for both its reference to
the importance of the JCPOA and its compliance with
the relevant provisions of resolution 2231 (2015). We
agree with the assessment by the Secretary-General that
the JCPOA is an achievement of multilateral diplomacy
from which all participants should benefit. We also
share his view that the JCPOA provides an example of
the benefits of diplomacy leading to the reduction of
tension among States. I wish to reiterate the Secretary-
General's call for all Member States and other relevant
organizations to support the implementation of
this agreement.

The robust and comprehensive structure and
the solid verification mechanism of the JCPOA are
crucial to upholding mutual trust and the credibility
of the Plan. Therefore Italy will continue to support
the International Atomic Energy Agency in its work
relating to the JCPOA.

Italy commends the High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy for her leadership in coordinating the Joint
Commission established by the JCPOA. We encourage
all stakeholders to continue to promptly address
and resolve any possible issues through dialogue by
exploring the relevant mechanism set up by the JCPOA.
The Security Council also plays a key role within its
competencies and responsibility, and my country will
continue to do its part, also in its capacity as Security
Council Facilitator, to foster the smooth implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015).

