Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would like
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Kang for the very
sobering briefing. I would also like to thank my fellow
Security Council members for organizing the meeting
on short notice.

At the outset, I want to commend the brave
United Nations and humanitarian workers who are
carrying out lifesaving work in Syria under the deeply
challenging circumstances of a conflict zone. Their
work is courageous and deeply valued. Millions depend
on them.

We have come to the Chamber today because the
world has been profoundly shaken by the display of
the sheer brutality of the Al-Assad regime in Syria.
The reports of starvation coming out of Madaya
have truly shocked our conscience and our sense of
humanity. Most disturbing is the fact that this is not
just a single instance of horror and cruelty. Rather, this
is part of a deliberate and systematic siege-and-starve
tactic employed by the regime against civilians across
Syria - another barbaric act in a conflict full of such
acts. The Council has adopted one resolution after
another on humanitarian access. And yet, over the past
year, we have only seen the suffering of Syrians deepen
to outrageous levels. This cannot go on.

We welcome the two United Nations shipments
made to Madaya, Fu'ah and Kafraya this week. It is
lifesaving assistance, but it is not nearly enough and
it is coming far too late. Before Monday, the 40,000
people in Madaya trapped by the Syrian regime and
its allies, including Hizbollah, had received almost no
humanitarian aid since October. Therefore, although
the shipments made this week are necessary, the need
is much greater. At least 32 people, including infants,
have died from starvation in the past 30 days, according
to the latest updates from humanitarian workers. The
United Nations has reported that more than 400 people
are near death due to starvation - those are just the
cases that we know about, there could well be more.
The only two doctors in the town - two doctors for
all 40,000 people - have very limited ability to treat
this sick and weakened community. Madaya's hospital
has been destroyed, and the one remaining medical
facility faces severe shortages of medicines, supplies
and health personnel. The facility consists of one
large room where, earlier this week, humanitarian
workers saw 20 weakened people suffering from severe
malnutrition, sleeping on the cold, hard floor without
mattresses.

When United Nations and International Committee
of the Red Cross workers arrived in Madaya on Monday,
the grateful local distribution committee insisted on
providing a meal, trying their best to offer hospitality,
truly generous of spirit, yet all they had to offer was
hot salted water with very few grains of floating rice.
Madaya has had no bread for nearly five months, and
what food is available is sold at exorbitant prices: 1
kilogram of sugar costs $150 and 1 kilogram of rice
costs $200. Madaya has simply been cut off from the
world. Civilians who have tried to escape or to find food
have been killed or injured by anti-personnel mines
and sniper fire by pro-regime forces. Since the Syrian
regime has cut off power and fuel for generators, the
residents of this mountain town - where temperatures
are now dropping often below freezing - must simply
risk their lives to collect firewood to keep their children
warm at night. That must change.
We reiterate calls on the Syrian regime to allow
immediate, regular, unconditional and unimpeded
access. The United Nations formally made a request to
the Syrian regime three days ago to bring in mobile
medical units and medical teams to Madaya to conduct
nutrition assessments and to treat the most critical cases.
That request was just approved today, but the units and
teams must arrive immediately, with no further delays.

The exhausted medical personnel in Madaya
urgently need this support to stabilize and treat
those who are severely malnourished. The most dire
cases - the 400 people the United Nations identified
as near death due to starvation - must be treated or
evacuated to a safe location immediately. The stories of
horror coming out of Syria have become so chillingly
commonplace. but they simply cannot make us numb:
families trying to survive on what cannot even be
called soup, just hot water and boiled spices, young
babies unable to feed because their mothers suffer from
such serious malnutrition and frail elders wasting away
to nothingness. We cannot just become immune to the
stories of their plight.

We, as a Council, must demand rapid, safe and
unhindered humanitarian access to the residents of
Madaya and all civilians in Syria, not merely as a
matter of implementing Security Council resolutions,
but as a moral imperative. As we all know, the hunger,
suffering, and obstruction of humanitarian access
should never have happened in the first place and it is
by no means limited to Madaya.

The Damascus suburbs towns of Mouadamiya and
Daraya are also worth highlighting. since they also
continue to be strangled by the Syrian regime. Madaya
is just one of 12 areas in Syria besieged by the regime,
while armed opposition groups have surrounded
civilians in Fu'ah and Kafraya and the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant has surrounded Dayr al-Zawr.
In addition to the 400,000 in those besieged areas,
4 million more Syrians are in hard-to-reach areas
where it is increasingly difficult for the United Nations
to send assistance.

Denying humanitarian access to anyone, anywhere,
must stop. While we welcome the United Nations
progress towards meeting the needs of those in
Madaya, Fu'ah, and Kafraya, one-off deliveries are
not a solution to the humanitarian catastrophe caused
by the besiegement of communities. All communities
should be guaranteed access to food, medicine and
basic goods. That has to be our goal. And since we
only saw access deteriorate and malnutrition and
starvation increase in 2015, we all have to re-examine
the strategies to do better.

In the past year, we saw the number of Syrians
who need humanitarian relief increase to 13.5 million,
which is another 1.3 million in need. The number of
Syrians receiving aid in hard-to-reach areas continues
to dramatically decline, from 1.1 million in 2014 to
625,000 in 2015. In besieged areas, on average only 3 per
cent received humanitarian assistance, as Assistant
Secretary-General Kang just noted. We must stop
acting as though such suffering is simply inevitable. In
the past year, the Syrian regime did not even respond
to more than half of requests from the United Nations
to deliver assistance across conflict lines. According
to the United Nations, if the regime approved such
outstanding requests, 1.4 million people would receive
assistance. As a United Nations partner, the United
States intends to help in developing strategies to reverse
the trends of the past year.

The Syrian regime must minimize administrative
procedures. We, as a Council, must effectively press the
parties to implement the resolutions we have adopted.
In that regard, we request that the United Nations
immediately bring to the attention of the Council any
obstacles to humanitarian access so that we may take
action.

The International Syria Support Group (ISSG)
discussed the need to take steps to ensure expeditious
humanitarian access throughout Syria, according to
resolution 2165 (2014). And the ISSG called for United
Nations pending requests for humanitarian deliveries to
be granted. In resolution 2254 (2015), the Council called
on ISSG States to use their influence immediately to
those ends.

As we have said before, the only way to stop the
violence and end Syria's conflict is through advancing
a negotiated political transition as outlined in resolution
2254 (2015). But while we work toward that goal, Syrians
literally cannot wait - whether for food, medicine or
clean water. It is critical that the Syrian regime and all
parties allow immediate, unconditional and unfettered
humanitarian assistance to reach all of those in need.
All States Members of the United Nations must unite
in pressuring the Syrian Government, or any actor over
which it has leverage, to grant access to Madaya and to
all communities across Syria.

