Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): We listened attentively to the briefing by Under-Secretary- General Lowcock. At present, a large number of people in Syria remain in need of humanitarian assistance. At the same time, the grave political, economic, security and counter-terrorism situations are complex and closely related to the humanitarian situation. In order to resolve the humanitarian issues in the country, we must take all factors into consideration and adopt an integrated approach. In that regard, I would like to emphasize the following points. First, while scaling up humanitarian assistance, we should work to meet the basic humanitarian needs and improve the living conditions of the Syrian people by lifting unilateral economic sanctions and supporting reconstruction projects in order to address both the symptoms and causes of the issue. The Syrian Government is actively working to rebuild housing, livelihoods and medical and educational facilities. Recently, Syria's first anti-cancer drug factory was completed in the capital city of Damascus, which demonstrates a commitment to resolving the shortage of medicine caused by unilateral sanctions. Unilateral economic sanctions and insufficient funding for reconstruction are major challenges toimproving the humanitarian situation for civilians in Syria, who are suffering from a lack of fuel, food and medicine. That is an important aspect of the humanitarian issue in Syria. I hope that the current situation will be addressed in future humanitarian briefings by the Secretariat and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). China will actively participate in the Syrian reconstruction process under the Belt and Road Initiative, as well as providing Syria with humanitarian assistance within our means, helping to train more personnel for reconstruction and contributing to the strengthening of Syria's independent development capacity. Secondly, the international community must work together to adopt unified criteria to combat all forms of terrorism and bring terrorists to justice in accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions and international law. Humanitarian and security issues in Syria are intertwined, and the elimination of terrorist forces is a necessary condition for the restoration of peace in Syria. Terrorist forces currently occupy most of Idlib, threatening the security and safety of civilians, destroying infrastructure and exacerbating the humanitarian situation, and must be resolutely fought against. The prominent issue of foreign terrorist fighters in Syria and spillover effects thereof pose common challenges and threats to countries of origin, the countries concerned and the countries of the region, which must work together to tackle this scourge. According to relevant reports, in Al-Hol camp there are still cases where women are being used to provide financial support to terrorist organizations. It is important to be vigilant about various forms of terrorist support. The Secretariat should closely follow, collect and consolidate information relating to that issue and inform the Security Council in a timely manner. Thirdly, humanitarian relief efforts should strictly comply with international law and basic norms of international relations, the Charter of the United Nations and General Assembly resolution 46/182. They should adhere to the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence while emphasizing a humanitarian nature and professionalism. They must also refrain from interfering in the internal affairs of the recipient country. Humanitarian assistance to Syria should respect and safeguard its sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity and avoid politicizing humanitarian issues. The Syrian Government bears the primary responsibility for improving the humanitarian situation in the country. OCHA should strengthen coordination with the Syrian Government and actively explore ways to increase the delivery of humanitarian assistance from within Syria, while maintaining openness and transparency and ensuring the Security Council is informed in a timely fashion. Cross-border humanitarian relief is a special relief mechanism adopted in specific circumstances. In the light of developments in Syria, the United Nations should proactively propose plans to evaluate it and make adjustments accordingly. In the search for alternatives, our priority should be to listen very carefully to the views of the Syrian Government and strengthen cooperation among all Syrian parties. A political settlement is the fundamental way to improve the humanitarian situation in Syria. China supports the United Nations, particularly Special Envoy Pedersen, in adhering to the principle of a Syrian-led, Syrian-owned process and in promoting a political solution that addresses the concerns of all parties. In resolving the Syrian question, all parties should behave responsibly and constructively. The current humanitarian situation in Syria is the misfortune of the Syrian people, but it is also a misfortune for the entire international community. Just now, the representatives of the United States and the United Kingdom once again abused the platform of the Security Council. In their statements, they made unfounded accusations against China and other countries, which we strongly refute. I would like to emphasize that the accusations are totally groundless and unwarranted. As we all know, due to the sensitive nature of the issue of the humanitarian situation in Syria, the Security Council has conducted many rounds of consultations on the extension of the cross-border mechanism. However, owing to the failure to reach consensus, the Security Council has had to put the issue to a vote a few times. In order to avoid confrontation, China has always tried its best to seek middle ground, and we hope that we can find a down- to-earth solution. We have been communicating with all the parties concerned very closely, as I think the penholders can testify to as well. After many rounds of consultations, we eventually found a solution. It may not be the most satisfactory to everybody, but it is the best way out of the situation at that moment, and we are very happy to have contributed to finding it. The role China played in the process has been acknowledged by Council members. Using this opportunity to accuse China is utterly unwarranted anda manifestation of power politics. As I have just said, because of the divisions and differences on the issue of Syria, the Council has had to conduct consultations and put the issue to the vote many times, and I believe that every country is entitled to vote according to its own position. At the same time, we can see that the United States and the United Kingdom voted against the alternative draft resolution. Why do they expect other countries to vote with them? Do they think we are still in a period of colonialism and the whole world has to side with them? That time has long passed. Furthermore, it is the United States and the United Kingdom that should take the primary responsibility with respect to the issue of Syria. China is not the problem. We are not promoting regime change in Syria; we have not bombed the country; we do not have a single soldier there; we have not occupied any oil fields or taken any assets from Syria. Therefore, the United States and the United Kingdom are not in a position to make accusations against China. They claim that they are defenders of humanitarian values, which is totally hypocritical. The entire world has recognized that hypocrisy. We hope that, on the issue of Syria, all can assume their responsibilities and avoid politicizing the humanitarian situation. We hope that the international community will make concerted efforts to find a political solution so that the Syrian people can enjoy their human rights and the humanitarian situation can improve. Making such wild accusations by abusing the Security Council will not be conducive to resolving the situation on the ground; they will only sow more discord. We hope that the representatives of the countries concerned will reflect deeply on that.
