Mr. Tiirk: I am pleased to present the fourth
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
30 of Security Council resolution 1546 (2004)
(5/2005/373). The report provides an update on United
Nations activities in Iraq since the Secretary-General's
last report, of 7 March 2005 (8/2005/141 and Corr.l). I
will therefore focus my remarks on the political
process that has developed since the convening of the
Transitional National Assembly and the formation of
the Transitional Government and on the implications
for the work of the United Nations in the coming
months.
One year after the adoption of resolution 1546
(2004), this report comes at what may be a critical
moment for Iraq - internally, regionally and
internationally. This is also a moment to take stock of
what has been achieved so far and to take a hard look
at the road before us.

Despite dire predictions about the evolution of
the internal situation, Iraq has been able, with the
support of the United Nations, to meet each benchmark
of its political transition so far. Most important, Iraq
has regained its sovereignty and has a newly elected
Government now in place following last January's
successful elections. We know from experience how
difficult it is for any society with a history like Iraq's
to go through such a fundamental transition. To be
sure, there have been inevitable setbacks along the
road, and today's problems cannot be addressed
through quick fixes. That is why it is important for
Iraq's new Transitional Government and Transitional
National Assembly to preserve the initial achievements
and address, most seriously, the challenges ahead as
Iraq moves forward into the next steps of its transition.

Many inside and outside Iraq see the political
transition process as having entered a decisive phase in
the process of national reconciliation. Our experience
around the world demonstrates that national
reconciliation requires a constructive relationship
between the majority in power and political minorities.
Democratic processes are most successful when the
majority allows minorities the full exercise of their
political rights and the opportunity to contribute to the
governance and reconstruction of their country. On the
other hand, political minorities have an equal
responsibility to contribute to the democratic process
and to support the national reconstruction effort. Those
goals are difficult to achieve. They are particularly
difficult to achieve in countries such as Iraq, where
ethnic and religions loyalties play an essential role in
the shaping of political choices.

For that reason, the report emphasizes that the
inclusion of all constituencies, public participation and
transparency in the political process and its
responsiveness to the key demands of all political
constituencies constitute a sine qua non for the
credibility and, therefore, the success of the transition
process. A credible political process will be crucial to
maintain the necessary political momentum to carry
Iraq through the remainder of the transition process.
Only by ensuring the confidence of Iraqi constituencies
in the process can their key concerns be addressed and
accommodated. That obviously is not a new
realization. The United Nations has worked
consistently for an inclusive political process in Iraq
ever since our political presence was established two
years ago. It continues to be essential that all intensify
their efforts to reach out to one another and to develop
relations of trust through dialogue and consensus-
building.

The new Government and Assembly have a
mandate from the Iraqi people to continue to engage all
citizens and political groups, particularly among those
who continue to feel disenfranchised. In that regard,
we are pleased that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ashraf Qazi, and his team in
the Office of Constitutional Support of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) were
able to help in facilitating the agreement in principle
reached today between the Constitutional Drafting
Committee of the Transitional National Assembly and
representatives of the Sunni Arab community to
expand the Drafting Committee by 15 new members
and 10 experts. We hope that that breakthrough will
now enable the Iraqis to make progress in drafting their
new constitution on time.

Flexibility and the capacity to compromise will
be required on the part of all - obviously a tall order
in Iraq. The process through which the constitution is
to emerge is therefore as important as its content and
its completion on time. If handled right, it can produce
a broadly acceptable constitutional framework for
durable peace and stability. At the request of the Iraqi
Government, Special Representative Qazi and UNAMI
will continue to work closely with Iraqi representatives
to help facilitate dialogue and consensus-building
among Iraqi parties and promote a constitutional
process that is procedurally and substantively
inclusive, participatory and transparent. UNAMI is
also increasingly coordinating international assistance
to the constitutional process.

At the same time, we are putting in place the
necessary capacity for UNAMI to continue supporting
the Independent Electoral Commission of Iraq and
other relevant authorities with regard to planning,
training and operational requirements for the upcoming
referendum and elections. A new Chief Electoral
Officer has been appointed to direct UNAMI's
electoral team. We are aware that the timing and the
substance of the new constitution may have a profound
impact on electoral preparations, especially as may
pertain to new electoral legislation. As was the case for
the January elections, substantial international
assistance will be required for a successful referendum
and successful elections.

In order for the transition to succeed, advances in
the political process will need to be complemented by
tangible improvements in the reconstruction,
development and humanitarian areas. After so many
years of deprivation, Iraqi citizens are now looking to
their leaders to deliver the dividends of their vote in
terms of basic services, employment and living
conditions. Promises of better lives must translate into
real improvement for Iraqis. The United Nations,
through creative arrangements with Iraqi implementing
partners and on the basis of Iraqi priorities, continues
to deliver its reconstruction and development
assistance inside Iraq, including in the key areas of
governance, human development and poverty
reduction, health, education and rural development. An
increased focus on institutional capacity-building at the
various levels of government is contributing to the
improved management of public affairs. UNAMI is
also stepping up its efforts to play an enhanced aid
coordination role between international donors and
designated Iraqi authorities. As in many other
situations around the world, the coordinating role of
the United Nations represents an example of added
value in the context of international efforts to help.

All those efforts are taking place within a security
environment that remains extremely challenging. Of
particular concern is the increasingly sectarian logic
that appears to be inspiring much of the violence. Our
paramount concern is that innocent Iraqi civilians
continue to bear the brunt of the violence and the use
of force. No cause can ever justify terrorist acts that
maim and kill innocent men, women and children. At
the same time, it is incumbent upon all parties to fully
respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law and to ensure that the use of force is
minimized in order to avoid civilian casualties.

Ultimately, in order for security initiatives to
yield the enduring results intended, they need to form
part of a broader credible political process that can
address the underlying political problems. Two years
after the demise of the former regime, it is also
imperative for the new Government, with the support
of the international community, to deliver basic
services effectively and to do more to promote the rule
of law and respect for human rights so that all Iraqis
can live free from fear and in dignity.

Having accompanied the Iraqi people and
Government thus far in their efforts, the United
Nations is determined to continue to implement its
mandate under resolution 1546 (2004) to the fullest
extent possible, as circumstances permit. The report
makes clear that, although a great deal of progress has
been made in cooperation with the multinational force
in terms of security and support arrangements, UNAMI
continues to face severe constraints that could
potentially affect the planned expansion of our
activities in Iraq.

UNAMI has already demonstrated that
effectiveness can be achieved with limited capacity on
the ground. Our willingness to deliver on expectations
of the United Nations, both inside and outside Iraq,
must necessarily be tempered by a realistic assessment
of prevailing security and operational conditions.
Consistent with our approach since the return of
UNAMI to Iraq, we will continue to make every effort
to determine how prevailing circumstances can enable,
rather than limit, UNAMI in the implementation of its
tasks. In doing so, Special Representative Qazi and his
UNAMI staff deserve the full support of the Security
Council and the General Assembly.

The report also comes on the eve of a major
international conference on Iraq to be held on 22 June
in Brussels. This is the latest in a series of regional and
international initiatives, including the Sharm el-Sheikh
ministerial gathering of November 2004, all of which
helped to maintain attention on the need for the
reconstruction process outlined in resolution 1546
(2004) to succeed. It provides a new opportunity for
the international community to widen and deepen
consensus in support of Iraq's transition and the role of
the United Nations. Benchmarks for success will
include a greater degree of international burden-
sharing, a positive impact on the situation on the
ground and an effective follow-up process.

Both inside and outside Iraq, there is no shortage
of financial resources, advice, expertise and goodwill
to support the Iraqi people in their historic endeavour.
Both Iraq and the international community have no
option but to succeed. It behoves all concerned - the
new Iraqi Government, the multinational force, this
Council and the United Nations - to rise to our shared
responsibility to ensure the full implementation of
resolution 1546 (2004). Only through a broad-based,
concerted approach by all relevant actors will we
develop the necessary partnership with Iraq to help it
regain its rightful place in the international community.

