Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: It is my honour to brief
the Security Council on the activities of the Office of
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court on
the situation in Libya in furtherance of resolution 1970
(2011).

In accordance with Office policy, the Prosecution
has been focusing its investigations on those bearing
the greatest responsibility for the most serious crimes
committed in Libya. Let me stress that the Security
Council consensus on the need to ensure justice for the
victims of crimes in Libya, as expressed through
resolution 1970 (2011) and reiterated at the meeting at
which I first briefed the Council on this matter two
months after its adoption (see S/PV.6528), has greatly
contributed to the cooperation received by my Office
and facilitated our investigations.
2

As I anticipated in my previous briefing, on
16 May the Office of the Prosecutor requested arrest
warrants against three individuals who, according to
the evidence, were most responsible for the attacks
against unarmed civilians on the streets and in their
homes in Benghazi, Tripoli and other cities in Libya
during the month of February.

After a thorough evaluation of the evidence
presented, on 27 June the Judges of Pre-Trial Chamber
I issued arrest warrants for Muammar Al-Qadhafi, Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafr, and Abdullah Al-Senussi for
murder and persecution as crimes against humanity
under articles 7(1)(a) and 7(1)(h) of the Rome Statute,
respectively.

The Chamber concluded that there were
reasonable grounds to believe that Muammar
Al-Qadhafi and Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafr were jointly
responsible as principals in the crimes pursuant to
article 25(3)(a) of the Statute, as indirect
co-perpetrators of the crimes against humanity. The
Chamber found that Abdullah Al-Senussi was also
responsible as a direct perpetrator.

Allow me now to update the Council on the
current situation of the three indictees.

On 20 October, Muammar Al-Qadhafi died. The
Registry of the Court is following the formal
procedures required to obtain official documents from
the Libyan Government to certify his death. The
Pre-Trial Chamber, after reviewing the documents, may
decide to withdraw the warrant against Muammar
Al-Qadhafi and to end the case against him.

Concerning Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
Abdullah Al-Senussi, the Office is galvanizing efforts
to ensure that they face justice. We have received
questions from individuals linked to Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi about the legal conditions attaching to his
potential surrender to the Court, namely, what would
happen to him if he appeared before the judges,
whether he could be sent back to Libya, and what
would happen if he were to be convicted or acquitted.
We clarified that, in accordance with article 107 of the
Rome Statute, he may request the judges not to order
his return to Libya after his conviction or acquittal, but
that he be sent to a different country, provided that that
country has consented to receiving him. The judges can
also decide whether he may be extradited to another
State. I believe that it is a positive sign that the Court is
seen as a guarantor of the rights of the suspects.
11-57695

On the other hand, we are also receiving
information that a group of mercenaries may be
endeavouring to facilitate Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi's
escape from Libya. We are calling upon States to do all
they can to disrupt any such operation. It is up to Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi to
decide if they will surrender, remain in hiding or try to
escape to another country. It is up to the Security
Council and States to ensure that they face justice for
the crimes for which they are charged.

We are grateful for the strong and essential
cooperation received from the Libyan authorities,
including a recent invitation to visit Libya. Over this
past weekend, the Office conducted its first assessment
mission in Libya in order to prepare for the collection
of further evidence in the territory where the alleged
crimes took place. The Office coordinated with local
authorities and local civil society. The Office met with
various local committees mandated to investigate
crimes committed by different parties in Libya.

The current focus of the investigations is twofold.
First, it continues the collection of evidence against
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi in
preparation for their eventual trial. Secondly, the
Office is continuing its investigations into gender
crimes committed in Libya.

The Office will continue to search out the
personal assets of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafr and
Abdullah Al-Senussi for the potential benefit of the
victims, through reparations awarded by the Court.
Since the opening of the investigation, the Office has
been in contact with the Sanctions Committee, which is
assisted by a Panel of Experts, and with INTERPOL to
coordinate its investigative efforts in relation to the
personal assets of the suspects. In late September, the
Court sent requests for assistance to Libya, States
parties and five Security Council non-State parties to
identify, trace, seize and freeze all the personal assets
of the suspects. The Office encourages the Security
Council and States to assist the Court in identifying
and freezing these assets.

With respect to the second aspect of the
investigation, the Prosecution is mindful that, in Libya,
rape is considered to be one of the most serious crimes,
affecting not just the victim, but also the family and the
community, and can trigger retaliation and honour-
based violence. Accordingly, the Prosecution has
adopted a strategy that seeks to limit the exposure of
11-57695

victims. The Office is organizing its investigation by
focusing on obtaining alternate evidence and
identifying avenues of investigation that support
charges without the need for multiple victim
statements.

In this respect, the Prosecution has been in
contact with different sources reporting multiple
victims of sexual violence allegedly committed by
Al-Qadhafi security forces. While it is premature to
draw conclusions about specific numbers, the
information and evidence indicate at this stage that
hundreds of rapes occurred during the conflict. The
investigation will benefit from a reporting system that
has been set up by the Libyan authorities through the
Ministry of Women's and Social Affairs, with the
purpose of affording rape victims the opportunity to
come forward.

The Office of the Prosecutor has also interviewed
a limited number of victims who were kidnapped and
raped in unknown, secret detention centres. The
information and evidence thus far collected do not yet
indicate who may be most responsible for such gender
crimes. We have some evidence showing that
commanders gave orders to commit rape in the Western
Mountains area and our screening of possible witnesses
indicates that Muammar Al-Qadhafr himself,
Al-Senussi and other high officials were discussing the
use of rape to persecute those considered dissidents or
rebels.

In conclusion, there are allegations of crimes
committed by NATO forces; allegations of crimes
committed by forces of the National Transitional
Council, including the alleged detention of civilians
suspected to be mercenaries and the alleged killing of
detained combatants; and allegations of additional
crimes committed by Al-Qadhafi forces. These
allegations will be examined impartially and
independently by the Office.

The Office has been informed that the new
Libyan authorities are in the process of preparing a
comprehensive strategy to address these allegations,
including the circumstances surrounding the death of
Muammar Al-Qadhafi. In accordance with the Rome
Statute, the International Criminal Court should not
intervene if there are genuine national proceedings.
Should the Libyan authorities decide to prosecute the
case we are investigating * that of Saif al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi - for the same
3
crimes, they should submit an admissibility challenge,
and it will be for the International Criminal Court's
judges to decide.

In assessing the situation, the Office will benefit
from the work of the United Nations Commission of
Enquiry, which should present a report in March 2012.
The Office is coordinating with Commission
Chairperson Philippe Kirsch. At its third briefing to the
Security Council in May 2012, the Office will be
prepared to present to the Security Council a
comprehensive report on the crimes allegedly
committed by the different parties in Libya since
15 February 2011 and the existence of genuine national
proceedings.

In summary, the Office will continue
investigations into Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
Abdullah Al-Senussi and into rapes. As I have said, in
May we will present a comprehensive analysis of the
crimes allegedly committed and on the possibility for
further investigations. I should clarify that the
possibility of carrying out all of these investigations
will depend on the budget available to the Office. This
is a matter currently under discussion and will be
decided in December 2011 at the upcoming session of
the Assembly of States Parties.

