Mr. Baja (Philippines): We, too, are grateful to
the Chairs of the three Committees dealing with
implementation of counter-terrorism measures for their
comprehensive briefings. They were both timely and
relevant. The recent bombings in London and other
terrorist acts in other parts of the world are grim
reminders of the need to further strengthen and
improve our efforts to counter terrorism.

My delegations welcomes the 1267 Committee's
consideration of a new resolution that will further
improve the sanctions regime. As Ambassador Mayoral
said, we are no doubt faced with a threat from Al-
Qaida that is radically different from the threat posed
when this sanctions regime was first imposed. It is
therefore important that the new resolution will not
only strengthen a number of the elements in the
sanctions regime but also address common concerns
expressed by Member States over the implementation
of the sanctions measures.

My delegation notes new developments in the
work of the Committee, such as increased briefings
from Member States on their experiences in
implementation of the sanctions regime, which could
provide further inputs and complement the assessments
and the Visits of the Chair and the monitoring team. A
broader engagement with relevant organizations such
as Interpol will also be very useful in the Committee's
work.

With respect to the 1540 Committee, my
delegation supports Ambassador Motoc's call for
Member States that have not yet done so to submit
their first national reports. We endorse his view that
non-possession of, or non-capacity to develop,
biological, chemical or nuclear weapons does not make
it unnecessary or irrelevant for States to prepare a
national report. The reality is that non-State actors
could take advantage of any weak link; thus the
submission of such reports to the Committee is
imperative, as they aid the Committee in determining
how to support a country in implementing the
provisions of the resolution.

My delegation commends the progress achieved
by the Committee, assisted by its experts, in examining
the national reports. We welcome in particular the
attention being given by the Committee to the issue of
capacity-building and technical assistance. We
encourage Member States to be proactive, whether in
offering assistance or in availing themselves of it, as
appropriate, so that they can fully implement the
provisions of the resolution and achieve its objective of
contributing to international stability.

On the 1373 Committee, my delegation looks
forward to coordination among the three Committees
on the matter of addressing issues related to reporting.
The innovative approaches developed by such
coordination will contribute to strengthening and
expanding the process of dialogue with States, alleviate
the incipient "reporting fatigue" of Member States, and
thereby enhance the effectiveness of the
implementation of each Committee's mandate.

We endorse the focus of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, as mentioned by the Chairperson, namely
dialogue with States, identification of those States that
need technical assistance, and the development of a set
of best practices.

My delegation further welcomes the continuing
progress towards making the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate (CTED) fully operational.

Other areas that could be addressed in a
coordinated manner by the three Committees are
capacity-building and technical assistance. We note
that the 1267 Committee has no mandate as concerns
technical assistance, which the 1373 and 1540
Committees do. A coordinated approach, where
appropriate, could be more focused and resource-
effective.

We are gratified to note that Governments are
evolving innovative strategies to deal with the new
methods used and the new skills acquired by terrorists.
We take note in particular of the statement made by
Prime Minister Blair on the need for a political
response to terrorism that includes looking at the
symptoms and causes of terrorism and countering not
only terrorist methods but also terrorist views.

Indeed, the greatest restraint on human behaviour
may not be a police officer or a border guard but
adherence to a noble ideal.

One of the most effective operational ways to
counter terrorist threats is the establishment of
communications procedures for the exchange of
information. In South-East Asia, for example, the
Philippines, Indonesia and Malaysia signed a trilateral
memorandum of understanding three months after 11
September. The memorandum has since been adhered
to by Brunei, Cambodia, Laos, Thailand and Viet Nam
and is being implemented even at the local level of
government. Such an exchange-of-information network
provides a greater opportunity to cut off terrorists'
access to funds and bomb-making materials.

Finally, let me also take this opportunity to
update the Council and other Member States on the
progress made by the working group established under
resolution 1566 (2004), which is under the
chairmanship of the Philippines. I would like to say at
the outset that this update represents the personal Views
and impressions of the chairmanship and does not in
any way restrict or reflect the position of other
members of the working group.

Under the mandate of the Security Council, the
working group commenced its activities in January this
year. To fulfil its Council mandate, the working group
agreed to conduct its work in two phases. The first
phase was that of information-gathering, during which
the group sought the widest range of Views and
suggestions from established experts on the areas under
the group's mandate. The second phase will involve the
consideration by the working group of its
recommendations to the Council.

The working group conducted its information-
gathering phase during the first six months of the year.
We have had excellent briefings from top-notch experts
and practitioners from both within and outside the
United Nations. The working group has benefited
greatly from the views and suggestions of those who
have graciously briefed it and also from those who
have briefed the other committees, particularly the
CTC.

For the rest of the year, the working group will
focus on preparing its recommendations to the Council.
The working group has agreed to consider three broad
issues: namely, practical measures, as mentioned in
paragraph 9 of the resolution; the possible scope of
those practical measures; and the question of Victims,
under paragraph 10 of the resolution.

The working group has agreed to conduct its
work in complete transparency Vis-a-vis the wider
membership of the United Nations. In that vein, the
chairmanship will hold, from time to time,
consultations with the wider United Nations
membership to hear States' Views and suggestions on
the issues under consideration by the working group.
The chairmanship had initially organized such a
meeting on 27 April, and, with the agreement of the
members of the working group, will convene a similar
meeting with United Nations Members in the next few
weeks.

