Mrs. Haley (United States of America): First,
I want to express, on behalf of the United States, the
sadness and heaviness we all feel at the loss of Michael
Sharp and Zaida Catalan. I know my friends in the
Swedish delegation feel the same way, but it is very
telling that when we focus so much on these types
of things and what we are trying to do, we have to
remember the people on the front line who are trying
so hard to protect people on the ground. These are real
people with real families who make real sacrifices. It is
a sobering reminder that we can never forget that when
we have people on the ground trying to keep peace, we
have to do all we can to make sure that we are keeping
them as safe.

I want to thank Ambassador Delattre for his time
and effort and for the negotiations and the care with
which all of this was done. I certainly want to tell
the Security Council how pleased I am that we that
we moved forward, because the whole mission was
keeping the Congolese people in mind, and when we
look at these peacekeeping missions what we need to
focus on is not the number of people we have on the
ground but the quality of the work that is happening on
the ground. What we are seeing is an area where we can
have thousands and thousands of troops, but if they are
not really working to keep the Congolese safe, none of
that matters.

I was therefore very pleased that we cut the troop
ceiling, but we made sure that the troops are actually
going to be more effective where they are deployed.
As Francois said about the specialized units, the key
is to make sure that the elections are safe, that we are
keeping people safe and that we are actually looking
at the political problems on the ground. The idea that
we are really pushing towards long-term stability and
good governance is something we should all be very
proud of.

Always prioritizing the protection of civilians is the
one thing that I think is most important. We are very
grateful to the contributing troops that come into the
area, but we can never forget that the whole goal is to
keep the Congolese safe. In order to do that, we have to
hold the troops that are actually doing this accountable,
and what I believe was one of the best things that came
out of this exercise was the strategic review that we will
get back in September, because what we cannot do is
walk away from this and say our job is done. What we
need to do is keep looking and making sure that what
we did is actually working and effective and meeting
the goals we have set.

That is why I thought it was very important
and appreciated hearing France affirm the specific
indicators that we are going to be watching. We actually
have measurables now so we can look back and see
where the troop failures are happening, because we owe
it to people like Michael and Zaida on the ground to let
them know what is expected and what we need to have
happen so that they can be protected. I think that now
having measurables whereby we can do that and hold
those troops accountable to do the best job they can is
going to be important.

With that, I also think that moving this focus away
from all of the other things related to the mandate and
towards the people and making sure it is effective and
successful is going to be good for all of us, because at
the end of the day we have to honor Michael and Zaida.
I think that the way we honour them is by making the
Mission stronger and more effective. I believe that the
entire Security Council did that today, and I am very
proud to be a part of it and to see what we have done
and how we have done it. I look forward to continuing
to work on this issue so that we can make sure that we
eventually get them to a peaceful and stable place.

