Mr. Van der Vliet (Netherlands): The Netherlands
welcomes the Council's strong presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/23, and aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the European Union.
I would like to make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.

The direct threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters
concerns us all. Both international peace and security
and national security are at risk. The Netherlands
is actively engaged in addressing extremism and
terrorism in partnership with the United Nations,
the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, the European
Union and other partners. Our participation in the
international military coalition in Iraq is a clear sign of
our determination to contribute to international efforts
to combat terrorism.

I would like to highlight three issues: first, the
action taken in the context of the Global Counter-
Terrorism Forum; secondly, our national programme
to deal with foreign terrorist fighters; and thirdly, our
vision with regard to the role of the United Nations.

During its ministerial meeting in September, the
Global Counter-Terrorism Forum (GCTF) adopted
a comprehensive set of non-binding good practices
to address all aspects of the foreign terrorist fighter
phenomenon. These recommendations cover not
only counter-terrorism responses, but also preventive
efforts, including efforts aimed at countering violent
extremism, recruitment and facilitation, travel and
return. As co-leader, together with Morocco, of the
GCTF Working Group on Foreign Terrorist Fighters, the
Netherlands will actively promote these good practices.
We stand ready to work closely with all United Nations
Member States and United Nations partners on this
issue.

The Netherlands has launched a comprehensive
action programme to deal with foreign terrorist fighters.

The action programme has three main objectives: to
protect democracy and the rule of law, to diminish the
threat posed by foreign fighters in the Netherlands, and
to remove the breeding ground for radicalization. The
national action programme contains several measures
to prevent, detect and counter radicalization and to
encourage alternative narratives, enhance resilience and
address social tensions. Front-line professionals from
all sectors of society are closely involved in countering
radicalization, including through the Internet and
social media. The national action programme also
focuses on risk reduction regarding the travel of foreign
terrorist fighters. This includes penal, administrative
and social measures. Potential departures are prevented
or disrupted.

The United Nations is a cornerstone of global efforts
to counter terrorism and violent extremism. It brings all
nations together to share challenges and best practices.
The Netherlands welcomes the active engagement of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force in support of Member States' efforts to address
the threats posed by international terrorism. The
mainstreaming of measures to prevent radicalization
and to counter terrorism across the United Nations
agenda is a high priority, as is combating the financing
of terrorism through an effective use of the sanctions
regime.

The traditional reluctance of development
programmes to address terrorism should be overcome so
that the United Nations can deliver on its potential and
contribute at the national level to inclusive participation
in societies and equal access for all to opportunities and
basic services. In this manner, it can address the root
causes of terrorism. We would also welcome more work
on the role of long-term counter-terrorism policies in the
context of United Nations peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and conflict prevention.

In conclusion, international cooperation is
essential to combating terrorism and the threat posed
by foreign terrorist fighters. National experiences and
challenges can help others in adjusting their approach
to incorporate best practices. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands is ready to be a partner in preventing and
combating terrorism.

