Mrs. Ni'ifiez Mordoche (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): Madam President, we feel obliged to express
at the outset our concern at the lack of transparency in
the preparation of the list of speakers for this open
debate. The Cuban delegation has evidence that some
of the delegations that spoke earlier presented their
formal request for inclusion on the list of speakers after
Cuba did so, on 13 April last, on behalf of the Non-
Aligned Movement, which has 118 member countries.
We believe that this is yet another example of the lack
of transparency that characterizes the work of the
Security Council and of the need for an urgent and
profound reform of this organ, including reform of its
working methods.

In my capacity as Chairperson of the
Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement,
and on behalf of all its member States, I have the
honour to convey the Movement's position with regard
the decision of the Council to hold an open debate on
the relationship between energy, security and climate.

The Movement expressed its position on this
issue in a letter dated 12 April 2007 addressed to the
President of the Security Council, the President of the
General Assembly, the President of the Economic and
Social Council and the Secretary-General. That letter
was circulated as an official document of the Security
Council under the symbol S/2007/203.

The Non-Aligned Movement once again
underscores the need for States Members of the United
Nations fully to respect the functions and powers of
each principal organ of the United Nations, in
particular those of the General Assembly, and to
maintain the balance among those organs in the
framework of their respective Charter-based functions
and powers.

The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its
concern regarding the continued and increasing
encroachment by the Security Council on the functions
and powers of the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council and other organs through its
consideration of issues that traditionally fall within
their competence.

The Non-Aligned Movement also notes that the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change is the appropriate forum for considering the
risks associated with and actions required to address
the issue of climate change, in accordance with the
principles enshrined in the Convention.

According to Article 24 of the Charter, which
defines the Security Council's functions and powers,
the Council's primary responsibility is the maintenance
of international peace and security. The Security
Council must fully abide by all Charter provisions as
well as all General Assembly resolutions, which make
clear its relationship with the latter and with other
principal organs.

In closing, the Movement would like to stress that
close cooperation and coordination among all principal
organs is indispensable in order to enable the United
Nations to continue to be relevant and capable of
meeting existing, new and emerging threats and
challenges.
