Ms. Rice (United States of America): The United
States warmly welcomes both Prime Minister Daeie
and Prime Minister Thaci back to the Council and
congratulates them on reaching the landmark 19 April
agreement on principles for the normalization of
relations. We commend the European Union, especially
High Representative Ashton, for their continued
engagement and leadership on this important issue.

The historic 19 April agreement strengthens Kosovo
and Serbia's futures as multi-ethnic democracies based
on the rule of law and respect for human rights and as
neighbours on the path towards European integration.
The United States applauds both Governments for their
political courage and commitment to making the hard
decisions to achieve this significant milestone, which
holds the potential to significantly enhance stability in
the region. We welcome the Prime Minister's agreement
on an associated implementation plan and time line,
and look forward to the agreement's timely and full
implementation.

It will be important for both Governments to
cooperate with the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo, the Kosovo Force and other partners
to advance implementation and ensure safety and
security during the transition phase. We encourage the
legislatures of Serbia and Kosovo to take all necessary
steps in support of this agreement.

The agreement provides a durable solution for
northern Kosovo within Kosovo's legal and institutional
framework, and reaffirms far-reaching municipal self-
governance for ethnic Serbs and other communities
living in the north. Free, fair and orderly municipal
elections this fall will be an essential step on this path,
and we commend the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe for its work with the Government
of Kosovo to facilitate this electoral process.

At the same time, however, we are concerned about
the threats of violence and irresponsible rhetoric from
hardliners who are personally vested in maintaining
the status quo. We encourage both Governments to
explain the agreement and its benefits to their citizens.
We hope that the residents of northern Kosovo will take
note of Prime Minister Dacie's appeal to accept and
support the agreement, and we welcome the assurances
of President Jahjaga and Prime Minister Thaci that
all citizens' rights will be protected. We applaud the
remarkable progress Kosovo has achieved, including in
reforming its justice sector and economy.

The new criminal code, the new code of criminal
procedure and the restructuring of the courts are major
steps forward. Kosovo's standby arrangement with the
International Monetary Fund is meeting performance
benchmarks, and the European Bank for Reconstruction
and Development just approved its country strategy for
Kosovo.

We are also pleased to note that over half of all
States Members of the United Nations now recognize
Kosovo.

The United States stands with Kosovo as a
partner and friend and looks forward to deepening
our partnership in the years to come. Serbia is also a
long-time partner of the United States, and we welcome
Prime Minister Dacie's productive trade mission to the
United States in May.

By resolving political differences through dialogue
and compromise, Kosovo and Serbia have collectively
set a noteworthy and constructive example for the
region. We look forward to continued progress by both
countries and their societies on reforms and boosting
economic growth.

Lastly, let me take this opportunity to reiterate our
strong support for the commendable efforts of Kosovo
and Serbia to further their cooperation which remains
the optimal path to peace and prosperity.

