I thank Indonesia for convening this debate at this time. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) presents a crisis of unprecedented scope and complexity. It has triggered health, humanitarian, economic, social, development, political and security challenges with both immediate and long-term ramifications. We are seeing how interwoven those challenges are. To quote from a recent article by the International Crisis Group: "(I]t would be a brave Ambassador at the UN who would bet that the health, economic and social fallout from COVID-19 will not lead to more political instability." That is why we have to get the response right, because, if we do not, we may end up in a scenario that sees decades of progress on peace and development reversed amid protracted turmoil and human suffering. As a member of the Council and the only leading economy that meets the 0.7 per cent official development assistance target, the United Kingdom is committed to doing everything that it can to avoid countries tipping into crisis. In the case of COVID-19, that means playing our part to ensure coordinated, comprehensive and collaborative multilateral action. It means prioritizing support to the countries that are the most vulnerable to shocks. It means ensuring risk-informed, calibrated responses and mobilizing to prevent crises in a spirit of solidarity. The United Kingdom is concerned about the impact of COVID-19 on the world's most vulnerable people, and we are reprioritizing many of our existing programmes accordingly. Despite pressures on the global economy, we must mobilize resources for the countries most in need. That is why, working with India, the United Kingdom pushed for an ambitious Group of Twenty action plan, including a $200 billion package of support from the World Bank and regional development banks for investment in health programmes and emergency fiscal support for the poorest countries. As our work on a vaccine continues at a pace, we should also keep striving for a framework that ensures equitable access for the world's most vulnerable people. As I mentioned during the recent dialogue between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission - co-hosted with Germany, the Niger and your country, Sir, as President of the Council - the United Kingdom believes that the United Nations system still needs to do more to integrate peacebuilding and conflict sensitivity into the global humanitarian, economic and development responses to COVID-19. This means the United Nations and its partners supporting countries in order to generate a shared appreciation of conflict risks so as to ensure that responses do not inadvertently exacerbate drivers of instability. It means continuing to prioritize issues that we know to be central to a social contract, which underpins resilience, good governance, inclusion, respect for human rights and the rule of law. It also means seizing opportunities for dedicated efforts to defuse conflict and build on peace initiatives. We should all be ready closely in the Council to take whatever action we can to support the United Nations in ensuring that countries do not tip into instability or, if we can, help them to build a pathway to that end. I want to reiterate the request that the Secretary-General provide further guidance to the United Nations system on this matter in the form of a policy brief on such an approach. The United Nations cannot prevent the loss of peace and development gains single-handedly. We need to work together to prevent destabilization. The United Kingdom is gravely concerned about the rising risk of famine in 2020, hastened by the impact of COVID-19. We will work closely with our partners to do everything that we can, not only to prepare for, but also to prevent, catastrophic food insecurity and related instability. But the complexity of the COVID-19 crisis makes collaboration between the United Nations and the international financial institutions critical for an effective international response. The macroeconomic responses led by the international financial institutions and the socioeconomic responses spearheaded by the United Nations should be playing complementary roles. Again this requires, as a starting point, a shared understanding of risks and opportunity based on common analysis and with that common approach mainstreamed throughout, not only at the very top, not only at field level, but at all levels in between. We have said previously that COVID-19 represents a real test of the United Nations reforms initiated by the Secretary-General. It has brought into even sharper relief the importance of a One United Nations approach and cross-pillar work to build and sustain that. Those concerns have been at the heart of our engagement with the 2020 review of the peacebuilding architecture, and I take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for his 2020 report (S/2020/773). I also take this opportunity to recognize the work of Canada as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission. We have been impressed with the agility of the Peacebuilding Commission in its response to COVID-19 at a time when other United Nations bodies, including, dare I say it, the Council have been rather slower. As this debate highlights, the peacebuilding approach is not just a nice to have. It is critical - it is fundamental - to responding effectively to the most pressing challenges of our time.
