Mr. Reyes Rodriguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The increasing challenges to the maintenance of peace
and security is a legitimate concern of the international
community. The possibility of attacks being carried
out using nuclear, chemical and biological materials
cannot be ruled out. Such risks cannot be eliminated
by applying a selective approach limited to horizontal
proliferation while ignoring vertical proliferation and
general and complete disarmament. In that regard, we
oppose measures that prohibit or restrict the legitimate
right of States to gain access to and use nuclear energy,
biological agents or chemical substances and the
technologies and knowledge associated with them,
whenever such use is for peaceful purposes.

We are deeply concerned about the threat posed
by the existence of weapons of mass destruction,
particularly nuclear weapons. We regret that the 2015
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) ended
without an agreement. We also regret the lack of
political will shown by certain nuclear-weapon States
and others protected by the so-called nuclear umbrella.
As a result, it has proved impossible to put an end to the
serious situation of parties' non-compliance with the
provisions of the Treaty and the agreements reached at
the 1995, 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences.

Contrary to the provisions of the NPT and the calls
from the overwhelming majority of the international
community, multimillion-dollar plans have been
launched to modernize nuclear arsenals and create
new means of delivery. With new and modified nuclear
warheads, modern intercontinental ballistic missiles,
hypersonic systems and sophisticated drones, our
planet will not be a safer world.

In Cuba, in accordance with the international
obligations that we have assumed under the NPT, the
Chemical Weapons Convention, the Biological Weapons
Convention and the International Atomic Energy
Agency, all of our programmes in the nuclear, chemical
and biological fields have a strictly peaceful character
and are directed to the socioeconomic development of
the country. Similarly, the Cuban State has adopted a
set of measures to ensure that no terrorist acts, which
we condemn outright, are committed in the country,
nor do we permit the organization or financing of acts
of that type against other States.

In connection with the review process of resolution
1540 (2004) that is taking place this year, Cuba has
stressed that the resolution should include a reference to
the imperative of total and complete disarmament and
the link between non-proliferation and disarmament.
Cuba supports the urgent start of negotiations aimed
at reaching agreement on an inclusive nuclear-weapons
convention that ensures the prohibition of such
weapons as well as their irreversible, transparent and
verifiable elimination.

Cuba is meeting its obligations and commitments
under the relevant international treaties to which
it is a party. The full implementation of the relevant
international instruments is an effective way to prevent
the acquisition and use of weapons of mass destruction.
At the same time, Cuba believes that international
cooperation in the implementation of the obligations
and commitments, as well as technical assistance,
without conditions or discrimination, plays a key role.

We believe that resolution 1540 (2004) must, as
a priority, preserve its non-proliferation component.
Cuba believe that the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) should play an important
role in assisting States in its implementation, which
is the purpose for which it was created. The actions
of the Security Council must not undermine existing
multilateral treaties on weapons of mass destruction,
international organizations established in connection
with those treaties or the role of the General Assembly.

We reaffirm our conviction that the only absolute
guarantee for preventing the acquisition and use of
weapons of mass destruction, including by terrorists, is
the complete and immediate elimination and prohibition
of all nuclear weapons from the face of the Earth.
No measure will be fully effective in preventing the
occurrence of terrorist attacks with weapons of mass
destruction as long as such weapons continue to exist.

