Mr. De Hoop Scheffer: I thank you first of all,
Sir, for your very good initiative and for your
invitation to participate in this important debate.

Let me make some comments about cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
and other intergovernmental bodies from a NATO
perspective.

It goes without saying that NATO nations are
deeply committed to the United Nations. In the Treaty
of Washington, which founded NATO, the allies
reaffirmed their faith in the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and acknowledged
the primary responsibility of the Security Council for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Consequently, NATO has already made and, indeed,
continues to make a significant contribution, in
particular by leading operations under a United Nations
mandate.
NATO's experiences of cooperation with the
United Nations include the peacekeeping mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, defusing the crisis in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, stabilizing

the situation in Kosovo, providing security and
assistance in Afghanistan, training and equipping the
security forces in Iraq, providing humanitarian
assistance in Pakistan, and assisting with training and
logistical support both the United Nations and the
African Union in the Sudan.

Drawing on those experiences, NATO has learned
valuable lessons about its own structures, procedures
and capabilities, which we are now addressing. But
NATO has also learned some important lessons that, I
believe, have wider relevance, in particular to
cooperation with the United Nations, as well as with
other regional organizations and intergovernmental
bodies.

First of all, it is clear that each organization has
different strengths and that these need to be
complemented and mutually reinforced. NATO offers
unparalleled military experience and capability, yet
addressing a conflict requires a coordinated and
coherent approach from the outset. Clearly defined
responsibilities regarding the political, military,
economic, development cooperation and other
challenges of a conflict are indispensable if we are to
maximize our chances of success.

I saw for myself only two weeks ago in
Afghanistan how important that lesson is. NATO,
through its International Security Assistance Force, is
certainly a key enabler in that country, but the military
contribution to stabilizing that country is not an end in
itself. If we wish to prevent Afghanistan from falling
back under Taliban rule and exporting fanatical
terrorism, then all actors with an interest in the well-
being of that country need to reinvigorate their efforts
to create a strong and sustainable Afghanistan.

(spoke in French)

My second observation concerns the role of
Member States. We often forget this, but our
organizations' ability to act depends directly on the
political involvement of nations and the will to
contribute - in the case of NATO, financially and
militarily - to conflict management. In the framework
of our respective organizations, we therefore need to
recall the importance of striking a balance between
collective political will and the means provided us by
nations.

Thirdly, there is a need to find a just balance
between the responsibilities of the various international
actors and those of local actors. That balance is, of
course, a function of the type of conflict, but I also feel
that the international organizations have an interest in
promoting, as speedily and as fully as possible, the
appropriation of the peace, stabilization and
reconstruction processes by the people and authorities
of the countries in question. Substitution is sometimes
indispensable, unfortunately, but it must not be seen as
an easy way out, lest it undermine the final objective of
timely disengagement.

My final comment is that we need to maintain the
support of public opinion, without which the political
basis of our interventions and the resources we enjoy
decline. It is therefore the responsibility of all of our
organizations to explain the basis of what is often a
long-term commitment. It would be beneficial for us to
demonstrate to the general public and to those who
finance us an exemplary spirit of cooperation and
solidarity among organizations.

I would like to conclude by welcoming the recent
establishment of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Commission. It is an important step towards instituting
real teamwork at the international level, and NATO is
ready to contribute to its work. The United Nations,
and the Security Council in particular, have the
primary role in the maintenance of international peace
and security. Regional organizations and other
intergovernmental bodies have a responsibility to
assist. NATO will continue to play its role in that
collective effort.

