Ms. Rice (United States of America): First, let me
thank all of the Force Commanders, as well as the men
and women under their command, for their service and
dedication. They have our strong support for the work
that they and all peacekeepers are doing for the cause
of international peace and security. The tragic deaths
only 12 days ago of seven Nigerian peacekeepers in the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire remind us
yet again of the dangerous and difficult circumstances
in which United Nations peacekeepers operate. We
mourn their loss, express our condolences to their
families and remain mindful of the great risks facing
their colleagues worldwide who continue to carry out
missions of critical importance.

I am pleased that we have now standardized
the practice of inviting the United Nations Force
Commanders to address the Security Council while they
are here for their annual conference. Our interaction
with them injects practical expertise and insight from
the field into the Council's discussions. I am also glad
that they will be meeting with the General Assembly's
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations this
week.

There have been significant developments in
United Nations peacekeeping since we met last year.
The Security Council has ended the original United
Nations Mission in the Sudan and established new
missions in Abyei, South Sudan and Syria. The
Council has also made important changes in ongoing
missions to better enable peacekeepers on the ground
to fulfil their mandates. Working with the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, we have taken steps
to promote inter-mission cooperation, particularly
between the United Nations Mission in Liberia and the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire, where it
has proved critical to supporting democratic outcomes.
We decreased force levels in the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti to almost pre-earthquake
levels, as security has improved in that country. We
authorized increased troop levels and enhanced United
Nations logistical support for the African Union
Mission in Somalia to further weaken Al-Shabaab and
bring more stability and hope to the Somali people than
they have experienced in decades. In the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has responded to the Council's call for stronger
measures to protect civilians by developing creative
early-warning mechanisms to reduce the chances of
attacks against civilians.

Strengthening peacekeeping remains a top priority
for the United States at the United Nations. Our
positions are well known. Mandates must be clear and
achievable. Missions must have the resources required
to carry out those mandates, including well-trained,
equipped and skilled personnel, and there should be an
exit plan that includes a political strategy - a vision of
the desired end-state and effective early peacebuilding.
Today's multidimensional peacekeeping missions must
have the capabilities and resolve to use force effectively
to deter threats, to defend themselves, to protect
civilians and, in the case of Chapter VII mandates, to
uphold the express will of the Security Council. The
United Nations has many troop contributors that uphold
the highest professional standards of proficiency
and conduct, and we thank them for their service.
We must not allow a relatively few poor performers
to undermine that reputation and put lives at risk.
Therefore, the Secretariat must be firm about troop
contingents, standards of readiness and performance.
The Secretary-General should be ready to send home
any contingents that do not act in accordance with the
mission mandate or whose training and equipment
maintenance standards are seriously deficient to the
point of undermining the missions' operations.

Peacekeepers and all field mission staff must be
held to the highest standard of conduct and discipline,
particularly with regard to the sexual exploitation and
abuse of vulnerable populations. We must not, and will
not, tolerate any such abuse by peacekeeping personnel
ofthe very populations they are charged with protecting.

For missions to succeed for the people they
serve, capable and committed peacekeepers and
commanders are necessary but not sufficient.
Operational effectiveness requires strong support
from Headquarters, as well as modern management,
administrative and logistics practices and, of course,
the contributions of the crucial civilian components. To
that end, the United States strongly supports the rapid
implementation of the global field support strategy. We
remain concerned by gaps in aviation capacity and are
determined to continue working with the Secretariat
and troop-contributing countries to help close them.
It is critical that the Secretariat holistically assess the
best mix of aircraft, including military, civilian, fixed-
and rotary-wing aircraft, to meet missions' needs.
Helicopter-contributing countries should be fairly
compensated for providing the United Nations with a
scarce and high-value asset.

We welcome the efforts being made by the
Secretariat, troop- and police-contributing countries
and other partners to improve training and to set
standards for professional skills. We hope the new
scenario-based training models for the protection of
civilians, now available to peacekeeping training centres
and troop-contributing countries, the Secretariat's
resources and capabilities matrix, and a United
Nations capabilities standards manual for infantry
battalions will improve performance in the field. We
look forward to the feedback of force commanders and
troop-contributing countries on those initiatives.

As the United Nations implements existing
initiatives to strengthen the effectiveness and
efficiency of peacekeeping missions, we must also
continue to explore new areas of innovation in best
practices and technology. The Council has placed a
heavy responsibility on the shoulders of the generals
present here. There are nearly 100,000 men and
women in uniform from over 100 countries serving
in United Nations missions, and doing so in some of
the most dangerous and fragile places on Earth. We
have asked the generals to bring, build and maintain
peace and protect the vulnerable in the most difficult
circumstances. It is very important to us that all their
soldiers return home safely. Yet, as we know, that work
is as honourable and essential as it is difficult. We are
grateful for their service and bravery.

In that spirit, we appreciate the generals' candour
and openness with us about their missions' needs,
challenges and limitations so that the decisions that
we make here in New York reflect the realities on the
ground.

