Mr. Normandin (Canada): Canada is honoured
to chair the Management Committee of the Special
Court and pleased to have an opportunity to speak to
the Security Council about the Court's work. It is a
particular honour to do so during Belgium's
presidency, as that country is well known for its
commitment to international criminal justice.

Two years after the previous President of the
Special Court appeared in this Chamber, it is fair to ask
ourselves whether the Court is succeeding in fulfilling
the mandate it has been given. First, as members of the
Council have heard from the Court's President, Justice
King, and its Prosecutor, Mr. Rapp, all the trials in
Freetown will soon be coming to an end, with
judgements in two of those trials to be handed down in
the coming weeks. If there are appeals in the Freetown
trials, they are expected to be completed by the end of
next year. The Court's operations in Freetown and in
The Hague should be winding up by late 2009.

Secondly, it may be instructive to hear what the
people of Sierra Leone themselves have to say. In a
recent survey of 10,000 Sierra Leoneans from across
the country, 91 per cent said that they either agreed or
strongly agreed that the Special Court had contributed
to building peace in Sierra Leone, and 88 per cent
agreed or strongly agreed that setting up the Court was
the most appropriate option for addressing the crimes
that were committed during the war. That is a
significant vote of confidence in the Court - a Court
that has been funded on voluntary contributions, that
was literally built from the ground up only a few years
ago, and that is operating in a country devastated by
civil war.

Despite those enormous accomplishments,
however, significant challenges remain. Financing has
been, and continues to be, the most critical issue facing
the Court. Throughout its history, the Court has
struggled because it has often been unsure from one
month to the next whether there would be money in the
bank. The resulting financial uncertainty has
profoundly affected every aspect of the Court's
operations. The Management Committee has taken
steps to address this issue. Last month, a three-year
completion budget was adopted that will take the Court
to the end of its work, in late 2009. That gives the
Court a clear financial plan that should allow it to
effectively implement its completion strategy. But that
will happen only if donors step forward with further
contributions. More than 40 countries from around the
world have contributed to the Court over the past
years. We thank them, but we also urge those countries
that can contribute more to do so.

The Court's challenges are not only financial. Let
me briefly address three others: enforcement of
sentences, witness protection and residual issues. So
far, only three States have agreed to enforce the
sentences of individuals who may be convicted and
sentenced to a term of imprisonment. Only a few States
have offered to assist certain vulnerable witnesses who
must be resettled in third countries for their protection.
Both of those needs are critical. States can make a
significant non-cash contribution to the work of the
Court by agreeing to enforce sentences or by accepting
witnesses for resettlement.

In addition, winding up the Court's work will also
raise a number of challenging issues. For example,
archives must be made accessible to the public, but
sensitive information, such as the names of protected
witnesses, will need to be kept confidential. Sentences
of imprisonment may need to be reviewed several
years down the road, and protected witnesses may
continue to need protection.

(spoke in French)

The Special Court will be the first tribunal of its
kind to face these and other difficult issues associated
with the completion of its work. So far, indeed, the
Special Court has often been a pioneer. It was the first
international criminal tribunal to be financed through
voluntary contributions. It was the first tribunal in
modern history to hold its deliberations in the very
country where the crimes were alleged to have been
committed. It was the first to establish an Office of the
Principal Defender, and it will be the first to embark on
the complicated exercise of running trials
simultaneously on two continents, thousands of
kilometres apart.

Many of us take pride in the Court's "firsts" and
in its other accomplishments. But let me not leave the
impression that it has been easy. Indeed, the Court is in
dire need of financial resources. Furthermore, the
personal and professional commitment demanded of,
and given by, every single person working at the Court
is enormous. And the stakes - for Sierra Leone, for
the region and for international criminal justice - are
high.

The Special Court is doing its part to contribute
to the restoration of the rule of law and to the end of
impunity in Sierra Leone. It is up to us to continue to
do our part.

