Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): I, too, thank Ambassador Mahiga, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
for his introduction of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/447) on the latest developments in the
political, security, humanitarian and human rights
fields in Somalia. Permit me to also welcome the
honourable Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kenya, His
Excellency Mr. Moses Wetangula, to the Council and
to thank him for his highly enriching and edifying
statement.

The numerous meetings held by the Security
Council on the matter of Somalia and other initiatives
taken in this area, in particular the Istanbul
Conference, demonstrate the international community's
ongoing awareness of the Somali problem. Similarly,
my delegation supports the convening this month of a
mini-summit directed at further involving the United
Nations in the Somalia stabilization process. My
delegation believes that the new options proposed by
the Secretary-General provide a good basis for
discussions on a coordinated and lasting solution to
this crisis.

This debate is being held at a time when Somalia
has become the theatre of violence that has, regrettably,
led to great loss of human life, including, yet again,
among the soldiers of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM). This upsurge in violence recalls
the precarious security situation in a country that has
faced numerous challenges for many years.

As my country has emphasized at previous
meetings on this same subject, the resolution of the
crisis in Somalia requires a three-pronged approach:
security, institutional and humanitarian. Improving the
security situation remains linked to strengthening the
capacities of both the AMISOM. and the Somali
national security forces. While it is true that troop
levels have considerably grown, reaching the 8,000
soldiers established in the mandate, it is urgent that the
troops enjoy the financial, logistical and additional
technical means that will allow them to counter the
frequent military attacks orchestrated by the rebel
movements.

Such assistance will also strengthen the authority
of the Transitional Federal Government, above all at a
time when the Islamist militias are on the offensive, as
demonstrated by the dual attack in Kampala on 11 July
and the progressive advance of Al-Shabaab towards
Mogadishu. In this context, we welcome the logistical
support provided to date by the United Nations, which
has significantly contributed to strengthening the
operational capacities of AMISOM. We also welcome
the support provided by the European Union to train
2,000 soldiers of the Somalia armed forces.

Furthermore, we support the recommendation of
the Secretary-General that the remuneration of
AMISOM. troops be aligned with those of United
Nations peacekeepers. Once enacted, this measure will
contribute to strengthening motivation among
AMISOM. troops in the theatre of operations.

This is also an opportunity to pay particular
tribute to Uganda and Burundi, whose commitment to
restoring peace and stability in Somalia, at the cost of
enormous human and material sacrifice, deserves
recognition. The same applies to other countries,
including the Republic of Guinea, which has
announced a troop contribution to AMISOM.

Illicit arms circulation also fuels insecurity in
Somalia. In that context, my delegation underscores the
need to ensure the effective implementation of the
sanctions imposed by the Council pursuant to
resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009).

Institutional stability in Somalia will require
strengthening the authority of the Transitional Federal
Government. To that end, we support the Secretary-
General's call on the international community to
provide the military and financial aid necessary to
strengthening the transitional federal institutions. My
Government urges the Transitional Federal
Government to pursue national reconciliation pursuant
the Djibouti Agreement, which is the political basis for
a resolution of the Somali crisis.

The Government's inclusion of three members of
the Ahlu Sunnah Wal Jama'a movement following the
last reorganization of the Government and the progress
made in drafting a new constitution are important steps
towards concluding the transitional phase. With a view
to capitalizing on this progress, my delegation invites
the members of the Government to rise above their
differences for the sake of the higher interests of their
country.
The humanitarian situation also remains of great
concern. We have the moral duty to sustain and
strengthen the efforts and cooperation of humanitarian
workers on the ground, and to ensure that food aid is
properly transported to its final destination.

The international community's attention to the
overall situation in that country - that is, security
problems on land and piracy off the coasts of Somalia -
will contribute to establishing a lasting peace, not only
throughout the country, but in the whole Horn of
Africa.

My country, for its part, will continue to support
the work of AMISOM, the involvement of the IGAD
countries and the role of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Somalia.

