Mr. Garcia Margallo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
My statement will focus on previous views on the
conflict, the humanitarian situation, remarks about
terrorism, the political process and the role of the
United Nations.

With regard to earlier perceptions, we all agree
that, as with other conflicts in the Middle East, the
roots of the conflict lie in the absence of political
regimes capable of ensuring cohesion among societies
that are intrinsically diverse. As a consequence, as the
French Foreign Minister just said, partial or temporary
solutions will not do. To the contrary, we need lasting
and stable solutions that address all the problems. I
also agree that there is no time to lose. At the moment
we have two avenues before us. The first is a political
framework to address the conflict, including the
Security Council and the International Syria Support
Group, and the second is a legal basis for resolving the
problem, namely, resolution 2254 (2015), by which we
are all bound. What we lack is the courage and political
will to ensure compliance with our resolutions and
sufficient imagination to envision a political process
that brings about a definitive end to the conflict.

The second point I want to make has to do with
the humanitarian dimension. I will not repeat the
statistics of the terrible consequences of the conflict in
Syria. We all know them. I will also not mention the
consequences of the conflict on host countries, which
are having to bear the enormous burden of refugees.
We heard about that yesterday at a meeting we all
attended. And nor will I refer to the consequences
for Europe. But know that, in large part, the increase
in populism and xenophobic movements is due to the
impact of refugees in our countries. But, as I said, I do
want to talk about the humanitarian situation, although
I will not refer to the consequences of violations of
international humanitarian laws, which is one of the
main result of the conflict. We have spoken of attacks
against civilians. We have talked about attacks against
medical facilities. And we have referred to the use of
prohibited weapons.

There are two consequences to all that. There can
be no impunity for those who have committed such
crimes.

Some time ago, Spain proposed establishing an
international criminal court specializing in crimes of
terrorism that would try crimes that the International
Criminal Court and national courts do not have the
authority to try. As our Malaysian colleague noted,
Spain, along with New Zealand and Egypt, Spain has
been a leader on humanitarian issues in the Security
Council, since it is an area we consider particularly
important.

With regard to terrorism, Spain has broad experience
in both its domestic and international forms. In sharing
my thoughts on this with the Council, I should point out
that we are dealing with three levels of action. The first
is pursuing action at the international level, that is, by
doing away with the forums and movements that export
terrorism to the rest of the world. That is being done by
the international coalition of which Spain is an active
member. At the national level, we must eliminate the
flows of foreign fighters who come and go between our
countries and Syria, as well as financial flows and arms
trafficking. In Syria, at the domestic level, it is crucial
that we separate the wheat from the chaff- that is, the
moderate opposition groups from those that are clearly
terrorist. I am thinking in particular of Da'esh and the
Al-Nusra Front, as I think we can all agree. However,
we must also convince the 20 groups that have not yet
decided on one side or the other to make up their minds
as to which side of the divide they are on, and we should
then draw the appropriate conclusions.

Regarding the political process that I mentioned
earlier, there can be no lasting peace without dialogue
and reconciliation within Syrian society. I think we all
agree that, to start with, there is no military solution.
Neither side can win the war, and if there is no military
solution we have to reach a political solution based
on dialogue. It cannot be dialogue for its own sake,
however; rather, it must be dialogue aimed at reaching
an authentic national reconciliation - and believe me,
Spaniards know something about that. But I believe
some conditions are essential if that dialogue is to
culminate in reconciliation.

All the parties to the conflict should understand
that the new Syria will not be the precise Syria that they
have fought or are fighting for, but it will be a Syria
that is a common home for all stakeholders of goodwill
who genuinely desire peace. To achieve that new Syria,
various conditions must be met. The first is the return
of exiles, without whose cooperation it will not be
possible to build a new Syria. The second is to avoid
dismantling institutions, so as to avoid the mistakes
we made in Iraq and Libya. The third is to understand
that the Syria we want is an integrated Syria, where
the principle of territorial integrity is respected - we
cannot accept or tolerate the possibility that the conflict
will end with its partition - a plural Syria, because
Syria is a plural society, and a democratic society that
respects human rights.
To make that possible, and to launch a political
process that can result in this new Syria, some
preconditions are essential. The ceasefire must be
guaranteed, and that is absolutely the responsibility
of all us. Access must be ensured for humanitarian
aid to the individuals, populations and communities
that are suffering the most. And a political dialogue
must be facilitated. The latter is the responsibility of
the Security Council, the International Syria Support
Group and in particular those countries that can exert
more influence on the parties to the conflict, whichever
they may be. While we can see that an endless war is
developing in Syria, there are external actors that are
taking advantage of the conflict when they are not
actually fomenting it.

I would like to conclude with a quotation from the
Spanish thinker Salvador de Madariaga - himself an
international civil servant - who in 1951, when the
Spanish Civil War was finally over, addressed both the
internal and external opposition, speaking in this very
Organization, with the following words:

"Those of us who once chose liberty and lost
their land and those who chose land and lost their
liberty are reunited to light the way that will lead
us together to both land and liberty."

Amen to that.

