Ms. Rodriguez Gomez (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We strongly welcome
the presence of more than 20 Heads of State and
Government and Ministers taking part in today's
important debate. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
is extremely grateful for the initiative taken by New
Zealand to convene this open debate. We consider it to
be a valuable opportunity to analyse from all angles the
challenges faced by small island developing States.

We extend our greetings and gratitude to the
Secretary-General of this important Organization,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon.

There are 37 United Nations Member States that
qualify as small island developing States i in other
words, one-fifth of the overall membership, including
16 fraternal Caribbean States. Venezuela is also a
Caribbean country and is therefore extremely aware
of the specific vulnerabilities and asymmetries facing
those States, in particular those that limit sustainable
development. Small island developing States are mainly
characterized by small populations and extensive
maritime borders, which make them vulnerable to
external factors, natural disasters, climate change,
global economic shifts, transnational organized crime
and foreign exploitation of their natural resources.
Small island developing States suffer the full force of
the ravages of the capitalist model.

The explosion of neoliberal globalization in the
1980s, including the expansion of free-trade zones, the
deregulation of financial markets and the privatization
of State enterprises, coupled with the giddying pace of
technology development in the areas of transportation
and telecommunications, exacerbated the vulnerability
of small island developing States most of which, we
must recall, were already historically victims of the
effects of late-stage colonialism, which reached the
Caribbean region with repercussions of various kinds
that continue to impact them all today.

The greatest external threat to the security of those
States arises not from an individual State, but rather
from the pressures of the new form of colonialism
represented by the dictatorship of international financial
capital. Moreover, those islands feel abandoned
by developed countries and relevant multilateral
institutions such as the World Trade Organization, and
even non-governmental organizations that determine
the rules and options available to those countries. In
addition to all this, but no less important, is the threat
of climate change. Despite being the least responsible
for the destruction of the environment, the small island
developing States are among the most threatened and
the immediate victims of a predatory environmental
model.

However, the answer to the challenges and threats
faced by that group of States cannot be found by way
of predominantly police and military approaches.
The challenges and threats in the field of sustainable
development and climate change, as well as those
arising from transnational organized crime and
international piracy, should be addressed by the
international community through genuine solidarity and
cooperation, mainly on the part of developed countries,
which is definitely an unresolved contradiction in the
framework of the very model of capitalism. It is worth
noting that the Caribbean region is a peaceful territory
that is free of weapons of mass destruction.

Despite its limitations, that group of States
has contributed significantly to the maintenance of
international peace and security and fulfilled its
obligations under international law, including those
deriving from the Council's resolutions. They are neither
arms manufacturing States nor bellicose expansionists
intent on conquering territory and oppressing
populations. Those countries must continue to work
together to establish collective bargaining mechanisms
on the basis of their large representation in regional
and international organizations, and their voices should
be heard and taken into account on the basis of the
sovereign equality of States, regardless of their size
or population. It is important to amplify the voices of
those countries and expand cooperation mechanisms
in order to articulate a broad multilateralism and build
a multicentric and multipolar world that will uphold
and prioritize the leadership of States. South-South
cooperation also plays a key role in capacity-building
for small island developing States in order to address
the multifaceted challenges they face.

I could speak at length about the extraordinary
mechanism for solidarity and unity represented by
Petrocaribe. Venezuela has been consolidating a
cooperation mechanism that goes beyond mere energy
security or energy legislation by fostering conditions
for millions of people to overcome poverty. It is based
on the premises of fair trade, complementary efforts,
social justice, solidarity and the common desire to
advance. That mechanism for integration and unity
serves as a model for the region and a key instrument
in promoting the right to development of the member
countries. I pay particular tribute to Prime Minister
Portia Simpson Miller of Jamaica because we recognize
the extraordinary efforts made by Jamaica to strengthen
that mechanism of unity.

President Hugo Chavez Frias was strongly
committed to the peoples of the Caribbean and helped
to convert the region from a premium market for
energy transnationals into a region that underpins the
economic, social and cultural development of our sister
Caribbean countries and their peoples. Of the 18 States
members of Petrocaribe, 15 are small island developing
States. Despite imperialist attempts to delegitimate that
humanist organization, which is the basis of the most
deeply cherished values of our peoples, Petrocaribe, as
stated by President Nicolas Maduro Moros, has proven
that it works and that we are people who can work in
friendship, unity and solidarity.

Venezuela also contributes to human development
in the Caribbean region through international health-
care programmes such as Misio'n Milagro, whereby
more than 4 million people in Latin America and the
Caribbean have had their sight restored. To date, we
have implemented, through Petrocaribe, 488 social
projects focused on the health, housing and education
of millions of men, women and children.

Venezuela is pleased to continue to support the
small island developing States, including through,
among other mechanisms and measures, the
establishment of genuine and lasting partnerships that
we hope will effectively contribute to strengthening
States' sovereignty and the policies available to them
in facing their challenges in the fields of sustainable
development and in international peace and security.

Finally, allow me to convey the following message
from the Constitutional President of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, President Nicolas Maduro
Moros, a scion of Hugo Chavez Frias:

"The Venezuelan people, the Bolivarian
Government and the Venezuelan nation as a
whole are peace-loving people who work daily to
fulfil their vocation of peace. We pride ourselves
on that heritage and lay claim to it. We practice
cooperation in solidarity and will champion
formulas for integration that seek common solutions
to the difficulties and problems of the needy, the
dispossessed and those that have been traditionally
excluded and marginalized. We believe in direct
dialogue and ongoing communication. We are
firmly wedded to international law, as we recognize
the validity of norms and standards to provide for
peaceful international coexistence, in conjunction
with the principle of maintaining and developing
friendly and good-neighbourly relations.

"We are a country that fought for and won
our independence. We were born in a territory
inherited from those who fought for our liberty
and who emerged victorious from the shackles of
colonial and imperial slavery. Today, we can say
that we have a free, sovereign homeland and that
we practice a diplomacy that exalts the principles
of Bolivarianism and peace. We have overcome
the rough roads of neoliberalism, and thanks
to President Hugo Chavez, we have raised our
country's flag and broken with the neoliberal
model that oppressed our people and those of Latin
America and the Caribbean.

"Despite the grave dangers threatening the
progressive Governments of the region, which
consolidate national models autonomous from
imperialist centres and which construct their own
realities and national and regional identities, we
have no doubt that the peoples, as well as those of
the small island developing States of our beloved
Caribbean, will continue to vanquish the imperialist
pretensions seeking to again impose their model of
predatory dependence on our natural resources. The
people of Venezuela are more committed than ever
to the principles and purposes of the Organization,
to the great challenges in the consolidation of a
more secure and peaceful world.

"Let us unite efforts to construct a multipolar
and multicentric world, firmly believing in the
sovereign equality of States, in non-intervention
in the internal affairs of countries and in the
independence of nations. Likewise, with the
heritage of union left us by our great Liberator,
Simon Bolivar, father of America, and with the
bicentenary this very year of the Letter from
Jamaica, we consider ourselves part of the
consolidated unity of our brothers of the Caribbean.

"When the peoples have decided to be free,
sovereign and independent, there is no force,
however powerful, that can stop them."

