Mr. Desta (Eritrea): I wish to congratulate you,
Madam President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of July, and I wish to
thank you and the members of the Council for
according my delegation the opportunity to share its
views on the agenda item "Peace and security in
Africa".

Before I address its substance, let me take this
opportunity also to welcome the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/327) and its reflection of
most of the important developments in our region and
some of the concerns of my country. Since Eritrea has
already submitted its views on the contents of the
report of the Secretary-General, I will limit my
intervention to three specific issues: Eritrea-Ethiopia,
Djibouti-Eritrea, and Somalia. Each issue is distinct
from the others, yet they are all linked by history and
geography. It goes without saying that such ties go far
beyond the countries mentioned.
3
The pacific settlement of disputes among nations
is one of the core principles on which the United
Nations was founded. In this connection, I wish to
commend the Secretary-General for pointing out the
need to resolve the Eritrea-Ethiopia border dispute,
which was peacefully, legally and technically
concluded by the Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary
Commission. However, the non-implementation of the
Commission's rulings continues to impede collective
and common approaches to some of the serious
problems of the region, not to mention the huge
sacrifices it demands of the peoples of Eritrea and
Ethiopia.

The Eritrea-Ethiopia issue is indeed centred on
the occupation of sovereign Eritrean territories by
Ethiopia, and it must be dealt with in accordance with
Article 51 of the United Nations Charter and other
relevant provisions of international law. This violation
needs the urgent attention of the Council and should
not be treated differently than others of a similar
nature. Let me state frankly that, for the past eight
years, the Security Council has declined to address
Ethiopia's defiance of the Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary
Commission's final and binding delimitation award of
13 April 2002 and the demarcation decision of
November 2007.

Ethiopia's refusal to honour its obligation and its
act of arming, training, hosting and financing Eritrean
armed elements with the objective of destabilizing
Eritrea should not be allowed to continue without a
reaction and action on the part of the Security Council.
Issues of peace and security must be addressed in a fair
and objective way, as the United Nations Charter
dictates. The Eritrea-Ethiopia issue was on the agenda
of the Security Council for many years, from 1998
until the Council decided to end the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea by
resolution 1827 (2008) of 30 July 2008.

Recalling that, under paragraph 6 of that
resolution, the Council decided to remain actively
seized of the matter, I wish to once again urge the
Security Council to discharge its responsibility in a
manner consistent with its mandate under the United
Nations Charter in order to ensure Ethiopia's
withdrawal of its troops from sovereign Eritrean
territories.

Somalia continues to be the most difficult crisis
to resolve in the African region, and that may continue
to be the case until the Somalis are allowed to rise to
the challenge of the day, which requires determination
and a shared vision of a united and stable Somalia. For
this to materialize, greater emphasis should be placed
on opening a political space that would allow all
Somali key actors to engage in meaningful and
peaceful discussions. Eritrea will continue to work
with the international community in seeking a
sustainable peace in Somalia. It was in this spirit that
Eritrea participated in the Istanbul Conference on
Somalia by accepting the gracious invitation extended
to it by the Government of Turkey and the United
Nations in order to end the suffering of the Somalis.

Eritrea believes that the efforts of the
international community should be guided by certain
principles. First, there can be no military solution to
the conflict in Somalia. Secondly, the only real
prospect for a lasting resolution of the Somali problem
lies in an inclusive political process. Thirdly, a lasting
solution for Somalia can only be the outcome of a
Somali-owned and Somali-driven process. As
demonstrated during the Istanbul Conference, Eritrea
shall engage officials of the Transitional Federal
Government and other key actors. Eritrea shall remain
part of a sustained and constructive effort to achieve
peace and stability in Somalia.

On Djibouti, as noted in the report of the
Secretary-General, the agreement signed by the
Governments of Eritrea and Djibouti under the
leadership of the Emir of Qatar, His Highness Sheikh
Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani, was a significant
development. Ever since the issue of Djibouti-Eritrea
was brought to the attention of the Security Council,
Eritrea has exercised restraint and opted for the matter
to be addressed in a calm and quiet manner, preferably
at the bilateral level or through a third party acceptable
to both sides, taking into account the sisterly
relationship of the two countries and the need to ensure
peace and security in the subregion. In this context,
Eritrea is pleased by the Qatari mediation to restore
and cultivate good-neighbourly relations with Djibouti
on the basis of full respect for each other's territorial
integrity and sovereignty.

Finally, notwithstanding resolution 1907 (2009),
which was imposed on Eritrea unjustly and selectively
by lumping unrelated issues together, my delegation
remains committed to regional peace and security.
Eritrea takes issues of peace and security very
seriously and it will not be discouraged or deterred
from participating in meaningful and fruitful
discussions that contribute concretely to sustainable
peace in its region.

In light of the steps taken by Eritrea, together
with Djibouti, under the auspices of Qatar's diplomatic
efforts, and of Eritrea's firm commitment to peace
efforts in Somalia, my delegation appeals to the
Security Council to lift the sanctions regime imposed
on Eritrea.

Let me also express my country's deep grief over
the recent bombing in Kampala, Uganda, which
claimed several innocent lives, including those of six
Eritreans, and many wounded.

