Mr. Ashikbayev (Kazakhstan): We thank
Mr. Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his detailed and objective update on
the situation in the Middle East. Let me focus on some
developments in the Middle East that have caused the
overall turmoil, not only in the region but also beyond,
with heightened and grave consequences for global
insecurity. These violent conflicts are also having an
increasingly serious impact on countries in Africa,
South, Central and South-East Asia and other regions.

Kazakhstan's position on the Middle East peace
process is very clear and remains unchanged. We
support the two-State solution and call for the early
resumption of negotiations, especially in the bilateral
format and without preconditions. That should be in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
the relevant Security Council resolutions and other
mechanisms and initiatives, such as the Quartet road
map, the Arab Peace Initiative, the Madrid principles
and the land-for-peace formula.

We support the rights of the Palestinian people to
self-determination and the creation of a free, sovereign
and independent State within the international borders
of 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital. It is necessary
to begin direct talks to reach agreement on pending
issues by giving them a so-called final status through
the signing of a basic treaty that provides security to
both Israel and Palestine.

Turning to Gaza, we are alarmed to see increased
Palestinian casualties. We reiterate that the Israeli
security forces must calibrate the use offorce, which must
be employed only as a last resort. We also underscore
our call on Palestinians to avoid provocations. All the
incidents in Gaza since March must be thoroughly
investigated and the perpetrators brought to justice. We
reiterate our call for all sides to refrain from any act
that could lead to further casualties and, in particular,
any measures that could place civilians in harm's way.
Kazakhstan believes that Gaza remains an integral part
of the two-State solution, in accordance with the relevant
United Nations resolutions. We hope that relieving the
humanitarian pressure in Gaza will reduce tensions and
the threat of escalation. Furthermore, we call on the
Palestinian Authority and Hamas to seriously engage
with Egypt on reconciliation and move forward with
implementing the Cairo agreement of 12 October 2017.

We are concerned about the temporary withdrawal
of international staff from Gaza, following a series of
worrying security incidents affecting its personnel,
who were harassed and prevented from carrying out
their duties. The challenging financial situation of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East is a cause for concern, in
particular the emergency appeal for the occupied
Palestinian territory. We endorse the Agency's calls
on the local authorities in Gaza to provide effective
protection to its personnel and facilities.

Regarding Syria, Kazakhstan believes that the
Astana process has great potential for directing
intra-Syrian talks towards long-term peace and
for supporting the Geneva process. We call on the
International Syria Support Group and other countries
to help to implement the measures stipulated by the
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex), the Vienna
statements and other texts.

With regard to Lebanon, with the parliamentary
elections held successfully in May, we hope that
the new Government can be formed soon with the
consolidation of the Constitution through a democratic
process. We realize that both of those are contingent on
developments in neighbouring Syria. I am pleased to
inform the Council that Kazakhstan's support to United
Nations peacekeeping operations is being expanded by
co-deploying, by the end of October, a well-trained
and highly qualified Kazakh contingent to the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon in partnership with
India. In addition, competent individual officers will
also be sent to Lebanon and the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization.

We congratulate Iraq on the election of its new
President, Mr. Barham Salih, and the appointment of
the new Prime Minister-designate, Mr. Adel Abdul
Mahdi. That will result in the next Government being
formed soon to help to bring about stability and peaceful
coexistence among the population and its minorities.

Turning to Yemen, we call for broad-based,
inclusive national dialogue in order to end hostilities,
which in turn will provide an opportunity to revive the
economy, resolve the humanitarian crisis and restore
public services. Only a political settlement will mitigate
the humanitarian and security challenges.

In conclusion, the region today and the entire
world are experiencing an uneasy confrontation among
countries, thus adding to mutual distrust and tension.
Peace and security, a world without terrorism and
nuclear weapons, sustainable development and human
rights for all are also noble goals for the Middle East,
which cannot be achieved without the joint efforts of
the international community.

Just over a week ago, Astana was host to the
sixth Congress of Leaders of World and Traditional
Religions. Once again leaders of different religious
denominations, including the Grand Imam of Al-Azhar
of Egypt, the Chief Sephardic and Ashkenazi Rabbis
of Israel, leaders of Shi'a Islam, Christianity and
Buddhism - all in all more than 80 delegations from 46
countries around the world - stressed the importance
of international cooperation to overcome intolerance,
discrimination, exclusion, tensions and conflicts based
on ethnic, religious, linguistic and cultural differences.

Kazakhstan is deeply committed to joining the
multilateral efforts to secure stability in this troubled
region which, at the same time, holds great promise
when peace will prevail.

