Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We would like to
express our sincere gratitude to Mr. Jeffrey Feltman for
his briefing to the Security Council. We would also like
to thank the Ambassador of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their statements.

Since joining the Council some 22 months ago,
we have seen very little progress in the Middle East
peace process, in particular the long-standing Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. One year has now since passed since
the Quartet committed to facilitating the resumption of
the much-awaited direct negotiations between Israel
and Palestine. That deadline has come and gone with
no significant progress towards the resumption of
talks. We welcome the ongoing quiet talks between the
parties, which serve as a confidence-building measure
that could help to soften their respective positions as
they seek a window of opportunity to resume direct
talks.

In the absence of any substantive progress in the
peace process, we once again question the value and the
credibility of the Quartet to which the United Nations
has outsourced its responsibility. In our assessment,
it has not proven its strategic worth. Therefore, let
us urgently review the mechanism and either bolster,
adjust or disband it. In reviewing the mechanism, we
could focus, inter alia, on its composition, mandate and
accountability.

There is an urgent need to focus on the plight
of the Palestinians. They expect a lot from us. They
deserve better, and we need not fail them. Political
and economic events elsewhere in the world should be
allowed to derail the peace process, which is by far a
better solution than ongoing confrontation and violence.

The prospects of peace and a two-State solution
are quickly diminishing. The recent reports of violence
by Israeli forces using missiles, air strikes, artillery
bombardment and drone missiles fired against
Palestinians in Gaza are worrying and should be
condemned in the strongest words possible. Equally, we
condemn the indiscriminate firing of rockets from Gaza
into southern Israel. In fact, the Security Council needs
to speak out against those heinous acts of violence.
Having said that, we must also point out that we are not
so naive as to think that such a condemnation would
quickly come out of the Council. We are well aware
of the circumstances that may hinder the Council from
doing that.

Israel continues its blockade of Gaza in blatant
defiance of international law with impunity, as the
Council has not been able to ensure compliance with its
own decisions, including resolution 1860 (2009). The
application by Israel of collective punishment on the
population of Gaza is a grave violation of international
human rights and humanitarian law, and should be
denounced by the Council. The latest report of the
United Nations country team in the occupied Palestinian
territory, entitled "Gaza in 2020 - A liveable place?",
states:

"The people of Gaza remain worse off than
they were in the 1990s, despite increases in real
gross domestic product per capita over the past
three years. Unemployment is high and affects
women and youth in particular The challenges
will only become more acute, particularly if the
current political status quo continues".

Given that reality, it is urgent that the blockade
be lifted. Concerned about the humanitarian plight
of the Palestinian people, South Africa has increased
its donation to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to
$2 million.

South Africa once again condemns the continued
settlement construction, which violates international
law and the resolutions of the Council. Those activities
remain the foremost stumbling block to the resumption
of the peace talks. Clearly, the continuation of the
settlement greatly jeopardizes the realization of the
two-State solution on the basis of the 4 June 1967
borders.

Israeli settlers continue their act of aggression
against the Palestinians almost on a daily basis. The
demolition of homes, mosques, churches and cemeteries
cannot be tolerated. The destruction of agricultural
projects, orchards and olive trees and setting fire to
farm produce, which is the means of survival for the
Palestinians, is deeply worrying. Recent evidence of
such acts are the destruction of olive saplings and grape
vines in the village of Al-Khader, near Bethlehem, and
the burning of olive trees in the village of Beitillu, near
Ramallah. Those acts of aggression take place with
impunity, as the Israeli Government seem unwilling to
hold the settlers accountable.

South Africa regrets that Israel has reneged on
its agreement to improve the living conditions of
Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails. We call on Israel
to improve their living conditions in order to end the
ensuing hunger strike. Palestinian prisoners have long
lived in appalling conditions in Israeli jails, and the
international community has not done much about their
plight. It is time that meaningful pressure be brought to
bear on the Israeli Government to fulfil its obligations
under international human rights and humanitarian
law with regard to all Palestinian political prisoners by
ensuring their safety, allowing access to them by family
members, and respecting their basic human rights.

The efforts of Egypt to reconcile the Palestinian
parties are indeed commendable. We encourage
the Palestinian parties to forge ahead with their
reconciliation efforts in order to consolidate the
Palestinian gains and to become a formidable and
coherent political force that will robustly advocate for
the permanent liberation of the people of Palestine.

South Africa supports Palestine's bid for United
Nations membership and the announcement in the
General Assembly a week ago by President Abbas of
his intention to seek non-member State observer status.
We call on the international community to provide
support to a permanent and sustainable political
solution, namely, the implementation of a two-State
solution providing for the establishment of a viable
Palestinian State, existing side by side in peace with
Israel within internationally recognized borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital.

South Africa is concerned, however, about the
critical financial challenges that the Palestinian
Authority faces. Those challenges have the potential
to reverse the gains made by Palestine in its
institution-building project and to render the country
unstable as service delivery declines. In that regard, we
call on Israel to urgently lift all restrictions to allow for
the development of the private sector, trade and other
economic activities that could stimulate economic
growth and address the Palestinian Authority's fiscal
sustainability in the short to medium term.

On the situation in Syria, South Africa remains
concerned about the ongoing violence in the country
and pledges its support to Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, Joint
Special Representative of the United Nations and the
League ofArab States to Syria. We call on all parties to
stop the violence that continues to claim civilian lives,
including those of women and children, and has led to
a sharp deterioration in Syria's relations with some of
its neighbours.

In conclusion, South Africa calls on the international
community, including the Security Council, to abandon
the business-as-usual attitude and to design new
intervention strategies regarding the Israeli-Palestinian
crisis. We have waited too long; the time for further
delays and double standards is a luxury that neither the
international community nor the people of Palestine
can afford. We need to act decisively and to do so now.

