Ms. Juul (Norway): I speak on behalf of the five
Nordic countries: Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden
and my own country, Norway.

We applaud the aspirations of the Silencing the
Guns by 2020 initiative and Agenda 2063 ofthe African
Union (AU) for a peaceful and secure Africa. We
commend the African Union and its member States for
their ambition and active engagement. It will enhance
our common future and collective security. Even though
the conflicts on the African continent have primarily
been intra-State conflicts, many have affected regional
peace and security.

It is crucial that regional and subregional
organizations and mechanisms, such as the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
Economic Community of West African States, continue
to improve the delivery of their mandates and that their
capacity is further increased. This should happen in
coordination with the African Union.

Ending armed conflict in Africa requires African
solutions. We stand ready to support African leadership
in this endeavour. We want a more transparent and
representative Security Council that better reflects
today's global realities. We support an increase in the
number of both permanent and non-permanent seats
for Africa in this Council. We welcome and support
the strengthened partnership between the AU and
the United Nations, not least between the AU Peace
and Security Council and the Security Council. This
includes securing the predictable and sustainable
funding of AU operations. The Nordic countries are
in favour of combining assessed contributions from
the United Nations with funding from the AU. We
also call for focused and accountable efforts to ensure
protection of human rights and respect for international
humanitarian law in all operations.

Achieving peace and stability in Africa requires
conflict prevention as well as mediation. We actively
support the implementation of the African Peace
and Security Architecture, including improved
capacity within the AU for preventive diplomacy,
mediation and peacebuilding. The Nordic countries
are long-term partners for development, addressing
root causes and multipliers of conflicts, building
stronger institutions through promotion of the African
Governance Architecture, mitigating climate change
and reducing inequality.

Protection of civilians is a fundamental concern in
all our humanitarian efforts. It is also is a key priority
of Norway's presidency of the Anti-Personnel Mine
Ban Treaty this year.

There can be no sustainable peace without women's
full and equal participation. Women's involvement in
peace efforts is key to enhancing trust, legitimacy and
credibility. Women's participation in preventing and
mediating conflicts makes solutions more effective
and sustainable. That is why the Nordic countries
are staunch supporters of resolution 1325 (2000) and
related resolutions on women and peace and security.
We will continue to work with such key partners as the
Special Envoy of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission on Women, Peace and Security and the
Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention and
Mediation, FemWise-Africa, to achieve full inclusion.
We will continue to be consistent partners, committed
to contributing to our collective security and our
common future.
