Mrs. Pucarinho (Portugal): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this open debate on the role of youth in
countering violent extremism and promoting peace, as
well as Mr. Neumann and Mr. Atran for their insightful
briefings.

The world currently has the largest generation
of young people in its history - over 1.2 billion,
representing one-fourth of the total population.
Youth has always been and will always be the driving
force of social, political and economic change, and
require respect for their fundamental freedoms and
rights, improved conditions for themselves and their
communities, opportunities to learn, decent work and
participation in making decisions that affect them.
Most of all, young people strive for feasible means to
ensure the achievement of their hopes and dreams.

Young people are agents, beneficiaries and victims
of major societal changes, and are often confronted by
the apparent paradox of seeking to be integrated into an
existing order or to serving as a force of transformation
of that same order. Those two aspects are, however, not
incompatible as long as young people can direct their
Vitality in directions leading to positive advancements
and beneficial changes to the whole of society. Young
people absorb and reflect social, economic and political
realities. The response to the nexus between youth
and Violent extremism requires an understanding of
the specific framework of their insertion, especially
when they live in societies under stress, along with the
complexities of the period of transition to adulthood.

In countries at war, young people are more prone
to recruitment into extremist groups, often by coercive
enforcement. As we have been able to establish more
recently, even in countries that are not involved in conflict
young people may be drawn into Violent extremism,
partly due to a sense ofmarginalization and/or social and
economic exclusion. Ultimately, the absence of kinship

and belonging, alienation and disfranchisement renders
young people more susceptible to Violent extremism.
In globalized societies, the increased use by terrorists
and their supporters of information and communication
technologies, in particular the Internet and social
networks, to incite, recruit, fund and eventually plan
terrorist acts, the dissemination of a narrative of glory
and sense of empowerment are only one computer click
away.

The international debate and fight against the
scourge of Violent extremism must go beyond the
paradigm of the war on terrorism and involve a
preventive policy model with a human rights-based
approach. Addressing the threat posed by extremist
non-State armed groups and terrorists to young people
requires a comprehensive and multidimensional
approach to its underlying factors, such as poor living
conditions, limited or unequal access to education,
lack of employment or sustainable livelihood, social
exclusion and inequality, weak political participation,
previous exposure to Violence, and a lack of public
safety and security.

On the other hand we must also engage in an effective
communication strategy to prevent radicalization and
the evolution from there to terrorism. That would
help in suppressing the flow of foreign fighters by
promoting a counter-narrative to extremism and its
fake promises of glory. The issue of youth and Violent
extremism cuts across mandates and across peace,
security and development agendas. The magnitude
of the problem requires it to be globally addressed,
a multidimensional and cross-cutting approach and
the involvement of States, international and regional
organizations, religious communities, civil society,
media representatives and, most importantly, young
people themselves.

Portugal has been a firm and consistent supporter of
the United Nations youth agenda, and strongly believes
that the World Programme of Action for Youth, adopted
20 years ago by consensus at the General Assembly,
continues to offer the apposite response to the serious
challenges faced today by the young population, as it
provides Member States with a blueprint containing
practical guidelines for action at the national and
for international support in improving the situation
of young people. Portugal also looks forward to the
Secretary-General's plan of action on countering
violent extremism.

If we are to protect youth against violent extremism,
we must make use of all instruments at our disposal, and
there is no greater tool than education. We consider it
crucial to promote a culture of peace, justice and human
development, ethnic and religious tolerance, and respect
for all religions and cultures by establishing suitable
and inclusive educational programmes. In that regard,
Portugal believes that platforms like the Alliance of
Civilizations can play a key role, including through
intra- and interfaith dialogue. The debate on promoting
tolerance and practical strategies to counter extremism
should deconstruct the false claim of terrorists and
extremists that religion is their guide, since their
ideologies and practices lack foundations and are even
contrary to the teachings of any major faith.

At the regional level, initiatives that foster mutual
understandingand intercultural dialogue and build
bridges among cultures, with a particular emphasis
on youth, should be most welcome. In that regard,
the North-South Centre of the Council of Europe
provides a good example of regional cooperation that
brings together youth from both hemispheres and
creates conditions to mitigate the appeal of terrorism
and violent extremism. Investing in good policies and
programmes to create enabling environments for youth
to prosper, fulfil their potential, enjoy their human
rights and engage as responsible social actors is key to a
successful collective strategy against the dissemination
of violent extremism.

