Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
We thank you for convening this open debate,
Mr. President. We have listened attentively to the
briefings by Ms. Karin Landgren, Executive Director
of Security Council Report, and Mr. James Cockayne,
Director of the Centre for Policy Research at United
Nations University.

The Security Council has a sacred duty to work
to maintain international peace and security. It is
the shared responsibility of all Council members
to improve its working methods and efficiency and
meet the expectations of the broader membership of
the United Nations. The Council's Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions has made useful efforts and achieved a
great deal of excellent progress to that end. China
commends Kuwait, as Chair of the Informal Working
Group, for facilitating updates to the note by the
President of the Security Council (S/2017/507). China
is very committed to improving the Council's working
methods and enhancing its authority and effectiveness
so that it can better discharge the duties mandated for it
by the Charter of the United Nations, and I would like
to share the following observations.

First, the Council should concentrate on its
priorities and discharge its duties in strict accordance
with its mandate. That means focusing on major issues
of great urgency that threaten international peace and
security, rather than intervening in domestic settings
that do not represent such threats. In recent years we
have noted an increase in the number of cross-cutting
items on the Council's agenda, some of which exceed
its mandates, and the Council must take the concerns
that Member States have expressed about this seriously.

Secondly, the Council should strive for as broad a
consensus as possible by holding in-depth consultations.
That requires that we preserve the Council's unity
while carrying out consultations patiently and based
on equity. Council members must increase their
communication and cooperation in order to fully
accommodate the concerns of all parties, and should
spare no effort to reach consensus-based decisions. Any
attempts to railroad draft texts through in the face of
stark differences of opinion must be discouraged with
a view to enhancing the authority and effectiveness of
the Council's actions.

Thirdly, the Council should continually improve
its working methods in order to ensure that it has
real impact. We have given long-standing support to
the Council in its efforts to step up communication
with all Member States, particularly host and troop-
and police-contributing countries. China advocates
providing newly elected non-permanent members with
greater access to make it easier for them to perform
their new duties. Penholderships should be allocated
according to the principle of equity so that every
member can have an opportunity to contribute to
resolving hotspot issues.

China has always consistently supported the
Council's efforts to improve its working methods and
efficiency. We support it in enhancing its interaction
with the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and other bodies to make its work more
transparent. During its presidency of the Council for
the month of November 2018, the Chinese delegation
sent reminders to Council members and briefers in
advance to ensure that meetings began punctually and
were focused on priority issues. We encouraged short,
concise interventions, thereby creating a culture of
results-oriented, efficient meetings. We also made a
point of improving our interaction with the Presidents
of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, the press and others, a move that was well
received by all of them.

Improving the Council's working methods is a
long-term process. We are ready to work with all the
parties concerned so that the Council can better fulfil
its mission, as mandated by the broader membership.

