Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I wish to thank
Special Representative Fall and Ms. Ghelani of
the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs for briefing the Council today
and for all that their respective teams are doing in what
is a complicated and difficult region, as they have both
set out.

Today, I will address issues that affect the region
as a whole: the situation in the Anglophone north-west
and south-west regions of Cameroon and the impact of
Boko Haram in the Lake Chad basin. I will not address
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi or the
Central African Republic, as we have the opportunity
to discuss these issues in other Council meetings.

The United Kingdom welcomes the holistic
approach that the Special Representative has taken,
both with this report (S/2018/1065) and to promote
peace and stability in Central Africa. An approach that
covers the political, humanitarian and human rights
situation and addresses root causes is crucial to conflict
prevention and resolution. We also welcome the work of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) to drive forward the women and peace and
security agenda under resolution 1325 (2000). We
encourage UNOCA to continue to focus on building the
capacity of regional organizations to enable delivery of
their early-warning mechanisms, conflict prevention
and peacebuilding initiatives.

I would like to focus now on a country of particular
concern in the region - that is, Cameroon. I should
start by saying that the United Kingdom recognizes
the many positive contributions Cameroon is making
to stability in the region, including its continued
commitment to the fight against Boko Haram and
the sanctuary that Cameroon offers to refugees from
Nigeria and the Central African Republic. However, we
are concerned by the reality of the rapidly deteriorating
security and humanitarian situation in the North-West
and South-West regions of Cameroon.

In particular, we are concerned about high levels
of displacement and take very seriously Ms. Ghelani's
warning that this is now one of the fastest growing
displacement crises in Africa. Reports of human
rights violations and abuses perpetrated by armed
separatist groups and Government forces - including
extrajudicial killings, other killings, abductions,
restrictions of movement and restrictions of access to
health and education, as described in the Secretary-
General's report - mean that we must always be alert to
the risk of the situation escalating, affecting the broader
peace and stability of the Central African region. We
have already seen over 30,000 Cameroonians flee into
Nigeria. If grievances are not addressed, tensions are
likely to increase further.

These concerns are not new. I raised them in
the Council's discussion in March, as did others (see S/PV.8212). Unfortunately, we have not seen the action
needed to address the situation and, since March, it has
deteriorated further. We welcome President Biya's recent
pledge to address the situation, but words alone will not
improve things. We strongly urge the Government of
Cameroon to take urgent action, including by actively
addressing the situation through inclusive dialogue
with the Anglophone leadership to address underlying
issues; undertaking confidence-building measures
in order to defuse tensions and build conditions for
dialogue, including the release of political detainees
and implementing the Government's own commitments
on decentralization and the recommendations of the
National Commission for the Promotion of Bilingualism
and Multiculturalism; and allowing full humanitarian
access and access for human rights monitors to all
parts of the country. I would also hope and expect
that our own Special Representative of the Secretary-
General will have access to wherever he wanted to
go. Accountability must also be ensured for all those
responsible for human rights violations and abuses. We
also call on the armed groups involved to cease their
attacks on civilians; to allow full humanitarian access
and access to human rights monitors; and to engage
with the Government on these issues.

The United Kingdom, for its part, is committed to
supporting Cameroon, and I am pleased to announce
today that the United Kingdom is contributing
$3.1 million to the United Nations response in the
Anglophone regions. That is equivalent to 20 per cent
of this year's flash appeal for the Anglophone crisis to
address immediate humanitarian and medical needs.
We strongly encourage other Member States to fund
this as an important part of the conflict prevention
effort. Preventing a crisis costs significantly less than
resolving one.

We have raised our concerns quietly and directly
with the Government so far, and we are committed to
working with the Government of Cameroon in every
way we can to help resolve this situation. But I fear
that, unless action is taken and the situation improves,
concern over the situation in Cameroon is likely to
increase among Security Council members and become
a more prominent part of our discussions.

In addition to Cameroon, I would like to raise
our ongoing concerns about the humanitarian and
security situation in the wider Lake Chad basin, which
continues to deteriorate. The United Kingdom has
played its part in providing humanitarian support, as
well as significant support particularly to assist the
Nigerian security forces in the fight against Boko
Haram and Islamic State in West Africa (ISWA), but
this matter needs the ongoing focus and support of the
international community.

The deteriorating security situation in north-
eastern Nigeria is of particular concern and one, I
note, that is shared by the Secretary-General. ISWA
has increased the frequency, range and sophistication
of its attacks and has attacked forward operating
military bases in north-eastern Nigeria. The execution
by ISWA of humanitarian workers like Saifura Khorsa
and Hauwa Liman, who were both abducted while
providing antenatal care to communities in desperate
need, is a telling reminder of the brutality of the
activities of ISWA.

Let me conclude by reiterating that we have
an opportunity to prevent further conflict and the
inevitable suffering and insecurity together. I hope we
can all act to do so.

