Mr. Lucas (Angola) (spoke in Spanish): We
wish you and the Spanish delegation every success,
Mr. President, in presiding over the Security Council
this month. You can rely on our full cooperation.
(spoke in English)

We congratulate the Russian delegation on its
successful presidency of the Security Council in the
month of September.

We are grateful to Ms. Sandra Honore for her
briefing on the situation in Haiti.

We wish to relay our heartfelt condolences to the
family of Lieutenant General Jose' Luiz Jaborandy,
Jr., former Force Commander of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). We
extend our condolences to all United Nations military
contingents and civilian personnel who benefited from
his leadership. We echo the words of the Secretary-
General in recognizing his leadership and dedication
to peace in Haiti.

The latest report of the Secretary-General on
MINUSTAH (S/2015/667) and President Michel Joseph
Martelly's address to the General Assembly at its
current session (see A/70/PV.22) instils in us a high
degree of confidence in the prospects of consolidating
democracy, the rule of law and development in Haiti.
Such confidence has been reflected in recent political
developments, particularly the success in the first round
of parliamentary elections, held in August, and the
climate of stability that the country currently enjoys.

We recognize and appreciate the excellent work
accomplished by the provisions of the Provisional
Electoral Council and by the national and international
observers, which, according to the Secretary-General's
report, progressively gained greater credibility by
demonstrating throughout the electoral process their
ability to comply with the electoral calendar despite
tight deadlines. Notwithstanding the occurrence of
some incidents, we are persuaded that the electoral
outcome created a climate conducive to the holding of a
second round, to take place on 25 October, and later to
the municipal and presidential elections.

We note with satisfaction the work of MINUSTAH
and the Haitian National Police, including their joint
exercises, the creation of a new rapid intervention force
with a capacity to intervene throughout the country, and
the elimination of buffer zones between communities
formerly controlled by criminal gangs. This effective
cooperation was crucial to the establishment of a
security climate conducive to the holding of elections,
while reducing the overall violence in the country. The
mandate for the renewal ofJustice Council members; the
appointment key administrative staff, as well as to the
administrative Department of Correction Services; and
the completion of the project to assess the performance
of Judges, as reflected in the Secretary-General's
report, are positive developments in the enforcement of
the rule of law and in the improvement of human rights
in the country.

Concerning humanitarian development issues, we
are closely following the bilateral efforts between Haiti
and the Dominican Republic regarding the repatriation
of Haitian refugees. We recognize the support of the
international community in ensuring that both countries
resume dialogue and take advantage of the current
encouraging situation to improve the management of
their common borders and strengthen cooperation in
order to create new opportunities for their citizens. In
that context, we commend the role of the Organization
of American States for expeditiously deploying a fact-
finding mission. We look forward to its outcomes and
recommendations.

Despite the efforts of the Haitian Government to
improve the living conditions of its citizens, we regret
the reduction of funds limiting the capacity of the United
Nations system and its partners to respond adequately
to development challenges facing the country, including
the cholera epidemic outbreak in 2015 that claimed
more than 175 lives. Recent United Nations awareness
and advocacy initiatives have been encouraging, since
concerted efforts and consistent funding may reduce
the incidence of the epidemic. Similarly, we commend
the technical assistance provided by the Global Fund
to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, as well as
the joint work of MINUSTAH, the United Nations
Development Programme and the Ministry of Health of
Haiti in order to improve the conditions of the Haitian
people.

We fully acknowledge the important role
MINUSTAH has been playing in Haiti since its
deployment in 2004. In order to keep the positive
momentum and gains achieved in recent years, we
support the Secretary-General's recommendation
for the extension of the MINUSTAH mandate until
15 October 2016 at the current strength in military
personnel and a review of the Mission's mandate.
Such an extension will, with the wider support of the
international community, ensure a peaceful political
transition through transparent, inclusive and credible
elections, which are vital factors for the consolidation of
democracy and peace in Haiti. In addition, the presence
of MINUSTAH for yet another year would consolidate
the successes achieved in key areas of governance, such
as the ability of municipal authorities to implement
administrative and financial procedures; recruit, train
and certify key personnel; and develop and standardize
tools and procedures for financial management and
transparency.

Finally, the extension of MINUSTAH's mandate
would ensure a climate of stability, encourage foreign
direct investment and, after several decades of
stagnation, allow the national economy to finally grow.
We are eager to witness in January and February 2016 the
empowerment of a new Parliament and a new President
and the establishment of an enabling environment for
the socioeconomic development of Haiti, which are
decisive indicators of the performance and success of
MINUSTAH after 11 years in the country.

