Mr. Tachie-Menson (Ghana): First of all, let me
join other members in thanking the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their detailed
reports. The professionalism, commitment and
resourcefulness of the Judges and Prosecutors and the
dedication to duty shown by the staff of the Tribunals
have contributed greatly to the unique role they are
playing in the development of international
humanitarian law.

Regarding the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, we are happy to note that, six
months after the last report of the President and
Prosecutor, steady progress has been made towards the
Tribunal's completion strategy. The completion
strategy of the Tribunal is crucial to its mission to end
impunity for the most serious crimes. It is for that
reason that we take note with great interest of the
procedural reforms and administrative arrangements
instituted to reduce the length of trials. That has led to
the expeditious disposal of cases - with the Appeals
Chamber handing down 114 decisions, which is a
record number in the circumstances. In addition, 107
proceedings against accused persons have been
completed since 2004.

We consider that the referral of cases to domestic
jurisdictions is one of the effective tools at the
Tribunal's disposal in the execution of its completion
strategy, as it reduces the Tribunal's workload. We also
consider referrals as a tool to build capacity in
domestic jurisdictions, in the sense that they enable
domestic courts to develop experience in handling
similarly complicated cases and contribute to
entrenching the rule of law.
We are impressed with the Tribunal's outreach
programme, which has had an influence on the level of
awareness of the importance of the work of the Court
in the various communities concerned.

On the question of cooperation, my delegation
wishes to express concern that four high-level fugitives
are still at large. We call on all members to collectively
or individually ensure the apprehension of the fugitives
for trial.

With regard to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, we are again impressed by the
gains made. The Tribunal has made an invaluable
contribution to the restoration of democracy and the
rule of law in the region by bringing to justice the
perpetrators of heinous crimes. The international
community therefore has an obligation to support the
Tribunal and its programmes, if the gains are to be
sustained.

We are impressed that, in spite of the difficult
circumstances under which it has to operate, 27
judgements have been delivered, involving 33 accused
persons. However, in view of the increasing workload,
we need to focus on how best to strengthen the Appeals
Chamber, which also handles cases for the ICTY. We
endorse the President's recommendation on the need to
take the necessary procedural steps to amend the
statute to enable the number of judges of the Appeals
Chamber to be increased.

On the issue of genocide, we wish to reiterate our
position that it would be desirable that the genocide
trials, which form the core of the Tribunal's mandate,
be disposed of within the timeframe for the completion
strategy.

We also commend the Tribunal's outreach
programme, which has had an impact on community-
based alternative justice mechanisms.

Finally, we wish to stress that there is a need for
flexibility in our consideration of the two Tribunals'
completion strategies. We believe that, following the
completion strategies' cut-off date, it should be
possible to have in place a residual mechanism to
handle cases of fugitives still at large, hear outstanding
appeals and handle administrative and archival matters.
The Security Council should consider all options on
how best to approach those residual issues.

