Mr. Chidyausiku (Zimbabwe): Let me begin by
reiterating the fact that Zimbabwe, a country at peace
with itself and its neighbours, poses absolutely no
threat to international peace and security and should
therefore not be a focus of this Council. In view of
that, the situation in Zimbabwe does not warrant the
adoption of a Security Council resolution under
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter.

Zimbabwe has been a victim of incessant
meddling through several measures, including declared
and undeclared economic sanctions, merely because
the Government embarked upon a process of equitable
distribution of land after the former colonial Power,
under a Labour Party Government, reneged on its
responsibilities stipulated in the Lancaster House
Agreement of 1979.

Unfortunately, because of the decision we took,
the British and their allies have used their media to
viciously portray Zimbabwe as a lawless, disorderly
and undemocratic country. We have been haunted in all
forums, including the Commonwealth, the Human
Rights Council, the General Assembly's Third
Committee and now the Security Council. The root
cause of the crisis, land ownership, is lost in the hype
about so-called human rights violations, a subject far
easier to sell for propaganda purposes. To us, the
ferocity of the anti-Zimbabwe campaign and today's
draft resolution underscore what is at stake - our
independence and future.

There have been adverse reports on inter-party
violence that have been overdramatized in the media to
justify the withdrawal of Mr. Tsvangirai from the
presidential run-off poll. It is important for the Council
also to note that only 10 per cent of the country may
have witnessed some form of violence, while 90 per
cent of the country has not been affected. The violence
that unfortunately took place does not justify the
submission of today's draft resolution before the
08-41947
Council. Let the international community not be
gullible about the political machinations of the
opposition in Zimbabwe. We would want to assure the
Council that the cases of those people who have
claimed to be victims of political violence will be
investigated by the Government of Zimbabwe. Already,
most of the culprits from both parties, including
criminal gangs, have appeared before the courts and
the law will take its course.

We are, however, astounded by some Western
Powers that are pushing to add more sanctions on
Zimbabwe following President Mugabe's re-election.
Zimbabwe has been under sanctions enshrined in the
United States' so-called Zimbabwe Democracy and
Economic Recovery Act of 2001, which instructs
international financial institutions to block aid to
Zimbabwe and to deny it debt cancellation. The
European Union-imposed sanctions of 2002 have
resulted in the economy's underperformance and have
brought much suffering to the people of Zimbabwe.

There has been an eight-year blockade of
balance-of-payments support and lines of credit, but
the world is made to believe that President Mugabe's
economic policies have precipitated the economic
problems. Recently, British Prime Minister Gordon
Brown stated that his Government was working on a
new sanctions regime to suffocate the ZANU-PF
Government and give birth to an MDC-T Government.
In addition, we have heard the European Union and the
United Kingdom promising millions to Zimbabwe in
the event that a Government of their choice is in place,
meaning that the current one is under sanction.

We reiterate that sanctions against Zimbabwe
have put the economy under siege and are affecting the
vulnerable groups and general population. Many of our
people are moving into neighbouring countries and
beyond in search of greener pastures. It is surprising
that this movement of our people to neighbouring
countries in search of economic opportunities due to
the impact of sanctions is what this Council is expected
to endorse as a threat to international peace and
security. That would be the first time that the
movement of a people seeking economic opportunities
elsewhere is used as a basis for a sanctions resolution
under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter.

By attempting to coerce Zimbabwe into a certain
form of behaviour through the force of sanctions and
isolation, the West has actually created an aggrieved
08-41947
nation. The current sanctions against Zimbabwe are
basically an expression of imperialist conquest and no
amount of propaganda or denial can ever wish that
away.

Political dialogue is ongoing between the
contending parties in Zimbabwe. In fact, in his
inauguration statement, President Mugabe reached out
to the opposition and said that it was now imperative
for the nation to look forward to the future with a sense
of unity. He called on all political parties in Zimbabwe
to enter into a comprehensive inter-party dialogue
sooner rather than later in order to enhance unity and
cooperation among Zimbabweans. He emphasized that
such dialogue was important in resolving the socio-
economic and political challenges currently prevailing
in Zimbabwe. The President emphasized that the
country has to move forward in unity, regardless of
diverse political affiliations, united by a sense of
common vision and destiny for a prosperous
Zimbabwe.

Zimbabwe fully welcomes the recent African
Union resolution and would like to assure members
that the people of Zimbabwe are willing to engage one
another in an effort to resolve their problems. It is
important to remember that reconciliation is not a new
concept to Zimbabwe. When Zimbabwe obtained its
independence in 1980, it was faced with a situation in
which it had to mould a nation out of two liberation
movements and the forces of Ian Smith's regime. As
the Council is well aware, it performed the task
extremely well and confounded many prophets of
doom. In view of that, we are confident that, with the
support of our neighbours, we will once again succeed
in reconciling Zimbabweans.

In line with his mandate from the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) and
supported by the African Union, President Mbeki was
in Zimbabwe over the weekend to consult with
President Mugabe and the political parties in order to
chart the way forward on the current situation in the
country. We are of the view that any other separate
initiatives on that matter would be counterproductive
and serve to undermine the role of SADC and President
Mbeki.

In view of the aforementioned, today's draft
resolution is a clear abuse of Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter as it seeks to impose sanctions on
Zimbabwe under the pretext that the country is now a
3
threat to international peace and security simply
because the elections held did not yield a result
favourable to the United Kingdom and its allies.
Adopting the draft resolution would set a dangerous
precedent and only serve to undermine the ongoing
dialogue between the political parties, risk worsening
the political and socio-economic situation in the
country and affect other countries in the region.

Furthermore, it is, in our opinion, not the role of
the Security Council to certify national elections of
Member States, all the more so where they do not
produce an outright winner. Zimbabweans have a right
to choose their own leaders.

It is also important to point out that the seven
African leaders who attended the G8 summit stated that
sanctions were not the way forward to resolve the
political impasse in the country. They expressed the
view that Zimbabwe is not a threat to regional peace
and security, and therefore the Security Council should
yield to the mediation efforts of both SADC and the
African Union. It follows therefore that the adoption of
the draft resolution would be in disregard of Africa's
own position.

Trying to impose a solution from outside would
be unfair to Zimbabweans, to SADC and to the African
Union. Zimbabwe's problems can be solved by
Africans working together. It is our fervent hope that
members of the Council will not support the draft
resolution, which seeks to involve the Security Council
in a purely bilateral dispute between Zimbabwe and the
United Kingdom.

