Mr. Nyamitwe (Burundi): At the outset, please
allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, and your
country, Angola, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March 2016. I wish
to express my appreciation for the timely scheduling of
this meeting on this theme. This region has suffered at
least three major wars over the past 25 years, leaving 3
to 5 million people dead and a huge number of refugees
as a result. We have to learn from the past. I also wish
to thank the Secretary-General, the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, the Secretary-
General's Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region and
the representative of the World Bank for their briefings.

We associate ourselves with the statement
to be delivered on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

My delegation appreciates the role of the Secretary-
General's Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region in
organizing the Great Lakes Private Sector Investment
Conference last February. We believe that creating
economic opportunities for youths is key to preventing
conflicts. I also wish to acknowledge the positive role
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region in the fight against the illegal exploitation of
natural resources and in addressing regional peace and
security issues.

Burundi is recovering from a massive, severe
campaign ofviolent regime change. All possible means
imaginable were used. All types of people were called
upon. The sound of that campaign reverberated in
places as far as this very building. Information was
manipulated, while all sorts of prophecies competed
in predicting the worst that could happen to Burundi.
The opposition was clearly given credence for all its
allegations. And at least one speaker today relayed
those at this meeting.
Our history does not start with the re-election of
President Pierre Nkurunziza. As a matter of fact, when
one assesses the situation that our country is fixing,
one cannot help but conclude that violence predates the
current term of the President. Burundi was attacked on
30 December 2014 by a group affiliated to an opposition
politicalparty, with aview to thwarting the 2015 electoral
process and installing a different political regime in
Burundi. The insurrection of April 2015 was organized
by the same ring of politicians, associated with groups
in the military and police, again, with the objective of
overthrowing the Government. The attempted coup of
13 May 2015 and the subsequent attacks on Burundi
from neighbouring Rwanda confirmed the overall
objective of regime change.

It goes without saying that information was
manipulated and some organizations formulated
policies with regard to my country based upon wrong
assessments, or in the absence of any assessment at
all. Groups that, in the name of exercising the right of
assembly, have been busy killing innocent civilians
over the past months are now coming out in the open.
Many are confessing their crimes, indicating who their
leaders are and which country trained them. One is met
with horror and shock as mass graves are found one
by one in the hotbeds of the insurrection. Yet not long
ago, especially in the wake of the simultaneous attack
against three strategic military barracks, Government
forces were accused, without any regard to either its
right of self-defence or the aggressive nature of the
assailants. Again, right here a short while ago, the
United Kingdom Minister decided to attack Burundi on
this issue without regard for those developments.

Burundi is not on the verge ofa precipice. Contrary
to the rhetoric that we have heard here, we believe that
the security situation is improving. The challenges of
today are met with the resolve of President Nkurunziza
and the Government to address them. On human rights,
for instance, our Government has made a number of
goodwill gestures, in full compliance with our own laws
and in respect of our sovereignty. A presidential decree
granting pardon to 2,000 prisoners was issued, and their
release is ongoing. That number includes youths who
had been arrested because of acts of violence against
the State and civilians over the recent months.

While we understand the legitimate concerns that
have been raised from time to time, we wish to take
this opportunity to invite our friends, near and far, to
understand our peculiar situation. As a sovereign State,
Burundi also has laws, which need to be enforced, as
befitting independent States. There is a country called
Burundi.

In view of all this, we find it difficult to understand
some of the decisions made against our country by
some partners, who have consistently proclaimed,
urbi et orbi, that they want peace and stability in
Burundi. Cutting aid to the Government does not fall
in the category of measures aimed at stabilizing the
country - to the contrary.

Our Government has offered cooperation in
monitoring the human rights situation on the ground.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights dispatched a team of three experts,
who concludedtheir mission last week. We are finalizing
the memorandum of understanding with the African
Union on monitoring the human rights situation. The
number of monitors has increased to 200 - 100 are in
charge of human rights and the other 100 are military
experts - and part of their mandate is to monitor the
border with Rwanda.

Criminal acts involving the mass graves, which for
months were not clear, are no longer mysteries. We now
know who killed the three Italian nuns two years ago
and who killed and hurriedly buried innocent civilians
in areas that were hitherto covered by remote-controlled
demonstrations. Criminals are now talking; they are
now indicating who gave them what and which country
in particular played which role.

With regard to the right of association, I wish to call
for caution, as some groups claim to speak in the name
of the human rights cause but are actually engaged in
efforts to promote one side of the conflict. Sometimes
they promote ethnic hatred, with all the consequences
that entails.

As for the freedom of the press, two radio stations
that had been shut down in the wake of the attempted
coup have been authorized to operate once again.
Today, 13 radio stations operate on the territory.
Only three are still shut down, for obvious reasons of
ongoing investigations.

With regard to dialogue, former President Mkapa of
Tanzania is already at work. Last Friday he concluded
his tour in the region by visiting Burundi, where he
was received by President Nkurunziza. We will soon
be informed of what is to be the way forward. It is our
View that the stability, security and territorial integrity
of the State should not be sacrificed at the altar of
inclusiveness. Resolution 2248 (2015) charts the way
forward. President Mkapa needs to be encouraged and
supported. Our Government trusts in his capacity to
conduct the dialogue process towards new horizons.
Meanwhile, the National Commission for Dialogue has
opened a debate on important matters pertaining to the
life of our nation. There can be no more inclusiveness
than that which brings on board all the citizens of the
country. Our Government asks for support.

The United Nations Great Lakes Regional Strategic
Framework was developed because the region was
plagued with negative forces and counted millions
of refugees. Both challenges compound the already
existing fragility of the region. The Framework was
established to address both issues by devising ways of
creating wealth for future generations while fostering
cooperation among concerned countries.

Obviously, acts of aggression are contrary to the
Charter ofthe United Nations and to the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region. Supporting
negative elements that disturb peace in neighbouring
countries is prohibited by existing relevant instruments.
Recruiting refugees for the sole purpose of destabilizing
Burundi is a clear violation of international law. The
civilian nature of refugee camps has to be respected. I
wish to thank the Secretary-General for emphasizing
that aspect.

All the acts I have described have been committed
by the Republic of Rwanda against Burundi. The Group
of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has reported those facts, joining other institutions and
States. The youths arrested in the course of their lost
battle of Kabarore, on 10 July 2015, have given extensive
details of their journey from the refugee camps to the
battlefield, through training camps inside Rwanda.
The security authorities of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo have also arrested some youths who, along
with deserters from our army and Rwandan nationals,
were using the eastern territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to launch their attacks against
their country.

Urgent action is needed. Burundi has already
turned to the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, which at least twice decided to deploy
to Rwanda the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism
with a fact-finding mandate. That mission is yet to
be authorized by Rwanda. On the other hand, our
Government will soon turn to international courts on
that very serious threat. The required Security Council
action is of course without prejudice to the right of the
State of Burundi to enter into a litigation process.
I wish to reiterate my country's full commitment
to, and support for, the United Nations Great Lakes
Regional Strategic Framework for 2016-2017. Burundi
offers its full cooperation for the fulfilment of the road
map therein proposed. It is our wish that point 5 of the
road map cater to the Burundian refugees, whose return
should be facilitated. We stand ready to work together
with the Office of the Secretary-General in that regard.

Finally, my delegation wishes to remind all our
partners that a selective assessment of the situation
in the region cannot help. Some talk today, in 2016,
in the way they used to refer to African countries in
the 1950s, giving orders to fully sovereign nations.
By all standards, it is absolutely unacceptable that
some appoint themselves as judges over our countries.
Burundi is not a colony of any country. As I said earlier,
our country vows cooperation, not subjugation. All the
African initiatives to address the situation in Burundi
should, in our view, be respected and encouraged. We
cannot accept undue interference in those initiatives.
The facilitator of the inter-Burundian dialogue is a
former President, who deserves respect, not injunctions
on how he should conduct his business.

