Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Egeland for his
briefing, which contained up-to-date information about
the state of affairs in the area of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. That task requires
systematic, coordinated measures at the international,
regional and national levels. An effective response by
the United Nations in cases of violence against
civilians during armed conflict can play a decisive role
in resolving crisis situations.

We fully share the thinking that Council decisions
must be accompanied by actions aimed at improving
the situation on the ground. It is important to ensure
the implementation of instruments adopted by the
Security Council on the protection of civilians,
including those highlighting the problems of women
and children. This requires an impartial, non-selective
approach by members of the Council when considering
such important issues, as well as strict observance of
the principles of United Nations humanitarian
activities.

Resolution 1674 (2006), adopted earlier this year,
represents a development in the efforts of the Security
Council in that area. It stresses the importance of
preventing armed conflict, which, in our view, is a
fundamental element. Key factors in that regard are
coordination and a strict division of labour, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and
other international legal instruments.

In the context of preventing violence, we attach
great importance to preventing impunity and to
bringing to justice all of those who are guilty of crimes
against civilians including sexual violence, as reflected
in several paragraphs of the resolution. In this
connection, we note the role of peacekeeping missions
in ensuring the protection of civilian populations from
violence. Here, we would also like to stress the role of
the International Criminal Court.

We profoundly regret that the deliberate targeting
of civilians is continuing. The resolution stresses that
such flagrant violations of international humanitarian
law deserve the most firmist condemnation, as do other
acts of violence, including, in particular, torture.

The use of regional and country approaches in
trying to resolve problems relating to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is justified. In that
connection, it is very important to take into account
economic, social, historical, religious, cultural and
other aspects specific to countries and regions, as well
as the heterogeneous nature of each conflict, its causes
and the ways of resolving it. Here, regional
organizations can play a special role.

Resolution 1612 (2005) on the protection of
children provided a new system-wide basis for the
implementation of that task. As a result, we have
launched a monitoring and reporting mechanism in that
area and the working group of the Security Council on
the subject has begun its work. We now need to make
sure that they work effectively. We must ensure the
objectivity and reliability of the information processed.
Resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security
is still relevant, in particular in terms of ensuring equal
opportunities for women to participate actively in all
efforts to maintain and promote peace and security and
in decision-making.
06-40877
In conclusion, I would like to say that
humanitarian work is a key component of a
comprehensive crisis-prevention and post-conflict
strategy. That work must be based of the norms set out
by the Charter of the United Nations and fundamental
humanitarian principles. To a great extent, its success
will depend upon how it is incorporated into the
international community's efforts to bring about
political resolutions to conflicts.

