Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): The draft resolution we
have before us, which my delegation fully supports, is not
just a simple renewal of Security Council resolutions 986
(1995) and 1111 (1997). While addressing specific
aspects, in order to allow for a smoother transition to the
next phase of its implementation, the draft represents a
decisive step in humanitarian operations in Iraq.

It clearly states the Council's intention to avoid
further deterioration of the humanitarian situation in that
country, and to find ways of meeting more efficiently and
adequately the priority humanitarian requirements of the
Iraqi people. My delegation strongly supports these
objectives, as well as an increase in the amount of oil
sales permitted. But it is not only a question of increasing
the amount of oil revenues. Funds are very important and
irreplaceable, but also important, in our view, is how best
they can be used to achieve the expected goals. It is
necessary to face the problems as a whole, understand
their complexity and find ways to solve the difficulties
rapidly, while always bearing in mind the objective we
want to pursue and the human dimension of the
programme.

 

As important as increasing the funds is achieving the
desired result: the alleviation of the suffering of the Iraqi
people. The serious nutrition and health problems clearly
identified in the Secretary-General's report are realities that
we must rapidly attack with adequate measures. These are
crucial aspects of the day-to-day life endured by the Iraqis.

The Council should address these questions, looking
particularly at the plight of the most vulnerable groups in
Iraq. The situation of children is especially distressing,
since they are suffering all the effects of the current
difficulties precisely when they most need all possible
support for their physical and psychological development.
Other vulnerable groups are also identified in the Secretary-
General's report, and we hope they will be helped by
specific programmes to meet their needs, designed in
cooperation with the Iraqi authorities.

Our intention is to state clearly that the task we face
is to work on solutions that could produce rapid, positive
results in these areas and for these groups. We can benefit
from the experience and knowledge of the United Nations
agencies in the field and other humanitarian actors. They
have expertise and can advise us on the best way to achieve
those results.

We have an important task ahead of us. We strongly
welcome the Secretary-General's initiatives to assist us in
the search for adequate solutions that could improve the
efficiency of this humanitarian operation. We look forward
very positively to the recommendations and conclusions he
will present at the end of January in his supplementary
report.

As Chairman of the Committee established by
resolution 661 (1990), I can assure the Council that all
Committee members will spare no effort to contribute to
improving the methods of work of the Committee in order
to expedite the approval of contracts and refine the overall
mechanism to ensure the supply of goods. This can only be
done in close coordination with the Secretariat and with the
political support of this Council.

We must not forget that no positive results can be
achieved without the cooperation of the Iraqi authorities.
The importance and urgency of attaining the
aforementioned objectives should not, in our View, be
subject to dispute or conflicting political opinions. We are
confident that we will gather the cooperation of all
interested parties.

