Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Ameerah Haq for presenting the
report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) (S/2010/522).

We thank Mrs. Sofia Borges, Permanent
Representative of Timor-Leste, for her substantive
statement. We are pleased with the stabilization of the
military and political situation in Timor-Leste and the
progress made in key areas of country's development.
Undeniable credit for this situation goes to the
leadership of Timor-Leste and of the United Nations
Mission. The political forces of Timor-Leste
demonstrate responsibility and commitment to the
process of national dialogue and reconciliation, based

on democratic principles. Further constructive
development of the political dialogue - and of the
political process in general - is paramount,
particularly in the context of the general elections
slated for 2012.

The relatively stable situation is making it
possible to address long-term challenges. Nevertheless,
the progress made needs to be further consolidated.
The institutions of governance of this young nation are
being formed, and there are still serious socioeconomic
problems. Given the range of problems, the country
continues to need the support of the international
community.

In that context, strengthening the national
security forces is paramount for the restoration of
stability and is an important indicator of how
independent the country is. We are closely following
the process of the transfer of responsibilities for the
maintenance of law and order from the United Nations
Mission to the police force of Timor-Leste. We note
that there has been considerable progress in this area.
However, consolidation of this progress requires the
intensification of efforts to build the capacities of the
police and to provide appropriate training and logistic
support. In that connection it is important that the
timetable for the transfer of responsibilities be based
on criteria worked out with the leadership of the
country as determined by the preparedness of the
police units, rather than on an artificially set schedule.

We support the intent of the Secretary-General to
begin discussions with the leadership of Timor-Leste
on issues related to the future activities of the United
Nations Mission and its parameters. We look forward
to further recommendations on reconfiguring the
United Nations presence, which will need to take into
account the realities in the country. Our position is that
the upcoming Security Council mission to Timor-Leste
in November will allow us to further gauge the
situation and gather first-hand information on the
specific challenges and needs of the country that are
relevant today.

In conclusion, we would like to express to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the entire staff of the Mission our gratitude for their
professionalism. Russia is providing assistance to the
United Nations activities in that country -
specifically, Russian police officers continue to serve
in the Mission.

