Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait): Before I begin my statement,
I would like to convey our heartfelt condolences to the
victims of Hurricane Florence. Our thoughts are with
their families and loved ones and with everyone in the
Carolinas as they weather that storm. I would also like
to convey our heartfelt condolences to, and solidarity
with, China and the Philippines.

(spoke in Arabic)

They are also facing similar devastating storms, which
demonstrate the dangers resulting from the phenomenon
of climate change.

At the outset, I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for having convened this meeting to discuss
the agenda item "Non-proliferation/Democratic
People's Republic of Korea". The request to hold today's
meeting reflects your ongoing efforts in the area of
denuclearization and your commitment to ridding the
Korean peninsula from nuclear weapons. We would also
like to thank Ms. DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for her briefing.

The issues ofnon-proliferation and weapons ofmass
destruction have always posed the gravest challenge
to the responsibility that we bear for maintaining
international peace and security. We are only nine days
away from returning to the Chamber for a high-level
meeting to consider the threat of those weapons to our
world today, as well as to discuss the main tools at the
disposal of the United Nations to limit such weapons
and ensure international peace and security.

A few months ago, the situation on the Korean
peninsula represented the most tense and dangerous
situation with regard to peace and security. We all were
concerned about the risk of military confrontation.
However, those fears began gradually to subside
after sincere diplomatic initiatives that resulted in
the convening of two presidential summits in just two
months. We look forward to the success of the summit
between the two Koreas that will be held tomorrow. The
resulting understandings in that regard were supported
by Kuwait and the entire international community in
order to achieve the desired goal of denuclearization of
the Korean peninsula and achieving peace between the
two Koreas.

It is also important to underline that those
diplomatic initiatives followed a series of resolutions
adopted by the Security Council. The coherence and
unity ofthe Security Council have played a leading role
in condemning all the illegal programmes and activities
by North Korea, whether they be nuclear programmes
or others related to ballistic missiles. It is critical that
the Security Council remains united, firm and resolute
in fully implementing all its relevant resolutions.
My country's delegation followed closely over the
past two months the discussions in the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006). I would like to first underline our appreciation
for the great efforts made by our colleague the Permanent
Representative of the Netherlands, Ambassador Karel
van Oosterom, Chair of the Committee, and then to
underline our appreciation for the professionalism of the
members ofhis Mission. We underscore the concerns of
all parties involved, but the discussions that took place
in that Committee over the past two weeks and what
ensued were unfortunate and a source of concern for
my country with regard to the possibility that the unity
of the Council on this matter could be lost.

We call upon all parties to transcend our differences
and assume our responsibilities for maintaining
international peace and security. Adherence to the
rules of procedure and safeguarding the independence
of reports issued by groups of experts are matters that
govern our work in the Organization. As Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, I am well aware that there is an
urgent need to modify many of the matters affecting
the work of the Council. However, until we are able
to introduce the modifications that will improve the
performance and work of the Council, we have no other
choice but to work through the established procedures.

