Mr. Inderfurth (United States of America): We
may be at a turning point in the bloody conflict that has
ravaged the former Yugoslavia.

With the signing today in Geneva of a joint
statement and agreed basic principles, the basis is laid for
an end to the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Even
though the threat of war is still with us, these events have
opened a narrow and precarious window of opportunity
for peace. The international community has worked hard
to broker a durable and just negotiated settlement.
Indeed, lives have been lost in this effort, including
recently those of three dedicated and talented American
diplomats, three peacemakers: Robert Frasure, Joseph
Kruzel and Nelson Drew. I would like to think - indeed,
I believe - that their tragic loss has contributed to the
movement towards peace that was in evidence today in
Geneva.

This effort to broker a settlement has not, of course,
been the work of one nation or even of a few nations, but
has included the efforts of the United Nations, the
International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia, the
Contact Group, the European Union and the Organization
of the Islamic Conference. We must all continue our
efforts to assist the parties who have the ultimate
responsibility to decide in favour of peace.

The United States agrees with all other members of
this Council that the conflict in the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina cannot be settled on the battlefield. This
is why we have placed so much emphasis on, and
invested so much effort in, finding a diplomatic solution.
We believe that to defend the possibility of a diplomatic
solution the international community had no choice but to
respond forcefully to the Bosnian Serb attack on the
Sarajevo marketplace. The Bosnian Serb leadership knew
the decisions of the Security Council which declared
Sarajevo a safe area. They had been warned that
continued attacks on the safe areas would lead to a strong
response. They chose to ignore that warning, and now
must accept the consequences of their actions.

 

The United Nations has made it clear that it is not at
war with the Bosnian Serbs; nor is the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) at war with the Bosnian
Serbs. The current round of air strikes will end as soon as
the Bosnian Serb leadership complies with the conditions
put to them by General Janvier, which call for nothing
more than the implementation of Security Council
resolutions. While my Government regrets that air strikes
are necessary, we fully support the action taken by the
United Nations and NATO to deter further attacks on the
safe areas. Those actions are fully authorized by existing
Security Council resolutions. It was the Security Council
which created the safe areas, and it was the Council that
gave the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR)
the mandate to deter attacks against them. We believe that
the Council must now support UNPROFOR'S efforts to
implement that mandate.

Today's events are a hopeful indication that the parties
will choose reconciliation and reconstruction. My
Government recognizes that much work remains to be done
in translating the Geneva principles agreed today into a
viable peace settlement. We will do our part. We call on
the parties to do theirs.

As President Clinton stated today in Washington,

"All the parties will need to display the same
flexibility and statesmanship that made today's
agreement possible if we are to turn away from war
and achieve our common goal of a durable peace in
the Balkans."

