Mr. Sin Son Ho (Democratic People's Republic of Korea): Let me begin by joining with previous
speakers in expressing deep condolences and sympathy
to the victims of the powerful earthquake in Turkey
and their families. My delegation also takes this
opportunity to express deep condolences for the
passing of His Royal Highness Crown Prince Sultan
Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud, Deputy Prime Minister,
Minister of Defence and Aviation, and Inspector
General of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Furthermore,
my delegation has received the sad news from the
Pakistani Mission on the passing of Nusrat Bhutto,
former Chairperson of the Pakistan's People Party,
Government minister and the mother of former Prime
Minister Benazir Bhutto. In this regard, my delegation
expresses its deep condolences.

It is my honour to speak before the Security
Council with regard to the Palestinian question. I wish
to thank the Nigerian delegation for its timely
convening of this important meeting of the Security
Council. Allow me also to associate myself with the
statement made by Ambassador Maged Abdelaziz,
Permanent Representative of the Arab Republic of
Egypt, on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

More than 60 years have passed since the
international community launched its efforts to settle
the Palestinian and Middle East problem, which was
set off by Israeli occupation of the Arab territories in
1948. Nevertheless, no significant progress has yet
been made. The Palestinian lands and other Arab
territories remain under Israel's military occupation.
The use of armed force, the expansion of settlements
and the blockade of the Gaza Strip continue to prevail.
This reality urgently requires the international
community to find the earliest possible solution to the
Middle East problem. The core element here is the
solution of the Palestinian question as soon as possible.
There can be no lasting peace and security in the
Middle East and the Arab world unless the Palestine
issue is completely resolved.
On 23 September, during the general debate of
the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session,
President Abbas of Palestine formally submitted an
application for the full membership of Palestine in the
United Nations. This event of great significance
received overwhelming support from the international
community.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea
officially recognized Palestine as a State in 1988, and
since then has extended unreserved support and
solidarity to the struggle of the Palestinian people to
establish an independent State with East Jerusalem as
its capital. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea
is fully committed to standing firmly with the
Palestinian and Arab people in their struggle for their
just cause until their final victory and the problem's
final solution. The Democratic People's Republic of
Korea unreservedly supports Palestine's full
membership of the United Nations.

