Mr. Motoc (Romania): I should like to begin by
joining others in thanking Under-Secretary-General Jan
Egeland for his excellent and very to-the-point briefing
on the topic at hand.

Romania associates itself with the statement to be
made shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Luxembourg on behalf of the European Union.

I wish to sincerely commend the French
presidency of the Security Council for having
convened this public debate. Indeed, it is a disturbing
reality of our times that, in spite of the efforts
undertaken in past years by various components of the
international community - including, prominently, the
United Nations - in many parts of the world, a great
number of civilians - in particular women and
children, but also other vulnerable groups - are still
targeted at various stages of armed conflict by
combatants. Hence, the Council needs to put even more
emphasis on its work on this topic, which cuts across a
broad range of conflicts, by changing the ways in
which we address it, in keeping with the changing
nature of the conflicts that confront us today.

It is striking evidence of the changing nature of
conflict that civilians are no longer just incidental
victims of armed conflict, but have increasingly
become targets and even tools in warfare. Women and
children are especially vulnerable in situations of
armed conflict. Moreover, there are situations in which
United Nations civilian personnel on the ground and
humanitarian workers operating out of either
intergovernmental or non-governmental organizations
have also become direct targets, because of the tactics
frequently resorted to by factions engaged in conflict.
The acknowledgement of new threats to civilian
populations, including their most vulnerable members,
must be followed by the steady formulation of proper
responses and solutions - often on a case-by-case
basis - to protect them.
The first priorities are strengthening the
applicable legal framework and ensuring its proper
implementation. The Security Council must use all
appropriate means to appeal to the parties in armed
conflicts to comply fully with the provisions of the
United Nations Charter and with the norms and
principles of international law, in particular international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law. Further, it is
imperative that States live up to their commitments and act
decisively to curb impunity by prosecuting those
responsible for genocide, war crimes, crimes against
humanity and violations of humanitarian law.

There is an increased need to protect certain
categories of civilians who may face particular threats.
Thus, we must devise specific measures and a broad
strategy aimed at preventing and addressing cases of
sexual and gender-based violence and at bringing to
justice the perpetrators of such serious violations of
human rights. We must make sure that the security and
freedom of movement of humanitarian personnel are
guaranteed by all parties engaged in an armed conflict,
while acknowledging that it is important that everyone
involved in humanitarian activities respect the
principles of neutrality, impartiality, humanity and
independence.

Prevention is always more effective than
protection. In that respect, we need to adopt a more
strategic approach that would address in a
comprehensive manner the root causes of armed
conflict. The international community must provide the
necessary incentives for the parties to engage in a
meaningful process of political reconciliation. The
establishment and consolidation of democratic
institutions, respect for human rights and the rule of
law are material conditions for sustainable
development in societies headed towards or emerging
from armed conflict.

The regional dimension of most armed conflicts
is obvious today. Romania has always been a strong
supporter of the United Nations working in concert
with regional organizations in taking up this agenda so
that no conflict, no crisis and no tension is left
unaddressed and to improve the chances that such
conflicts, crises and tensions will be dealt with in a
more timely and comprehensive manner. Regional
action under United Nations supervision can also make
a difference by removing the more deep-seated factors
that currently trigger violence against civilians.

It is essential to improve and upgrade the
capacity of the United Nations system so that it can
respond appropriately to contemporary manifestations
of conflict. That entails, for instance, the provision of
better-tailored mandates and more adequate resources
to peacekeeping missions to enable them to pursue
their goals - including the protection of civilians in
armed conflict - more effectively.

Concerns related to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict in general, and of children and women
in particular, have become matters that the Security
Council now considers, in a dedicated manner and on a
regular basis, as important components of its agenda.
In our view, that should also be the case with regard to
the relationship between the United Nations and
regional organizations in conflict situations.

What matters most is that these steps forward not
be diluted by formalistic or ritualistic approaches. It is
difficult for us to understand, for example, why the
Council cannot extend its protection to children - or
to other vulnerable population groups, for that matter -
when they face violence and adversity, regardless of the
status we ascribe to the conflict affecting them. After
all, children and other vulnerable groups have no
choice between living in peace and being exposed to
conflict, violence or hardship; likewise, they cannot
choose between conflict situations that are addressed
by the United Nations and those that are never on - or
quietly slip off - our radar screens.

Perhaps it would be appropriate for me to
conclude on a note of optimism. At a time of change
for the Organization, Member States should be able to
keep the plight of civilians in armed conflict at the top
of the agenda aimed at improving and consolidating
existing United Nations bodies in order to rid the world
of the scourge of war and the pathology of
infringements of human rights.

