Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I deeply regret that
the previous speaker showed more outrage against the
United States than against the Al-Assad regime, which
on Tuesday deliberately dropped chemical weapons
killing over 100 men, women and children in the most
barbaric fashion.

More than three and a half years ago, the Syrian
regime made a pledge: it would join the 189 countries
that had already signed the Chemical Weapons
Convention and it would reveal the full extent of its
chemical arsenal and proceed with its full destruction.
What spurred this pledge was a chemical-weapon attack,
that time in Ghouta. Hundreds, if not thousands, were
dead. There were images of men, women and children
choking, foaming at the mouth, clearly asphyxiated.

Three and a half years after a historically heinous
war crime was committed, after the stockpiles were
supposed to be destroyed, Al-Assad on Tuesday showed
us yet again, this time in Idlib, that he is capable of
redefining horror. Tuesday's attack must be fully
investigated. Impunity cannot be the norm. We will
continue to work with our partners on the Security
Council to ensure that those responsible are brought
to justice.

The United Kingdom supports the United States air
strike on the Al-Shayrat air field because war crimes
have consequences, and the greatest war criminal
of all, Bashar Al-Assad, has now been put on notice.
The United States strike was a proportionate response
to unspeakable acts that gave rise to overwhelming
humanitarian distress. It was also a strong effort to save
lives by ensuring that such acts never happen again.

The resolution that we adopted three and a half
years ago (resolution 2118 (2013)) provided a framework
for the destruction of chemical weapons in Syria. It
had a clear author and a clear guarantor. At the time,
Russia assured us that Al-Assad would fully declare his
chemical arsenal and would continue to cooperate with
international inspectors. Perhaps that was the assurance
that Russia received from Al-Assad, and perhaps Russia
has now learned the hard lesson that backing a war
criminal comes with its own consequence: humiliation.

Russia has barely any support from the Arab world
for its policy of propping up the criminal Al-Assad
regime as it carries out chemical-weapon attacks
against its own people. Russia needs to listen to the
Security Council, listen to the Arab world, listen to
the rest of the international community, and above all
listen to the Syrian people. Their message is clear: end
Al-Assad's bombs, his use of chemical weapons, his
torture dungeons.

Instead, Russia has given Al-Assad everything he
could dream of. Without Russia's seven vetoes in the
Security Council defying the views of other members of
the Council, Al-Assad would now have faced sanctions
and justice. And what did Russia get for its unconditional
support? Al-Assad ignores Russia's requests for him to
obey a ceasefire. Al-Assad defies Russia's request for
him not to gas his own people. Al-Assad thumbs his nose
at Russia's calls for him to join a peace process. Russia
sits in this Chamber today humiliated by its failure to
bring to heel a puppet dictator entirely propped up by
Russia itself and Hizbullah and Iran.

Let me bust some myths about our private
negotiations over the past couple of days. We were
seeking agreement on a draft resolution. I repeatedly
asked the delegation of the Russian Federation why
it could not support our draft resolution. If it wanted
the truth, why did it not want the United Nations and
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons to have access to the places, the people and
the information that they needed? What possible excuse
does the Russian Federation have for keeping that
information from the investigators? What reason does
it have to continue to protect Al-Assad? Ifit cared about
the Charter of the United Nations, why would it protect
a dictator who has repeatedly violated international
law? I received no answer.

There is another way for Russia. I appeal to the
Russian Federation to abandon its failed strategy;
join the rest of the Council in its call for justice and
accountability; end its protection ofa war criminal; and
join all of us in supporting a genuine political process
that would lead to a transition to a more legitimate and
representative Government.

The only reason that we are here and these
discussions are taking place at this moment in the
Chamber is because the international community
has not done enough. Things can be different. The
difference that can and must be made lies in a political
solution. That will not happen if we take the familiar
route that has plagued the Council, the countries of the
region and the millions of Syrians looking for a future.
The new road must see the Syrian regime engage. The
new road must have Russia and Iran not only at the
table but negotiating in good faith.

We are here within the walls of an Organization
that was built to guide us when peace seems out of
reach. The United Nations has a vital role in convening
those negotiations and helping the parties resolve their
disputes. The agenda has been set, and it is long overdue
that a proper negotiation happens on a future Syrian-
led transition that meets the legitimate aspirations of
the Syrian people. Al-Assad must engage in serious
discussion about that future to meet the aspirations of
all Syrians.

In conclusion, the United Kingdom supports the
United States action as an appropriate response to
a heinous act by a brutal and uncaring dictator who
believes that gassing his people is somehow a legitimate
step on the road to stability. It is now time to get a
genuine political process back up and running. Those
discussions may be long and difficult, but the people
of Syria deserve nothing less. If we want to ensure that
the shocking images that have haunted us this week are
truly confined to history, then that is our duty.

