Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): I did not intend to
be the first speaker, but I find that unless one raises
one's hand very quickly one may end up being the last
speaker. Madam President, I would like to join you in
thanking Judge Jorda, Judge Pillay and Ms. Del Ponte
for the briefings they gave us. The work being done by
them is extremely important. I think that when the
history of the twentieth and twenty-first centuries is
written, it will be said that these Criminal Tribunals
have in a sense advanced the frontiers of human
civilization, because they have ended the culture of
impunity and have shown clearly that mankind will no
longer accept the kind of barbaric behaviour that we
saw in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia.

Given the importance of the work being done by
these two Criminal Tribunals, we need to reflect deeply
and think hard on how they are progressing. I am
pleased that when Judge Jorda spoke to us earlier, he
began his remarks by saying that he would like to
engage in in-depth reflection, and he asked some
questions along those lines. In that spirit, I will
comment on the presentations and raise some
questions.

The only problem we have is that the Council
itself, unfortunately, is not a very reflective institution.
It tends to function on autopilot most of the time.
When the Council makes a decision, it is as if the train
has left the station and nothing can be done to change
its direction. However, if the Council does not pass
judgement on the progress of these two Tribunals, it
will be the court of public opinion that will pass
judgement on their work. The Council, in turn, will
have to be accountable to the court of public opinion.
Unfortunately, if one wanders along the corridors
of the United Nations listening to discussions on these
two Criminal Tribunals, there seems to be some
bewilderment about the rate of progress that has been
made so far. To be fair, I think all of the speakers have
addressed this question. Indeed, Judge Pillay said a
question asked by many members of the Council is
why the output of judgements is so low: a single
judgement this year and just eight in the four years
since the trials started in 1997. In the case of the ICTY,
I believe there have been 26 convictions and five
acquittals in the same period.

If one looks at this output, the obvious question is
whether these Criminal Tribunals will succeed in
accomplishing the main goal for which they have been
set up - to deter future genocidal leaders and send
them a message that if they repeat what has been done
in Rwanda or the former Yugoslavia, they will be
hauled to court. For this goal to be accomplished,
justice has to be swift and effective. If this is the result
after five, six or seven years, the deterrent impact will
be lost.

Fortunately, we have some good news.
Undoubtedly, the detention and trial of Milosevic are
having a dramatic impact on the whole world. This
single arrest has made a louder statement than those
made by many of the other arrests. But it must be
accompanied by other, equally important arrests; I
believe references have been made to General Mladic
and Mr. Karadzic and other high-level figures, and also
to those regarding whom the Security Council has
passed resolutions.

The more important point I intended to make here
is the following. If this is the record of what the
Criminal Tribunals have achieved after four to five
years, what will be the long-term impact with regard to
future decisions by the international community? When
we consider such places as Sierra Leone, Cambodia or
East Timor, where, as we know, atrocities have been
committed, if any suggestion is made that we set up
similar criminal tribunals, the international community
walks away. It says we have already had two very
expensive criminal tribunals; can we afford to have
equally expensive criminal tribunals in other areas? So
the impact of the work of these Tribunals is not limited
to Yugoslavia or Rwanda; it extends to other areas in
which we have seen similar massacres, similar barbaric
actions.

I hope this point will be borne in mind as the
work of the Criminal Tribunals progresses, because a
great deal of attention will be paid to the expenses
incurred by these courts. Here, I am pleased to see that
efforts are already being made. I understand that
seminars are being held in Dublin, Ascot and other
places to look at how the courts are progressing. I hope
that as a result of the lessons learned, administrative
costs will be reduced and people will see that a
significant change is taking place in how the courts are
administered.

At the same time, I think a very important
suggestion was made by Judge Jorda when he said that
with the improvement of the domestic courts in the
former Yugoslavia, we should also consider whether
some cases can be transferred to the local courts so that
the Criminal Tribunals can focus on the major cases. I
understand that this will be a bit more difficult in
Rwanda, but, as Ms. Del Ponte pointed out, as part of
the traditional gachacha process in Rwanda, 11,000
local jurisdictions involving 260,000 local judges will
be will be dealing over a three-year period with
120,000 perpetrators of the genocide.

One useful indicator as to the effectiveness of our
work is a comparison of the costs of these local
processes, which are doing very important work, with
the costs of the International Criminal Tribunal of
Rwanda to see how we can ensure a fairer allocation of
resources, with the goal being to punish all those who
were responsible for the genocide in Rwanda.

Finally, I think we may not have time in this
meeting to reflect on what we have or have not learned
as a result of today's discussions. However, in the
wrap-up session at the end of the month, I will suggest
some questions that we should address when we meet
again next year to review the progress of these
Criminal Tribunals.

