Mr. Nesho (Albania): Allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your convening of this meeting of the
Security Council.

We are present here at this emergency meeting of
the Security Council to discuss the damage caused to the
Chinese Embassy as a result of bombardments in
Belgrade against criminal and brutal regime that is killing,
massacring, torturing, raping and is committing genocide
against the entire Albanian population of Kosovo. The
Albanian Government expressed its regrets and
condolences to the Chinese Government over this
unfortunate incident, believing that that friendly country,
China, has always shown maturity and wisdom on the
basis of its foreign policy principles and that it is among
the countries promoting progress and development in the
world.

Albania would not like for this incident to be used
as a pushing force for not punishing the medieval regime
in Belgrade and for allowing the wave of crime and
conflict to spread in Europe and throughout the world. On
the contrary, we must make every effort to prevent our
civilization from facing a tragic new history.

After 300,000 people were massacred in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and millions were deported, we face today
the same reality of 1 million Albanians being deported in
the same way - homeless, hopeless and massacred
together with their children. The only hope for all of them
is the action of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) to stop their catastrophe and to ensure their safe
return to their land.

The incident that happened yesterday may not
respect or be in conformity with international agreements,
but those agreements have been completely and constantly
violated by the Belgrade regime through crimes against
humanity, ethnic cleansing and genocide against the
Albanians of Kosovo and other peoples, about whose
suffering not much has been said in this debate by some
of the speakers.

Any action that serves peace, stability and security
in the world and saves humanity cannot be limited, but
should be supported by all the countries that respect
human values and democracy. We believe that NATO,
through its action, is trying to preserve the same

 

principles as those of the United Nations Charter, including
the maintenance of peace and international security.

