Mrs. Albright (United States of America): The
Council has convened today to examine, among a wider
group of Member States, the Secretary-General's fifteenth
progress report on the United Nations Observer Mission
in Liberia (UNOMIL) and to discuss the future of Liberia.

I have just returned from a trip to Africa, including
Liberia. President Clinton asked me to travel to Liberia to
assess the situation there. Although I have not yet
reported to President Clinton, I would like to express
today some observations and reflections on the situation
in Liberia.

 

First, I share many of the views set forth in the
Secretary-General's report. The peace process is indeed at
a critical juncture, as he wrote,

"and the full support of all concerned will be required
to overcome the recent setbacks." (5/1996/47, para. 42)

The Secretary-General' s observations about maintaining the
cease-fire, the need for more resources to help the
Economic Community of West African States Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG) to fulfil its responsibilities effectively
and the need to reintegrate ex-combatants into civilian
society: these are all central to finding a lasting peace in
Liberia.

I must admit that I am both sceptical and hopeful
about the prospects for peace in Liberia. On the one hand,
Liberia appears to have hit rock-bottom. On the other,
members of the Council of State seem to be working well
together and all claim, at least, to be committed to peace.
Thus far, they are acting as though they are committed. Yet
it is unclear whether their commitment will be sustained as
disarmament begins and elections approach. It is also not
certain that each of the main warlords can maintain control
of his fighters. Some who feel left out of the process may
be capable of undoing it.

The conflict in Liberia is among the elites, not among
the people. They are fighting not over ideology, but over
personal power. That creates both risks and opportunities.
The risks are that the drive for personal power, particularly
among the extremists, can lead to further carnage and
destruction with little interest in preserving or building
society. There is opportunity in the fact that it is difficult to
sustain a power struggle on personal ambition alone.
Ultimately, the people want peace in the absence of any
ideological goal. The people of Liberia want peace.

In my meeting with the Council of State, I stressed the
importance of the Council's role in keeping the peace
process on track so that ECOMOG deployment -
temporarily interrupted by fighting and attacks on civilians
in various areas by the ULIMO followers of General
Johnson - can recommence. I said that, although the
United States and the international community remain
committed to helping Liberia, only Liberians can make the
peace. I told them that the international community is
losing its patience. The Abuja peace process that took so
long to negotiate is now at a critical state of
implementation. The moderates will have to perform better
if they are to sustain the support of the international
community.

The members of the Council of State offered many
reasons for the delay in disarmament and demobilization.
Everyone but themselves was to blame. My message to
them was simple: "No more excuses." There can be no
further delay in implementing the most important
provisions of the Abuja Agreement, namely, those on
disarmament and demobilization. As far as the United
States is concerned, the word "delay" can no longer be
part of the vocabulary of the Council of State. Otherwise,
the fragile peace that does exist will collapse.
Overall, at least for now, I found ECOMOG
performing well. It seems to be playing a neutral and
constructive role now, as opposed to at various times in
the past. Despite ECOMOG's losses in recent weeks, I
was impressed by General Inienger's resolve to move
forward in the face of adversity. We believe that
ECOMOG deserves our support, both for the important
role it is now playing in Liberia and because it represents
an important precedent in regional peace-keeping that
should be encouraged.

We believe, however, that ECOMOG'S force
structure should be more diversified among member
States of the region if it is to constitute an authentic
regional peace-keeping operation worthy of international
support. We also believe that ECOMOG must enter into
a status-of-forces agreement with the Liberian National
Transitional Government so that ECOMOG's operations
in Liberia are appropriately regulated.

As the Secretary-General points out in his report, the
international community

"must provide the resources necessary to enable
ECOMOG to fulfil its responsibilities effectively".
(ibid.)

In recent years, the United States has provided $420
million in humanitarian assistance and $60 million in
support of ECOMOG's peace-keeping activities. On 27
October, the United States pledged an additional $75
million to support peace, including $10 million to assist
ECOMOG logistically. The vehicles ECOMOG
desperately needs to facilitate disarmament and
demobilization have begun to arrive under the $10 million
pledge and we hope to provide a total of up to 100
vehicles within the near future. In fact, the deployment of
ECOMOG troops in December was made possible only

 

by using trucks leased by my Government through the
assistance of the United Nations. However, I said while in
Monrovia that the United States has no intention of
allowing its logistical support to be squandered by a failure
of political will - by any side - to achieve the objectives
of the Abuja Agreement.

The United States calls upon all other Member States
to provide similar assistance as quickly as possible. The
assistance is needed not only for ECOMOG itself, but also
to provide a more attractive demobilization package for
ex-combatants.

I also want to acknowledge the courageous work of
the observers of UNOMIL. Their role is vital to the success
of the Abuja Agreement. When I was in Monrovia, I
stressed to UNOMIL officers that, in addition to monitoring
the disengagement and disarmament of the combatants and
assisting in their demobilization, we expect UNOMIL to
follow through urgently on its other responsibilities,
including investigating and reporting to the Secretary-
General on human rights abuses, on any major violations of
international humanitarian law and on humanitarian
assistance activities. We have noted with some concern the
criticism from the non-governmental organization
community that UNOMIL is failing to meet these
responsibilities. We have no doubt that it is a tough
assignment. I told the Council of State that no party should
hinder UNOMIL's important tasks.

We are studying the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the UNOMIL mandate should be
extended for a period of four months, until 31 May, with an
interim report by the end of March. We believe that it is
very important for the Council to continue to review the
situation, and to continue to assess the progress of
disarmament and demobilization, and of the preparations for
elections, which are scheduled for August under the Abuja
Agreement.

There is a simplistic way of looking at Liberia: that it
is a land of chaos. I do not subscribe to that View. It is true
that Monrovia is a devastated city, yet I witnessed a daily
life on the streets that embodies a discipline and hope that
the leaders of the country must nurture and live up to.

I delivered a blunt message to the Liberian leadership
in Monrovia: the era of the child soldier in Liberia must
come to an end immediately. It is an outrage by any
standard of civilization that children under the age of 15,
numbering between 4,000 and 6,000, are toting automatic
weapons, slaughtering innocent civilians and ignoring the
rule of law. They have no identity other than through the
weapon they carry. We believe that the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) can play a key role in
rehabilitating these abused children, and I pressed that
point during my discussions in Monrovia. The United
States stands ready to assist UNICEF and the people of
Liberia in order to save these children.

Many United Nations relief agencies are actively
assisting the people of Liberia. I visited with many of
their administrators. We can all be proud of their
contribution in the face of adversity. But the international
community needs to go one step further and consider how
demobilized soldiers and other citizens can be put back to
work rebuilding their country's infrastructure which, to
put it bluntly, is trashed. The international community
should have ready the technical assistance and other
resources to help rehabilitate Liberia through technical
and financial assistance for doable, targeted public works
projects.

Implementing the Abuja Agreement is Liberia's best
chance to achieve peace and justice. The violence must
end, and the hatred must subside. Liberia's leaders must
find the political will, and its people the political courage,
to succeed in building a new, peaceful and prosperous
Liberia.

