Mr. Raum (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Allow
me to congratulate Poland on organizing this public
debate on the situation of children in armed conflict,
as well as all speakers for their valuable work and
testimonies. I would also like to thank Belgium for the
work that it is doing at the head of the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
Luxembourg fully endorses the statements delivered on
behalf of the European Union and the Group of Friends
of Children and Armed Conflict.

The Secretary-General's annual report (S/2019/509)
on the situation ofchildren in armed conflict begins with
the sad observation that violations were significantly
higher in 2018 than in the previous year. They represent
the unacceptable daily plight of more than 24,000
children living in conflict situations. Thousands of
children are held in detention centres for suspected
foreign terrorist fighters in conditions inappropriate
to their age and vulnerability. All children recovering
from a traumatic environment must be considered first
and foremost as victims. Their psychosocial care and
rehabilitation must be a priority.

In two days, we will mark the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1882 (2009), which added the
killing and maiming of children to the serious crimes
recognized by the normative framework on children in
armed conflict. The Secretary-General points out in his
report that more than 12,000 children were killed or
maimed in 2018. The resolution has therefore clearly
not lost any of its relevance.

In a number of modern conflicts, the denial of
access for humanitarian aid to civilian populations is
used as a weapon of war. Children are the first victims.
That is a serious violation of international humanitarian
law. The use and targeting of schools and hospitals for
military purposes expose children to many dangers,
such as bombing, abduction and recruitment by armed
groups. The stalemate in many conflicts means that
generations of children see their access to education
severely curtailed. That is tragic for the individuals and
whole societies are thereby threatened with stagnation.

Schools continue to be the target of deliberate
attacks. School facilities are regularly looted or
diverted from their primary function to be used for
military purposes. We urge all Member States that have
not yet done so to endorse the Safe Schools Declaration.
We call on all States to take the necessary measures
to implement resolution 2143 (2014) and thereby
deter the parties to a conflict from using schools for
military purposes.

In 2018, the Secretary-General documented a very
high number of cases of sexual abuse against girls and
boys in the various ongoing conflicts, knowing that the
recorded figures are certainly much lower than the real
figures given that a large proportion of such crimes
are never reported. Impunity in the face of sexual
violence encourages its recurrence. Where national
justice cannot perform the task, the perpetrators of
and those responsible for such crimes must be tried by
international criminal justice and, ultimately, by the
International Criminal Court.

For the children and armed conflict mandate to
be effective in combating impunity, it is essential
to provide resources that are allotted to establishing
reliable mechanisms for data collection, unimpeded
access and security for monitoring staff.

On 20 November, we will mark the thirtieth
anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. It is therefore crucial that we act today to protect
the rights of children and ensure that those rights
are enjoyed.

