Mr. Erdos (Hungary) (interpretation from French):
Hungary welcomes this discussion in the Security Council

 

of the activities undertaken by the international community
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and of the tasks that remain to
be completed in order to implement the decisions made in
the framework of the Dayton Agreement. We note in
particular the importance of the conclusions of the Peace
Implementation Conference held recently in Bonn, which
emphasized building on the achievements of the peace
process, continuing international assistance and
strengthening the role of the High Representative.

Hungary, which neighbours the Balkan region, is
profoundly attached to a political settlement of the issues of
conflict on the territory of the former Yugoslavia. It is also
attached to the preservation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and of all the
other successor States of the former Yugoslavia. We reject
vigorously the proposals that have been made here and
there suggesting the dismemberment of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a solution. It is not necessary to dwell at
length on the possible negative repercussions of such
destructive ideas.

We welcome the determination of the international
community to proceed on the track of carrying out the
civilian aspects of the Dayton Agreement. We also
welcome the intention of the Security Council to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina for an additional period. Hungary joined the
peacekeeping operations in 1996 by opening a base for the
Stabilization Force at Taszar, in the south of our country,
and by sending a logistical contingent of 500 people, which
last year was able to rebuild 20 bridges used for railway
and surface transportation. That contingent also began
demining operations in the immediate vicinity of those
bridges. This year the contingent is continuing its
reconstruction activities without interruption, in order to
facilitate the resumption of normal economic and
commercial life in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Likewise, my country has participated in the
operations of the International Police Task Force since it
was created and at the beginning of this year again
increased the number of its personnel serving in the Force.

Nevertheless, we note that the efforts made to improve
the economic situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina could be
accelerated further if the necessary economic legislation
were implemented and if the functioning of the central
bodies were made more effective. It is harmful for Bosnia
and Herzegovina that the laws which are absolutely
necessary for the recovery of the country's economic life
have not yet been approved by the competent bodies
because of differences in views, a lack of confidence or
the absence of political will.

Nor can we fail to underscore the importance of
reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, for if peace and
political and economic stability are not accompanied by
the corresponding psychological changes in the citizenry,
the situation in the country will remain fragile and the
results of the peace process may be reversed.
Administering justice, monitoring respect for human
rights - including the rights of minorities - education,
spreading the values of democracy and a free press could
contribute greatly to this process.

We note with satisfaction the arrest in Bosnia and
Herzegovina of two more individuals accused of war
crimes. We encourage the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and the Stabilization Force to continue
their activities in this sphere, while emphasizing the need
to secure the full cooperation of all three communities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and of neighbouring countries
as well, so that the number of those brought to justice
will accurately reflect the true dimensions of the atrocities
committed there. It is time we remembered the bitter
lessons of this bloody century of ours, recalling the words
spoken at Nuremberg in November 1945 by the United
States judge Robert Jackson:

(spoke in English)

"The wrongs which we seek to condemn and
punish have been so calculated, so malignant and so
devastating that civilization cannot tolerate their
being ignored, because it cannot survive their being
repeated".

(spoke in French)

One might well wonder how many times the horrors
of the past will have to be repeated. The parties in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the immediate neighbours of that
country must also shoulder their share of the
responsibility in efforts to reject vigorously aggressive
nationalist, racist and ethnocentric theories - theories
that in fact contributed greatly to kindling the inferno in
the former Yugoslavia.

We are convinced that in spite of the difficulties and
the passage of time, the international community must not
turn away from the developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and must maintain its civilian and military
presence in that country. Here, Hungary welcomes

 

yesterday's announcement on this matter by the President
of the United States, and is prepared to continue to
contribute to reaching the objectives of the Dayton
Agreement. The Security Council can play an enormous
role in the uniquely complex endeavour aimed at restoring
normalcy to this sorely tried country.

