Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Darfur issue has attracted world attention and
remains one of the top items on the Security Council's
agenda. The African Union, at the request of the
Government of the Sudan, has invested enormous
energy and efforts in helping to stabilize the situation
in Darfur. China has, all along, highly commended and
supported its endeavours. In accordance with a
decision by the African Union, after consulting with
the Government of National Unity and upon its
agreement, the United Nations will take over from the
African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) in
carrying out the mission in the region.
06-48422
China is in favour of replacing AMIS with a
United Nations operation. It is a good idea and realistic
option, and it will help to improve the situation on the
ground and serve the interests of all parties. We
therefore support, with the consent of the Government
of National Unity, the deployment of United Nations
troops in Darfur as soon as is feasible. We also agree
that the Security Council needed to take the necessary
decision at an early date, so as to effectively fulfil the
responsibilities set forth in the United Nations Charter
and assist the Government of National Unity in
achieving comprehensive and lasting peace and
stability in Darfur.

The Darfur Peace Agreement, concluded in May
this year, has created a new dynamic and offers new
opportunities for resolving the Darfur issue.
Unfortunately, the positive momentum was not fully
exploited by the parties involved, and the provisions of
the Agreement have failed to yield peace. More
alarming, the security situation and the humanitarian
conditions in Darfur have further deteriorated. AMIS,
as the only peacekeeping force in Darfur, has an
arduous task and is confronted with enormous
difficulties. To ease the situation on the ground and the
difficulties faced by AMIS, Secretary-General Kofi
Annan has put forward some very good
recommendations. The League of Arab States has also
expressed its willingness to finance AMIS. The
Security Council should attach great importance to
that, give full play to the initiatives of various regional
organizations, and help AMIS to overcome difficulties
so that it will be able to continue the peacekeeping
mission and ease tension in Darfur in a timely and
effective manner.

To address and resolve the Darfur crisis, we need
to bear in mind both a sense of urgency and a sober
assessment of the complexity of the issue. We need to
demonstrate both firm determination and the
corresponding patience, as well as to take an effective
approach. The transition of AMIS to a United Nations
mission is a good and pragmatic approach. Such a
transition can be possible and the mission can be
deployed only when the consent of the Government of
National Unity is obtained. That is the understanding
of the African Union, as well as the decision of the
Security Council.

In order to allay each other's doubts and deepen
mutual understanding, Secretary-General Kofi Annan
has proposed holding a direct high-level dialogue at the

Security Council among the parties involved. That is a
constructive initiative endorsed by all Council
members. As the hope is to conduct such a dialogue in
early September, we deemed it unnecessary for the
Council to put the draft resolution to the vote in a
hurry. Postponing the vote would have helped to create
a good atmosphere among the stakeholders, as well as
an environment conducive to the smooth
implementation of the resolution.

We felt that, under the current circumstances, the
push for adoption by the Council would not contribute
to the smooth implementation of the resolution nor
help to stop further deterioration of the situation in
Darfur. On the contrary, it may trigger further
misunderstanding and confrontation on the part of the
country directly involved. It may even cause problems
with regard to implementing the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement process. That is obviously not the outcome
intended by the Council in adopting the resolution.

Having participated in all the consultation
processes in a constructive manner, China agreed upon
or accepted almost all the contents of the resolution.
However, we have consistently urged the sponsors to
clearly include "with the consent of the Government of
National Unity" in the text of the resolution, which is a
fixed and standardized phrase utilized by the Council
when deploying United Nations missions. We also
urged the sponsors to carefully reconsider the timing of
the vote. Regrettably, they failed to earnestly heed
China's sincere efforts. Due to our principled
reservations on the timing of the vote and on the text
itself, China could not but abstain from the voting.

I wish to reiterate that China continues firmly to
support the peace process in the Sudan, as well as the
relevant decisions of the African Union in that regard.
We call upon all major parties to act in good faith,
show mutual respect and understanding, continue to
conduct frank dialogue, increase mutual trust and
reinforce cooperation, so as to create good political
conditions for the final settlement of the Darfur issue.
China is willing and ready to make its own effort to
that end.

