Mr. Winid (Poland): Poland aligns itself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union.
I would like to add a few comments in my national
capacity.

Let me first thank you, Sir, for convening this
timely debate. It gives us an opportunity to reflect on
the key issue of the radicalization of youth, which is
an increasingly challenging aspect of the fight against
extremism. The importance of this topic was also
underlined during this week's high-level meeting of the
General Assembly.

I would like to highlight the role, sometimes heroic
and very tragic, of young individuals in our collective
struggle against terrorism. Just this Monday, Captain
Ahmed Salam and two other brave Egyptian soldiers
paid the ultimate price when they were killed by a
roadside bomb in the Sinai peninsula. Their devoted
patriotism did not differentiate among faith, tribal or
ethnic backgrounds. We pay tribute to their heroism.
Responsibility for this act of terror was claimed by an
affiliate of the so-called Islamic State. Thiat terrorist
organization also runs the most effective campaign
of attracting youth from all over the world. Fighting
this evil propaganda is a key element of a successful
campaign against extremism.

The United Nations Global Counterterrorism
Strategy identifies in its first pillar the socioeconomic
conditions that are conducive to the spread of
radicalism. Unemployment, the lack of education and
prospects for personal development are among the
major factors that make young people so vulnerable to
propaganda. Terrorists offer them an illusion of security
and power. As is rightly stated in the concept paper
(S/2015/231, annex) prepared by Jordan for this debate,
violent extremist groups very effectively exploit these
weaknesses. Their cynical propaganda takes advantage
of youth's economic struggle and idealism. These
problems do not, however, affect only young people
in certain regions of the world, struck by conflict and
poverty. This ideology is also advancing in rich and
developed countries. The issue of social exclusion is a
worldwide challenge that has to be better addressed by
the international community.

To adequately address the challenge posed by
radicalism, we need to apply holistic approach.
The focus has to be put on education and promoting
interreligious dialogue to counter the idea of the so-
called clash of civilizations that is being spread by
extremists and greatly contributes to the radicalization
of youth. Bearing in mind that one should not establish
a false direct link between Islam and radicalism,
we welcome the very wise voice of Sheikh Ahmed
al-Tayeb, Grand Imam of Cairo's Al-Azhar University.
Let me recall his February speech in Mecca, in which
he condemned terrorism, linking extremism to "bad
interpretations" of the Koran and the life of the Prophet
Muhammad.

Another very good example of a valuable contribution
to countering radicalism is the comprehensive strategy
implemented by Morocco. It includes, among other
things, an innovative programme of training for imams,
which begun in 2008 and was recently reinvigorated
by the opening of the Mohammed VI Institute for
the Training of Imams in Rabat. Instead of military
operations to mitigate the effects of extremism,
Morocco has identified a powerful tool to address its
root causes.

A long-term, concerted effort is needed to limit
the involvement of youth in violent extremism.
There is a direct link between security, development
and education. This is why I echo the call for better
coordination among all United Nations bodies active
in the field of countering terrorism. At the same time,
the Security Council and the international community
have to do more to bring an end to the conflicts that
destabilize the Middle East and fuel radicalism. No
country is safe from the threat of extremism. It is in
our common interest to effectively respond to this
challenge.

