Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French):
Allow me to say how honoured we are today to be holding
our proceedings under the presidency of the Foreign
Minister of a country that has become a symbol of the
quest for peaceful settlement of disputes and
implementation of the rule of law.

We are entering the third year of the implementation
of the Peace Agreement in Bosnia and Herzegovina and are
also at the mid-point of the period of consolidation.

The consolidation plan adopted last year for a two-
year period rested on a new rationale - that of a
conditional, contractual approach to the peace process. That
approach can be summed up easily: there is no credible
alternative to the Peace Agreement, and the responsibility
for implementing it falls primarily to the elected authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

A simple comparison with the situation that prevailed
only two years ago in Bosnia and Herzegovina fortunately
enables us to see that there has been progress. The military
side of the Peace Agreement has been largely completed. A
considerable effort of reconstruction has been undertaken in
the country, and for this we must congratulate the
authorities.

The European Union is honoured to be far and away
the largest contributor of aid towards the restoration of the
economic structures of Bosnia and Herzegovina. However,
it is to be recalled that continued international assistance is
linked to respect by the parties for the obligations in the
Agreement. That conditionality must be perceived in a
positive light: those who cooperate in good faith in the
implementation of the Agreement, whether at the central,
local or municipal level, can be assured of our support.

This huge effort, however, cannot lead to a lasting
restoration of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
unless necessary reforms are undertaken and the central
institutions are able to function in a more satisfactory
manner. Respect for the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and implementation of the physical and
political conditions needed for the operation of those
institutions at all levels are priorities.

Beyond these difficulties that relate to the functioning
of central institutions, progress still needs to be made in
many areas - strengthening of democratization, developing
of pluralistic media, reform of the police and the judiciary
and in the struggle against corruption. France underscores
also the importance of improving the situation with regard
to respect for human rights and the return of refugees and
displaced persons. To date, of more than 2 million
refugees, fewer than 200,000 have been able to go home.

France unequivocally urges that all indicted persons
be handed over to the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. There again, the primary
responsibility for handing over the war criminals being
sought falls to the parties. France, which was involved in
the creation of the Tribunal from the beginning, France,
whose army paid a heavy price in the service of peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina - 70 dead, 700 wounded -
was deeply shocked by recent statements in the press
questioning the conduct of States participating in the
Stabilization Force (SFOR) in the implementation of the
Tribunal's decisions. As recently confirmed by the
Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), all of the allies and the countries
participating in the Stabilization Force, indeed, share the
same resolve to ensure that indicted war criminals are
brought to justice. The arrest in central Bosnia of two
indicted persons, which has just taken place, is an
example. This is a joint effort under a single chain of
command and in accordance with identical rules of
engagement. The policy followed in this domain is
decided by the NATO Council. The French officers
present in Bosnia and Herzegovina today, like others,
follow those directives set jointly by the allies and strictly
apply the rules of engagement laid down by NATO for
the apprehension of persons sought by the Tribunal.

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina calls for
additional efforts by all, especially by the parties. Only
one year remains before the completion of the
consolidation plan and only a few months before the
holding of the next general election. Thus, this is an
urgent matter. The Peace Implementation Conference that
has just taken place in Bonn clearly indicated the path to
be followed.

The High Representative charged with the
implementation of the civilian aspects of the Peace
Agreements will continue to play a central role in
coordination in this respect. The tireless efforts of
Mr. Carl Bildt and those today of Mr. Carlos Westendorp
have greatly contributed to the successes achieved in
Bosnia and Herzegovina since the end of hostilities. The
High Representative may rely in this regard on the
constant support of my Government.

The United Nations is also making an important
contribution to stabilizing the situation in Bosnia and

 

Herzegovina and the region through the work of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina and, in
particular, of the International Police Task Force. France in
that regard thanks the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Coordinator of United Nations
Operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Eide, for his
efforts in support of the peace process, and we today assure
Ms. Elisabeth Rehn, who is to succeed him, of our full
support.

