Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for having organized this very
important debate. I also wish to congratulate the
delegation of Germany on its excellent conduct of the
presidency of the Security Council during this month
of July.

Kyrgyzstan welcomes the tenth annual report of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(A/65/250). We also thank Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict,
and Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive Director of UNICEF,
for their comprehensive presentations.

Let me reaffirm Kyrgyzstan's strong
commitment, as a member and Vice-President of the
Human Rights Council, to the promotion of human
rights and the safeguarding of international
humanitarian law.

Kyrgyzstan appreciates the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's report. We believe
that the strict implementation of those
recommendations will greatly change the lives of many
children for the better. We consider it necessary to
adopt more stringent measures to bring to justice and
end impunity for criminal gangs and individuals who
have continuously committed serious violations against
children and have been listed in the report of the
Secretary-General for the past five years.

Kyrgyzstan welcomes the signing of the new
plans of action mentioned in the report. We join the
call of the Secretary-General to the parties involved in
the recruitment, use, killing and maiming of children,
as well as in committing sexual violence against them,
to finalize plans of actions as soon as possible, in close
cooperation with the relevant United Nations country
task forces.

The timely implementation of action plans and
the taking of appropriate measures in respect to those
parties not complying with those documents are crucial
to preventing criminal acts against children. We believe
that the Security Council should develop concrete
measures to track progress in the implementation of
such plans.

Kyrgyzstan fully shares the concern of the
Secretary-General and the Security Council with regard
to the growing trend in attacks against schools and
hospitals. We strongly condemn those acts and urge all
parties to respect international humanitarian law.

Kyrgyzstan believes that the issue of child
protection should be consistently reflected in peace
processes and peace agreements. The special needs of
children must be taken into account in post-conflict
planning and in the funding of peacebuilding activities.

Protecting children in armed conflict should
always be part of a wider conflict prevention strategy
and of response measures aimed at overcoming hunger
and poverty and promoting socio-economic
development. In this regard, we would like to
emphasize the pivotal role of the United Nations in
ensuring the successful implementation of such a
strategy. It is important to maintain a close and
effective cooperation between the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, as well as peacekeeping missions, political
missions, UNICEF, the United Nations Development
Programme and other agencies.

Since 1994, Kyrgyzstan has been a party to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its two
Optional Protocols, as well as other international legal
instruments aimed at protecting civilians in armed
conflict. I would like to confirm that Kyrgyzstan will
continue to strictly follow the commitments assumed
under these international instruments.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that
Kyrgyzstan supports resolution 1998 (2011), adopted
today by the Security Council, and believes that it will
make an effective contribution to the protection of
children in armed conflict.

