Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): I should like to express
my appreciation to you, Madam President, for
convening this open meeting of the Council on this
important subject. I should also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his detailed and comprehensive
report on the implementation of resolution 1261 (1999)
on children in armed conflict. I am grateful to the
Deputy Secretary-General for her introductory remarks.
Let me also take this opportunity to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu, and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF), Ms. Carol Bellamy, for the very
important contributions they just made. I commend
them for their strong, unshakeable commitment in the
cause of the protection of children.

It is indeed encouraging to note that considerable
progress has been made since we last debated this issue
in August last year. However, more needs to be done
and it is imperative for the Council to continue to keep
the issue of children in armed conflict on its agenda. It
has clearly acknowledged, in several of its resolutions
and presidential statements, that the harmful impact of
conflict on children has grave implications, not only in
the context of peace and security, but also for socio-
economic development.

Nearly all of today's conflicts occur within
national boundaries, and 90 per cent of the victims are
civilians, mainly children and women. We cannot deny
the fact that, in many conflict situations, the most
vulnerable members of the population, particularly
children and women, are often targeted with impunity;
and because children have been conscripted to bear
arms, they end up killing other children as well. This
is, indeed, a sad state of affairs. The proliferation of
small arms and light weapons has not only exacerbated
conflicts around the world, but has also led to the
increased use of children as combatants and pawns in
the deadly game of warfare played and orchestrated by
adults. Many of these child soldiers either fall as early
casualties of the conflict or survive to become cool and
callous instruments of warfare.

In "The State of the World's Children 2000",
UNICEF reports that in the decade since the adoption
of the Convention on the Rights of the Child more than
2 million children have been killed, and more than
6 million injured or disabled, in armed conflicts.
Hundreds of thousands of children have been forced to
take part in armed conflict as soldiers, sex slaves or
porters, clearly in violation of their human rights.
Countless children, including girls of very tender age,
have been scarred psychologically by the violence and
the trauma they have endured. Many have died for lack
of food and necessary medical or health services, and a
great number have been orphaned as a result of armed
conflict. The statistics on children in armed conflict are
mind-boggling. They should spur us to take prompt
action.

The protection of children in armed conflict
should be all-encompassing. Children should not only
be assured of physical security in situations of armed
conflicts, but should also be provided with legal
protection under international law. That point has been
underscored by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2000/712) and by previous speakers today. The
report of the Secretary-General has drawn our attention
to the fact that there exist a number of international
instruments and conventions that provide a legal basis
for the protection of children, but that these have not
stopped children from being attacked, targeted and
abused with impunity. The perpetrators of these crimes
must be held accountable for them; they must be told in
unambiguous terms that they cannot hope to escape the
full penalty of the law, even after the conflict is over.
There should be no leniency or amnesty with respect to
crimes perpetrated against innocent children. As a
signatory of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
Malaysia calls on the few remaining countries to sign
or ratify the Convention so as to make it a truly
universal legal instrument. Malaysia continues strongly
to support the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child.

As a practical measure to ensure the protection of
children in armed conflict, it is important that United
Nations personnel, both military and civilian, involved
in peacekeeping missions be appropriately sensitized
and trained on the subject, so as to be better able to
handle actual situations on the ground. Indeed, the
physical protection of children in armed conflict has
become even more urgent than before, given the fact
that there are today millions of refugees and internally
displaced persons around the world, vast numbers of
whom are children, and many of them orphans.

Equally important in this exercise is the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of child
soldiers. It is shocking that as many as 300,000
children under the age of 18 are currently participating
in armed conflicts around the world. What is even more
alarming is that this trend of involving children in
armed conflict is on the increase. Hence the importance
of ensuring that their protection and well-being are
recognized as a priority concern in the mandates of
peacekeeping operations, including programmes of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. We
therefore welcome the collaboration among the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, the United Nations
Children's Fund and other United Nations agencies in
producing terms of reference for Child Protection
Advisers. We recognize that two peacekeeping
operations currently have senior Child Protection
Advisers on the ground; two were seconded from
UNICEF and the third was previously with a United
Nations peacekeeping operation. We also take positive
note of the fact that there are two such advisers
working with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Kinshasa, and that others are
being recruited for imminent deployment.

My delegation is equally concerned about the
debilitating effects of sanctions on children; it may be
years before the problems are recognized. We fully
agree with the Secretary-General's admonition that
there should be a coordinated and integrated approach
when sanctions are imposed to minimize unintended
consequences on civilian populations, especially
children. We have consistently called for and we
therefore strongly support the dispatching of
assessment missions to targeted States, not only before
the implementation of a sanctions regime but also after
sanctions have been imposed.

My delegation agrees with the Secretary-General
that the best way to address the problem of children in
armed conflict is to prevent armed conflict in the first
place, which entails the promotion of a culture of peace
and prevention. Just last week, the Council addressed
that very important issue. In its presidential statement
(S/PRST/2000/25), the Council recognized that peace
not only was the absence of conflict, but also required
a positive, dynamic, participatory process in which
dialogue was encouraged and conflicts were solved in a
spirit of mutual understanding and cooperation. The
Council also reaffirmed the belief that early warning,
preventive diplomacy, preventive deployment and post-
conflict peace-building were interdependent and
complementary components of a comprehensive
conflict-prevention strategy, and emphasized its
continuing commitment to addressing the prevention of
armed conflicts in all regions of the world.

We should move beyond pronouncements to
action. The Secretary-General's report, which is rich in
details as well as in recommendations, has laid out the
problem of children and armed conflict in all its
dimensions, and has challenged us to take concrete
action. It outlines some 55 recommendations, some of
which clearly fall within the purview of the Security
Council. We should rise to meet the challenge, mindful
of the fact that children are society's most precious
asset; we should do everything in our power as adults
to protect and nurture them, as a sacred, God-given
responsibility. In that undertaking, we should mobilize
the necessary resources and cooperate and collaborate
with all relevant international and domestic actors,
including international institutions, the private sector
and civil society, all of which have played
commendable roles.

