Mr. Gone (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Mr. President, I would like to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency for this month
and to assure you of my delegation's support. I also
have great pleasure in expressing our appreciation to
the President of the Security Council for the month of
January, the Permanent Representative of Uruguay, His
Excellency Mr. Elbio Oscar Rosselli, and his team for
their excellent work, when the positive changes in the
situation in Cote d'Ivoire, inscribed on the Security
Council agenda, were the subject of a resolution
authorizing a reduction in the military component of
the United Nations Operation in cote d'Ivoire. My
congratulations also go out to the representatives of
Sweden and Chile for their outstanding briefings.

As the representative of a country subject to
Security Council sanctions regime, I take a keen
interest in taking part in this debate on the working
methods of the Council's subsidiary bodies, so as to
share experiences and use this opportunity to make
several recommendations.

Following the events of September 2002 in Cote
d'Ivoire and the subsequent developments, the Security
Council placed my country under a sanctions regime
by virtue of resolution 1572 (2004). Three types of
sanctions were implemented: an arms embargo against
C6te d'Ivoire, individual sanctions involving the
restriction of movement and the freezing of assets,
and an embargo on diamonds originating from C6te
d'Ivoire. The political context that prevailed in Cote
d'Ivoire during the first six years of the sanctions
regime impeded the achievement of real progress.
Since 2011, with the swearing in of His Excellency
Mr. Alassane Ouattara, President of the Republic,
significant changes have taken place in the political
and security arenas that have led to great progress
towards a return to the peace and stability in the
country. Those positive developments led the Security
Council to gradually ease the embargo regime on arms.
Similarly, in April 2014, with the ongoing improvement
of the management of natural resources, the Security
Council, in resolution 2153 (2014), lifted the embargo
on diamonds originating from Cote d'Ivoire. Following
the smooth conduct of the presidential election and the
outcomes achieved in the areas of security and stability,
cote d'Ivoire now awaits the total lifting of the arms
embargo, following the Secretary General's report
expected at the end of March.

As I said earlier, cooperation between my country
and the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004) has been marked
by a spirit of frank cooperation over the past five
years. The Group of Experts and the relevant Ivorian
authorities, including the Permanent Mission in New
York, have held working meetings on several occasions.
The Ivorian Government has always been committed
to providing the best possible working conditions for
carrying out the mission of the Group of Experts during
its periodic visits to the country. A striking illustration
of that outsanding cooperation was the field visit made
by the Ambassador of Chile, then Chair of the 1572
Sanctions Committee, to C6te d'Ivoire in 2014. During
that visit, the Committee was able to appreciate not only
developments on the ground, but also the readiness on
the part of the Ivorian authorities to make themselves
available. It is appropriate to note that the Committee
was received by the Head of State.

However, the willingness of a country under a
sanctions regime to cooperate effectively with the
sanctions committee may sometimes be hampered by
deadlines i sometimes just two or three weeks i that
often are insufficient in order to furnish the information
requested, above all owing to the difficulty of gathering
certain information. In that regard, my delegation
believes that more time should be allowed for States to
respond efficiently to the requests on the part of a group
of experts or committee, especially when the subject
entails complex issues.

The partially confidential nature of the reports
of groups of experts is a practice that deserves equal
mention. Providing reports to the countries concerned
should enable them to become familiar with experts'
observations in a timely manner. As one might infer,
that should endow those reports with a sheen of
transparency and balance.

One of the key components of a committee's
effectiveness is its thorough knowledge of the subjects
that are the object of the sanctions. My delegation notes
that the time allotted to new committee Chairs for
mastering the subject matter is at times too short. To
that end, mechanisms should be devised to allow new
Chairs to become familiarized with their case files.

A periodic review of the impact of a sanctions
regime is also an essential component that should
receive all of the attention that it deserves. It is a matter
of adapting a sanctions regime to the changing needs on
the ground. In my country's case, the sanctions regime
was established to put a halt to ongoing hostilities and
establish conditions for lasting peace. With the return
of peace and renewed stability, the arms embargo, for
example, should be lifted to allow Cote d'Ivoire to
confront domestic challenges, such as those related
to public safety, border security and the fight against
terrorism.

In concluding my remarks, I would like to reiterate
the gratitude of my delegation to you, Sir, for the honour
that has been bestowed upon my country in having been
invited to take part in this debate. I have high hope that
the conclusions of this debate will help to improve the
working methods of the Council's subsidiary bodies
and, in particular, those of the committees and working
groups.

