Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): In accordance with rule 33.3 ofthe provisional
rules of procedure of the Security Council, I should like
to propose to adjourn this meeting until 7 November.
Also in accordance with the Council's provisional
rules of procedure, I should like to explain why we are
presenting this motion.

Let us not pretend that we do not understand what
is happening here. It is absolutely clear to us why
adopting a draft resolution ahead of time has been
proposed - I think that it is clear fto the members of
the Security Council, and probably for most people in
the Chamber. In addition, I am sure that it is absolutely
clear to the authors of this deplorable idea. This has
not been done out of good intentions; it is intended to
embarrass Russia once again.

I also want to be absolutely clear. Today's
decision will in no way affect the future of the Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM). The way it functions
up to 17 November is the way it will continue to
function, regardless of the decision we take today, and
even if we take no decision to extend it. That does not
mean, however, that the decision on extending the JIM
cannot be adopted in principle. The authors of the draft
resolution understand our position very well. We have
expressed it more than once. First we receive the report,
then we consider it, and then we discuss the extension.
There is no need present the situation so as to make it
appear that the future of the JIM. and of the planet itself
depends on today's decision. Let us not mislead anyone.

Over the past year, we have not seen a single
substantive report from the JIM. Obviously, we would
all like to see the report of the Mechanism on the
episode in Khan Shaykhun, which is to be published
on 26 October. That is only two days from now - the
day after tomorrow. It is unprecedented and unjustified
by any logic that the United States should insist on
extending the operation of a body with a limited time
frame before the publication of a report that we are all
eagerly awaiting. Moreover, the argument that the JIM
has a great deal of work ahead as ajustification for this
untimely decision simply does not stand up to criticism.

We suggest adjourning this meeting until
7 November, when, in accordance with the plans of the
Italian presidency in November, we will discuss the
Syrian chemical dossier. At that time, we will take a
decision on extending the JIM. in a calm atmosphere,
without any of the unprecedented pressure to which we
have been subject. I ask the members of the Council
to support us, in accordance with rule 33.3 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council,
in postponing the meeting until 7 November.

