Mr. Radomski (Poland): Poland aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union. I would like to add a few comments in my
national capacity.

Madam President, let me at the outset thank you for
convening this timely debate. It gives us the opportunity
to once again reflect on the key issue of the protection
ofjournalists in conflict situations. This question fully
deserves our attention, as the number of journalists
killed while doing their jobs continues to increase.

Having said that, I would like to highlight the often
heroic role of those committed professionals who lost
their lives while reporting from zones of conflict. 1 can
still vividly remember the excellent Polish journalist
and war correspondent Mr. Waldemar Milewicz, who
bravely reported from different parts of the world. He
brought into our homes tragic stories of war and death
and let us witness the suffering of innocent victims.
On 7 May 2004, Waldemar Milewicz was travelling
around Baghdad in a clearly marked press vehicle when
he was attacked by a group of armed men. Milewicz
was hit first and died instantly. Another member of his
crew, Mounir Bouamrane, an Algerian-Polish editor
and translator, was killed in a second volley of gunfire
when he left the vehicle.

There are so many similar tragic stories of the
devoted men and women prepared to risk their lives to
tell the truth about the horrors of war to the rest of the
world. Unfortunately, the dangers that journalists face
very often transcend the borders of conflict zones. For
example, the conflict in Syria has brought suffering
not only to the correspondents working on the spot but
also to those in neighbouring Lebanon. In 2014, two
journalists were kidnapped there on a smuggling route
for Syrian rebel forces. Ironically, they were preparing
a report on the kidnapping ofjournalists inside Syria.

Indeed, statistics on the safety of journalists are
frightening. In 2015 alone, 25 journalists have been
killed. Among them were Ali al-Ansari, killed in
January in Iraq, Qais Talal Agha, killed by Daesh in
February in Iraq, and Khalid Mohammed al-Washali,
killed in January in Yemen. We pay tribute to them and
to all those who died while exercising theirjobs.

It would be impossible to overestimate the role
that journalists play in today's world. Contemporary
societies depend on the exchange of the most current
news and access to honest, impartial information. We
should not forget that press and media coverage benefit
everyone and that they are crucial for the promotion
of democracy, human rights, the rule of law and good
governance. Journalists are the eyes and voice of civil
society. Brave, truthful reporting often inspires and
encourages people to defend freedom, demand justice
and construct democracy.

Let me mention just one example, from Tunisia.
It has already been demonstrated that the safety and
rights ofjournalists are often not ensured. In violation
of international obligations, standards and declarations,
journalists are kidnapped, imprisoned or forced into
exile. They face threats, harassment, fines and assaults.
As States Members of the United Nations, we have an
obligation to take active steps to prevent and respond to
violence and intimidation against journalists and other
media actors, in order to enable them to work in safety
and security.

We must continuously promote respect for
international standards, as set forth in the Geneva
Conventions and their Additional Protocols, as well as
in Security Council resolutions. There is an urgent need
to address the root causes ofviolence againstjournalists
and their sources. Preventive mechanisms must be
further developed. The sharing of best practices on the
safety ofjournalists, as well as training and awareness-
raising for security services and journalists themselves,
can contribute to preventing future violations. In that
light, we welcome today's adoption of resolution
2222 (2015), which was introduced at the initiative of
Lithuania. Poland proudly co-sponsored that important
document.

While working to increase the safety ofjournalists in
conflict, we should not forget to focus on accountability.
As stated in the concept note (S/2015/307, annex) for
today's debate, accountability for the perpetrators of
attacks against journalists is virtually nonexistent.
Accountability is especially important for local media
workers, who constitute the largest percentage of
journalist victims. To address that issue, Poland has been
supporting the European Endowment for Democracy
since its establishment in 2013. The Endowment works
on the media environment and helps to keep it safe.
In that regard, we are pleased that the Endowment's
participants include representatives of countries from
the Middle East such as Lebanon and Jordan and from
Eastern Europe, including Armenia and Ukraine.

As today's debate proves, we should not hesitate
to ask questions on the most serious threats to the
safety of journalists, such as the existence of common
threat patterns or measures to enhance respect for
international obligations. We will do our utmost to find
the answers to those questions.

