Mr. Pequeno (spoke in French): I thank you, Sir,
for this opportunity to brief the Council on the political
and security situation in Guinea-Bissau.

(spoke in English)

I fully concur with the statement made by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Modibo Toure. Allow me to add some points.

The security situation in Guinea-Bissau remains
calm and the military has so far kept out ofpolitics. It is,
however, questionable how long it can remain politically
neutral, considering the fragile political situation.
On top of that, the security sector reform process has
stalled due to a lack of funding, as has the justice and
public adminstration reform. We should recognize the
critical importance of the role played by the Economic
Community of West African States Mission in Guinea-
Bissau (ECOMIB), and welcome the decision taken by
the Heads of State ofthe Economic Community ofWest
African States (ECOWAS), who recently held a Summit
in Dakar on 4 June to extend the mandate of ECOMIB
for another year, which we believe will further stabilize
the country. In that regard, we urge the defence and
security forces of Guinea-Bissau to better collaborate
and coordinate with ECOMIB.

In addition, we stress the importance of the
ECOWAS high-level mission made up of three heads
of State, which will go to Guinea-Bissau to engage in
a dialogue with national political stakeholders with a
view to encourage dialogue and find a lasting political
solution to the continuing political crisis. The African
Union stands ready to provide any assistance, in
coordination with other partners, to ensure the success
of the visit.

The crisis in Guinea-Bissau has long undermined
peace and stability. The general tensions in the ruling
party - the African Party for the Independence of
Guinea and Cabo Verde - and the divisions among
political actors are the causes for the political and
institutional crisis, which needs to be addressed with
a compressive approach. It is our conviction that only
a genuine and inclusive dialogue, based on respect for
the country's Constitution and its laws, will lead to
a resolution of the crisis. We therefore encourage all
national political actors to exercise restraint, uphold the
rule of law and engage in a constructive dialogue to
resolve their differences, safeguard peace and stability
and foster socioeconomic development, with a view to
alleviating the suffering ofthe people of Guinea-Bissau.

Lastly, I would like to highlight the excellent level
of coordination and collaboration among ECOWAS,
the CPLP, the European Union, the United Nations
and the African Union, as well as the role they have
been playing to address the crisis in Guinea-Bissau. I
look forward to working in the same spirit. Similarly, I
would like to urge the CPLP and ECOWAS to convene
an International Contact Group meeting on Guinea-
Bissau to contribute to a resolution of the crisis.

We still have a long way to go. Two important
portfolios in the new Government, as Mr. Toure
mentioned, namely, the Minister for the Interior and
the Minister for Foreign Affairs, are yet to be filled.
Furthermore, the programme and budget of the
Government need to sail through the National Assembly
in due time.

I thank the Council for this opportunity and for its
continued attention to the people of Guinea-Bissau.

