Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock for their briefings. I also thank in particular Ms. Wafa'a Alsaidy and Ms. Raja Abdullah Ahmed Almasabi for their work and for sharing their experiences and recommendations with the Security Council. I would like to make five points. First, I reaffirm our full support for the efforts of the Special Envoy to achieve a nationwide ceasefire, confidence-building measures and the resumption of an inclusive political process. We call on all parties to engage constructively in such efforts and to muster the necessary political will to reach an agreement. Secondly, we are alarmed by recent reports of civilian victims, including children, of air attacks. All parties must protect civilians and put an end to the grave violations committed against children. As we heard from Ms. Almasabi, disabled persons are disproportionately affected by the conflict. They need special protection and support. Thirdly, the scourge of locusts creates yet further vulnerability. We are worried about their impact on food security, and we support the efforts of the United Nations, particularly those of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), to lead ground monitoring and control operations. To that end, we call on the parties to provide FAO safe access to the breeding grounds and to implement days of calm. Fourthly, the humanitarian situation remains of great concern. All international partners must show their solidarity with the Yemeni people by supporting the Organization's intervention plan. We therefore encourage all parties to make additional commitments and to honour them. I also reiterate the importance of humanitarian access. We remind all parties to respect their obligations under international humanitarian law. Authorities must accelerate customs clearances for medical supplies and protective equipment and facilitate the aerial transportation of humanitarian personnel. Finally, I note the recent meeting on the FSO SAFER oil tanker (see S/2020/721), and I echo my colleagues in underscoring that action is more urgent now than ever. We therefore urge the Houthis to honour their commitments and allow the technical experts of the United Nations to access the oil tanker so as to prevent a catastrophe.
