At the outset, Thailand welcomes the Secretary-General's recently released report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2020/366), which is submitted against the backdrop of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Furthermore, Thailand views the Secretary-General's appeal for an immediate global ceasefire to reinforce diplomatic action as significant. The initiative could help create conditions for the delivery of humanitarian assistance and bring hope to those most vulnerable to the COVID-19 pandemic. The pandemic continues to have a severe impact on the protection of civilians, both in conflict contexts and from domestic and gender-based violence. By looking ahead to the post-COVID-19 era, we can see that the vulnerability of the least protected in society, especially those in conflict-affected areas, will be exacerbated in terms of health and security. In conflict-affected States, where health-care systems are already weakened, the pandemic will worsen the situation for the vulnerable, particularly the elderly, who are more prone to the virus. Women and children, as well as persons with disabilities, will face greater difficulties in gaining access to health care and other essential services. Therefore, while we are assessing measures to move forward in the new normal, it is imperative for all stakeholders to devote their efforts to protecting these vulnerable groups by upholding their rights within the obligation to protect civilians under international law. We must create strong partnerships among all stakeholders, share best practices and provide socioeconomic opportunities to the vulnerable through sustainable development approaches. Thailand wishes to highlight the elements that we believe deserve special emphasis in today's discussion. First, priority must be given to raising awareness of, and respect for, obligations related to the protection of civilians under international law, including the Charter of the United Nations. The State has the primary responsibility to protect its citizens, and all parties to armed conflict must honour and strictly comply with their obligations under international law, international humanitarian law and international human rights law. While all personnel in peacekeeping missions need to clearly understand their protection mandates, priorities and responsibilities, efforts must be made to promote awareness and understanding among all parties and stakeholders, including civilians themselves. In that regard, the protection of women and children and the elimination of sexual exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping missions have been one of Thailand's priorities. Secondly, we need stronger partnerships to strengthen the protection of civilians. This requires an integrated approach among military, police and civilian components at all levels. In turn, they must coordinate with national authorities, local communities and relevant humanitarian organizations in the field. Multi- stakeholder engagement is also key, while all players must be given space for meaningful participation. All stakeholders must exchange information on frank and clear situation assessments, supported by adequate capabilities and resources and further underpinned by practical and achievable expectations. Thirdly, it is essential to reduce threats to sustainable peace and development and to build and sustain a safe and enabling environment for civilians. We support the Secretary-General's view that the most effective way to protect civilians is through a long-term process and a comprehensive approach applied before, during and after conflict. Sustaining peace requires us to view peacebuilding more holistically, as part of the peace continuum from conflict prevention and conflict resolution to laying the foundations for sustainable peace and development. By achieving sustainable peace and development, civilians, including those in vulnerable groups, would gain a better opportunity to thrive and attain better living conditions. Thailand encourages peacekeepers to take on the role of early peacebuilders. By promoting development initiatives in the field, peacekeepers could play a crucial role in promoting sustainable peace in post-conflict societies, thereby complementing Sustainable Development Goal 16 on peace, justice and strong institutions. Our peacekeepers have been incorporating development aspects into their assigned task in the United Nations Mission in South Sudan. It is also important to build a sustainable environment for civilians where their safety is ensured and their human rights promoted and protected. We must also recall the tremendous role of women as agents of change in conflict situations, especially when it comes to building trust and ensuring protective environments for vulnerable groups. The reach and impact that women have in the local community have long been underestimated. Last but not least, an area that Thailand has always viewed with a discerning eye is the issue of capacity-building and training. All peacekeepers have to be properly prepared, trained and equipped to meet the challenges they will face in the field. It must be underlined time and again that intensive predeployment and periodic in-mission training, including training of trainers, both on operational tasks and other protection-related elements, are vital. As an active troop- and police- contributing country, Thai peacekeepers are trained as a standard procedure to assist the local population in their efforts to prevent the relapse of armed conflict and ensure sustainable development. As we aspire to becoming a regional centre of excellence on the issue of children and armed conflict and for the United Nations Staff Officers Course, we have been working closely with the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and the Department of Peace Operations. We are also willing to share our experiences and lessons learned in these areas with all interested partners. Thailand also wishes to exchange views and best practices through the Peacebuilding Commission, which provides a constructive forum to discuss integrated strategies for post-conflict peacebuilding and recovery. Furthermore, Thailand continues to support the delivery of consistent and coherent training, in collaboration with relevant agencies, to our peacekeeping personnel for all mandated tasks. Those elements include international law, gender-based issues, the protection of civilians, child protection, conflict-related sexual violence and cultural sensitivity. There is more we can and want to do. Thailand wishes to conclude with the parting thought that, in its view, durable peace is not tenable if civilians lack security and are not safe. We need to continue to evolve our discussions on enhancing and reinvigorating the protection of civilians agenda in order to meet the new challenges of that protection.
