Mr. Burian (Slovakia): We too would like to
thank Mr. Egeland for his very powerful briefing and
very sobering description of the situation developing in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and northern
Uganda. At the same time, we note encouraging signs
of progress in the developments in those two countries.

As we heard in the briefing, there are still many
disturbing acts of violence against civilians, as well as
acts of gender-based violence, which the international
community cannot disregard and must pay greater
attention to.

In that regard, we believe that the international
community must pay constant attention to
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1674
(2006). We agree with Mr. Egeland that we must not
allow impunity in any country or in any region, and we
must bring all violators of human rights and
perpetrators of acts of violence and human rights
abuses to justice.

At the same time, we noted, in connection with
the negotiations between the Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA) and the Government of Uganda on the cessation
of hostilities, that there are some calls for the leaders
of the LRA to be guaranteed amnesty or impunity as a
condition for accepting the cessation of hostilities. We
would like to ask Mr. Egeland a question with regard to
how that issue can be addressed: on the one hand, so as
not to compromise the principles of impunity, and on
the other hand - as Mr. Egeland noted - to use it as
the last chance for peace in northern Uganda.

We share Mr. Egeland's view that the constant
interest of the Security Council in the issue is crucial to
progress in northern Uganda. That is why we would
welcome regular briefings by him and by the
Secretariat on developments in northern Uganda, as
well as on how the Government of Uganda fulfils its
commitments to address the grave social, humanitarian
and economic situation in northern Uganda, including
by the establishment of a sustainable and coherent
recovery plan for the north.

Returning to the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we share the opinion of
Mr. Egeland that it is of the utmost importance to
address the problem of violence committed against
women and other grave violations of human rights
perpetrated by the Congolese armed forces and
militias. We think that effectively addressing this
problem is one of the prerequisites for sustainable
peace consolidation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

That is why we believe that additional efforts and
resources are needed to speed up the process of
security-sector reform in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Again, we think that a comprehensive
action plan should be elaborated based on full
compliance with and implementation of resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1674 (2006), with special attention
given to the situation in the Armed Forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In conclusion, we would like to underline the
necessity of paying equal attention to all regions in
Africa and trying to do everything possible to prevent
humanitarian crises like those we have witnessed in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and northern
Uganda and to avert the humanitarian catastrophe
currently unfolding in Darfur. In this respect, we are
also concerned about the rapid deterioration of the
humanitarian situation and the social and living
conditions in Zimbabwe, which we are afraid might
lead to an internal conflict similar to those we have
witnessed in other parts of Africa. In this connection,
we would like to ask Mr. Egeland whether he thinks
that it is possible for the international community to act
to prevent these situations from turning into violent
conflicts.

