The President: I thank the representative of the
United Kingdom for his kind words addressed to me. I
shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of the United States.
By adopting this resolution, the Security Council has
sent a clear and unmistakable message to Iraq: non-
compliance will not be rewarded or tolerated. Iraqi efforts
to defy Council resolutions and obtain a lifting of
sanctions without full compliance have failed, and will
fail. Compliance with the Council's resolutions is the only
course which will lead Iraq back towards acceptance
within the community of nations.

The restrictions which Iraq has imposed on the
United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) since
5 August are intolerable. Let me be clear: key provisions
of resolution 687 (1991) cannot be implemented unless

 

UNSCOM. and the IAEA have Iraqi cooperation and full,
immediate and unimpeded access.

The Secretary-General, whose efforts to obtain Iraqi
compliance are commended in this resolution, has expressed
his own View that Iraq's 31 October decision to halt
UNSCOM. activities is a serious breach and major violation
of the 23 February Memorandum of Understanding. It is
significant that today's resolution similarly cites the Iraqi
decision as a flagrant violation of resolution 687 (1991) and
other relevant resolutions. I would also recall that both
President Clinton and Secretary of State Albright have
emphasized that all options are on the table, and the United
States has the authority to act.

The Council has made clear on many occasions -
most recently in its 30 October letter to the Secretary-
General and today in this resolution - that it is prepared
to recognize and respond to Iraqi compliance, but not
until Iraq lifts all restrictions on UNSCOM. and the IAEA
and resumes cooperation.

Iraq should recognize the gravity of the situation it
has created. Iraq must turn back from the dangerous and
self-defeating course it has chosen. The United States
sincerely hopes that Iraq will heed the clear message of
this resolution and take the necessary steps without delay.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 5 pm.
