Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you, Sir,
for convening this debate. I join others in thanking the
Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Chawahir Mohamed
and Mr. Smail Chergui for their briefings, and all the
ministers for their presence.

As we have just heard, Africa is often associated
with the scourge of war. In countries such as the
Democratic Republic of the Congo millions have lost
their lives in the deadliest conflict since the Second
World War, while in regions such as the Lake Chad
Basin, as he heard just yesterday (see S/PV.7748),
millions face famine because of the instability caused
by Boko Haram. But this portrayal is incomplete. Many
countries in Africa are living and thriving in peace, and
others are escaping the conflict cycle, countries such
as Sierra Leone, Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire. So how can
we build on those peacebuilding successes? What can
we learn from them, and how can the Council support
peacebuilding so that there are more successes to come?

First, all of our support needs to be in partnership
with the people and the Governments of African
countries. It is not our place to prescribe solutions. We
should instead work together to strengthen the ability
of each country to identify its own threats and help it
respond to them before conflict happens. This means
building on existing practices such as the African
Union's Continental Early Warning System and the
Panel of the Wise. Our efforts need to focus on building
the capacity of a country's institutions, just as the
Secretary-General said this morning, so that they can
secure predictable and sustainable finances. This in
turn will allow them to develop African-led prevention
and mediation processes supporting African ownership.

Secondly, it is vital that we get better at planning
United Nations interventions that reflect the full
conflict cycle, including considering from the outset
how United Nations missions will complement the
work of existing United Nations staff in the country.
Crucially, it means planning how missions will
transition when their objectives have been achieved. So
I strongly support the work of the Executive Office of
the Secretary-General's strategic planning and analysis
cell. Rigorous analysis and planning is vital to the
effectiveness of the United Nations, and the cell must
be empowered to lead cross-United Nations analysis of
emerging conflict.

At the heart of all of this analysis needs to be
the recognition that countries are different and have
different drivers of conflict. Our planning needs to
be based on real understanding. Mandates should be
country-specific, and then from better planning the
flows the better use ofphased mandates. These can help
ensure that mandated activities and resources are the
most appropriate to the political and security conditions.

In some cases, we need to recognize that United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations
may not be best placed to deliver institution-building,
which requires long-term and specialist engagement.
Where appropriate, we need to draw on support from a
United Nations country team and from others.

Thirdly, sustainable peace needs inclusive
participation and good governance. Implementing the
Sustainable Development Goals, especially Goal 16,
will be crucial. Well-governed and inclusive societies
with effective and accountable institutions form the
foundations for stability and for economic growth.
So by promoting transparency and accountability,
tackling corruption and ensuring that finances are
used effectively, we can help tackle some of the key
underlying causes of fragility and drivers of conflict.

To build a sustainable peace, everyone must be
allowed to play their part. Women have a crucial role
in conflict resolution and peacebuilding as well as in
building institutional capacity and resilience. Women's
participation needs more support.

Working with non-State actors and informal
institutions can be important entry points. It should
not just be for the elite. Getting the right support down
to grass-roots organizations and civil society will also
help create positive changes in the lives of women and
girls, and it means women being able to participate
without fear of reprisal or backlash in politics at all
levels, formal and informal.

We can also do more to engage young people.
Africa has more people aged under 20 than anywhere
else in the world. Capturing all of this potential and
channelling this energy into positive change is Vital
to peace, stability and prosperity. So we all need to
respond this opportunity by supporting the needs of
children and young people through education, training
and deployment.

Finally, as I stated before, tackling potential risks to
stability early is the most effective approach to creating
a sustainable peace. Doing so prevents enormous
human suffering, fear and displacement, and it makes
economic sense. But to be effective, early warning
requires early action. This takes political will from
individual countries, the Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission and key regional actors. I hope that we
will all show some such will in the coming weeks
and months.

