Mr. Moussa (spoke in French): It is my honour and
privilege to present the fourth report of the Secretary-
General (8/2013/297) on the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA).

As I take the floor this morning, the general
situation in Central Africa, politically and in terms of
security, is characterized by relative peace and stability
in most of the countries of the subregion, with the
notable exception of the Central African Republic and
some parts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

As the Security Council knows, developments
under way in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
are promising, in particular with the signing of
the Framework Agreement for Peace, Security and
Cooperation in February 2013, under the auspices of
the Secretary-General. The situation in Central African
Republic, however, continues to have an adverse
impact on its neighbouring countries, in particular in
terms of refugee flows and transborder crossings of
ex-combatants.

Over the past six months, UNOCA has continued to
work closely with regional organizations, in particular
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) and its member States, as well as with other
partners, in order to seek sustainable solutions to the
numerous challenges to peace and security in the
subregion. To that end, UNOCA, with the support of the
Mediation Support Unit, is planning a second capacity-
building workshop in the area of mediation in June for
ECCAS in order to better use that subregional tool and
better carry out its prevention, management, peaceful
settlement of conflict mandate.

(spoke in English)

During our meeting in December (see S/PV.6891),
the Security Council requested UNOCA to work with the
African Union (AU) and other stakeholders and partners
to develop a prioritized and sequenced implementation
plan for the operationalization of the United Nations
regional strategy to address the threat and impact of the
activities of the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). Now
that that has been done, the next immediate priority is
to organize a resource mobilization forum in support of
the implementation of the strategy, in partnership with
the African Union.

In that regard, I salute the African Union for
the recent convening of a forum in support of the
operationalization of the African Union Regional Task
Force (AU-RTF). The forum was an important step
in the right direction for the preparation of a broader
and more inclusive process to mobilize the requisite
resources for the implementation of our joint regional
strategy.

With regard to the operationalization of the AU-
RTF, which is a key component of our joint regional
strategy, it is important to highlight some of the
challenges encountered that were amply articulated
by the AU Commissioner for Peace and Security at
the opening of the AU Support Forum on 24 April in
Addis Ababa. According to Ambassador Lamamra, the
contingents handed over to the RTF face real logistical
challenges that constitute major obstacles, in that, with
the exception of the Ugandan contingents, the troops
are being confined to their respective bases and far
from being able to initiate expected military operations.

Those challenges are compounded by the current
political and security crisis in the Central African
Republic. The situation has a direct impact on the
operationalization of the RTF in that country. However,
reassuring signals have been received from Bangui
following a fact-finding mission to the Central African
Republic in April by Special Envoy of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission on Lord's Resistance
Army Issues, Ambassador Francisco Caetano Jose
Madeira. As confirmed by Prime Minister Nicolas
Tiangaye, the Central African Republic authorities are
ready to continue to cooperate with the international
community, in particular the AU and United Nations,
in pursuing the fight against the LRA.

The Security Council approved the LRA strategy
last June (see S/PV.6796). We have finalized the
implementation plan, which identifies present needs
and the areas in which additional resources are
required. We therefore count on the continued political
goodwill and financial commitment of all stakeholders,
particularly the LRA-affected countries and the major
partners, to translate those plans into reality.

Another major source of security concern for the
subregion is the ongoing military operations by the
Nigerian armed forces against Boko Haram insurgents
in the states of Borno, Yobe and Adamawa. Following
a week of military operations in the three states, which
were placed under a state of emergency, Nigeria's
military announced on 20 May that it had reasserted
control in five remote areas of the north-east, close
to the borders with Cameroon and Chad, where the
lslamist insurgents had seized territory.

The potential humanitarian consequences and
cross-border impact of Nigeria's military offensive
for the countries of the subregion have yet to be
fully assessed. However, thousands of refugees have
reportedly fled the military offensive into neighbouring
Cameroon and Chad, with the military claiming that
some Boko Haram insurgents had been prevented from
fleeing into neighbouring Chad and the Niger.

The current political and security situation in
northern Mali continues to have a negative impact on
the countries that have sent troops there. Following
the twin attacks on a military base in Agades and a
French-run uranium mine, the President of the Niger,
Mahamadou Issoufou, claimed that those involved in the
attacks, which left more than two dozen dead, entered
his country from southern Libya. He also warned that
further attacks were being planned against Chad.

The issue ofpoaching is another emerging and rapidly
growing phenomenon that has the potential to have a
negative impact on the already challenging peace and
security situation in some parts of the subregion. Over
the past five months or so, there have been increasing
and at times alarming reports underscoring the gravity
of that threat. We gather that at least 26 elephants were
recently massacred by poachers at the World Heritage
Site of Dzanga Bai, in south-eastern Central African
Republic. The same reports further claim that Central
Africa has been regularly hit by poaching operations
and that in February 2012 at least 300 elephants were
killed for their ivory in northern Cameroon. The efforts
made by the countries of the subregion to address that
challenge need to be encouraged.

Another major challenge for the advent of sustainable
peace and development in the Central African
subregion is the thorny issue of youth unemployment.
Cognizant of the destabilizing effects of growing
youth unemployment on the subregion, UNOCA has
engaged in efforts to facilitate the organization of
a subregional conference to discuss the impact of
youth unemployment on the consolidation of peace.
Those efforts will continue to be pursued vigorously
in partnership with ECCAS, the African Development
Bank, the International Labour Organization, the
United Nations Development Programme and some key
regional and international partners and stakeholders.

In my statement to the Council on 18 December 2012
(see S/PV.6891), I pledged that UNOCA would continue
to place a premium on building on and consolidating the
achievements registered during that year. That included
redoubling efforts to accelerate the operationalization
of the regional strategy to address the threat posed by
the LRA through the early finalization of the relevant
programmatic document; the pursuit of ongoing efforts
towards the organization of a the regional summit on
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, as recommended by the
Council in its resolution 2039 (2012), of 29 February
2012; and enhancing our capacity-building and
institution-strengthening support to subregional
organizations, particularly ECCAS.

Looking back, I can humbly state that we have
fulfilled that pledge, at times under very challenging
circumstances, including dwindling resources.
Therefore, as we enter the second half of 2013, I would
like to renew my pledge to pursue those efforts and build
on the progress made thus far in the implementation of
our mandate under the overall guidance and orientation
of the Council.

I thank the members of the Security Council for
their strong and continued support for UNOCA.

