Mr. Ryan (Ireland): As noted earlier by my
European Union colleagues Ambassadors Greenstock
and Levitte, Sweden will speak a little later on behalf
of the European Union. I wish to associate Ireland fully
with the statement of the Swedish European Union
presidency in advance. We would like to make the
following points in our national capacity.

We welcome today's debate on HIV/AIDS, and
we recognize the efforts of the United States and of
Ambassador Richard Holbrooke in helping to inscribe
this critical issue on the agenda of the Security
Council. We commend the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) for the
cooperation framework just presented, which is an
important follow-up to resolution 1308 (2000).

The analyses and the detailed action programmes
which we heard earlier from Jean-Marie Guehenno and
Peter Piot reflect very clear, unblinking responses by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
UNAIDS. I commend their frankness and the
practicable character of their proposals, as well as the
evident intensive cooperation between their
departments.

The intensified cooperation envisaged at the
Headquarters and field levels, encompassing military
and civilian peacekeepers as well as humanitarian
workers and vulnerable populations, will constitute a
very important further step in the fight against the
HIV/AIDS pandemic. We particularly welcome the
proposal for extensive training for peacekeepers
before, during and after their participation in missions,
which has already been identified by the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations as one of the
key factors in this area. We encourage Member States
to support the efforts of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations in this regard.

I should like also to echo and to underline the
important point made earlier by Jean-Marie Guehenno
that we need to move quickly to fully staff the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and, during
the comprehensive review, to look at the staffing needs
related to the crucial issues he covered today.

The Council has recognized that, in large areas of
the world, HIV/AIDS poses a threat to international
peace and security. Where this threat is most
conspicuous, the Governments and peoples concerned
are faced already with the huge challenges of forging
national and regional development. Ireland is firmly
convinced that in building international peace and
security, the international community must recognize
that no peace can be whole or secure if it is not
underpinned by a sustainable process of economic and
social development. Many different challenges flow
from this assertion. Effective combat against, and
reversal of, HIV/AIDS is one of them.

The problem of HIV/AIDS is an extremely
complex one. It is abundantly clear that the success of
the struggle against HIV/AIDS in developing countries
depends on the implementation of policies and
programmes that deal with the fundamental problems
of global poverty and inequity. I would like to make
some comments on what Ireland sees as the major
challenges in combating this pandemic.

On a global scale, the impact of HIV on
international development is similar to the impact of
the HIV virus on human immunity; it is progressively
weakening the fabric of societies and increasing their
vulnerability to conflict and poverty. Though there is
now genuine commitment on the part of many leaders
to fighting the disease, it is a hard reality that the
countries most affected by HIV/AIDS are those least
able to afford the mobilization of a sustained, effective
response.

There is no single other issue that presents such
an enormous challenge to the attainment of the
international development goals than HIV/AIDS. We
know that low levels of development are associated
with poverty, illiteracy, poor access to health services,
gender inequality, economic migration and political
instability. We know that these are the same factors that
have greatly facilitated the spread of HIV in poorer
countries. We know also that the existence of high rates
of HIV/AIDS in communities leads to a reversal of
development progress. In short, HIV/AIDS is both a
cause and a result of high levels of poverty and
underdevelopment. The fight against HIV/AIDS will
never be won unless it is situated within a
comprehensive response which effectively addresses
global poverty and disadvantage.

Despite the very considerable efforts to stop the
halt of HIV/AIDS over the past decade, the number of
people infected with the virus, particularly in countries
where there are high rates of poverty and instability,
continues to grow. Twenty years into this pandemic the
international community is more aware of which
interventions have succeeded in curtailing the spread of
HIV and which have not. More than this, there is now a
much greater understanding of which approaches to
development aid have been found to be effective and
which are inappropriate or are no longer valid. One
clear message has been learned, however, and that is
that complex development problems are not amenable
to quick-fix, vertical-type interventions.

There is a very real sense that HIV/AIDS has
transformed the development agenda. The global
spread of HIV/AIDS has highlighted the inadequacies
and failures of the international development effort to
date. Ireland believes that there is no single issue that
provides a more compelling reason for strengthening
our commitment, including the financial commitment
of the donor community, to international development
cooperation than the global HIV/AIDS crisis.

Ireland has developed a specific HIV/AIDS
strategy for our national programme of development
cooperation. HIV/AIDS is now a core issue cutting
right across all development programmes supported by
the Irish Government. The commitment by our
Government to reaching the United Nations target of
0.7 per cent of GNP to be spent on official
development assistance (ODA) by the year 2007
provides us with an opportunity to advocate and to
provide substantial additional financial support to
address this huge global challenge.

There is a need for the international community
to assist poorer countries in providing care and support
for people infected with the HIV virus. In particular,
we must redouble our efforts in conjunction with the
relevant United Nations bodies, in addition to DPKO
and UNAIDS, industry and other relevant
organizations, to address the complex issues of access
to medicines in developing countries and overcoming
the obstacles in that regard. We need clarity about
issues such as tiered pricing, compulsory licensing,
parallel imports and the rights and obligations of both
patent holders and signatories to international patent
protection agreements.

We hope that all of these issues will be addressed
in the forthcoming special session of the General
Assembly on HIV/AIDS next June. We welcome the
proposal that one of the round tables scheduled as part
of the special session should include a discussion on
HIV/AIDS as a security issue. We look forward to
participating in the preparatory process and in the
special session itself, which, hopefully, will secure a
full global commitment to fight the pandemic.

I heard, and share fully, Richard Holbrooke's
conviction that resolution 1308 (2000) should become
one of those watershed resolutions in the history of the
United Nations thus far.

Prime Minister Meles of Ethiopia, in his address
to the HIV/AIDS meeting organized by the African
Development Forum in Addis Ababa last month, stated
that "the struggle against HIV/AIDS is a struggle for
the future of the African continent". Our presence here
today demonstrates a very clear affirmation of Mr.
Meles' statement and recognizes also that HIV/AIDS is
a major development crisis not just for Africa but for
the global community. We also recognize that the only
solution will be a global one involving sustained
coordination and cooperation by us all.

Finally, Ijoin other speakers in bidding an revoir
soon to our colleague, New Yorker and man of the
world, Richard Holbrooke. I would be grateful if his
colleagues could convey this message to him.

