Mr. Duale (Somalia): I fully appreciate the fact that
the Council has invited me to be present here today and
to witness the adoption of this new and very important
resolution 2102 (2013), which, I believe, provides real
support for my new Government and facilitates the
achievement of its policy of developing Somalia in the
areas of, inter alia, governance and security.

Mr. President, allow me also to thank your
predecessor as well as the incoming Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas
Kay, and to express my appreciation and thanks to
Mr. Mahiga, the outgoing Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for ajob well done.

I believe that the resolutionjust adopted ensures that
the first steps of the process of support by the United
Nations and the Security Council in particular will be
truly effective, especially with the proposed United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM),
which ensures that Somalia and the Government of
Somalia will now have only one door for dialogue and
for support.

We appreciate the Secretary-General's letter
and report (S/2013/239), which ushered in this very
important resolution, which we fully endorse. My
Government has already expressed its appreciation for
the Secretary-General's letter and report.

We are also confident that the Security Council,
the international community and all other partners
in the development of Somalia's future will abide by
what is clearly expressed here - that the sovereignty
of Somalia and the ownership of every action belong to
the Federal Government of Somalia, while at the same
time the regional authorities must also be consulted.
We welcome the emphasis on coordination and urgent
action, and we hope in particular that the conference
to be held in London on 7 May will enable us to garner
some resources, both human and financial, so that the
Government of Somalia can implement its mandates,
in cooperation and coordination with UNSOM. and our
international partners.
That said, I hope that we will soon see, within the The President (spoke in French): The Security
year we have been granted by the Security Council Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
in which to report back, that this year will bring the consideration of the item on its agenda.

opening ofopportumties for Somalia 5 development. The meeting rose at "40 am.
