Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, our delegation commends
the presidency of the Netherlands for placing this
important topic on this morning's agenda. Moreover,
we thank Mr. Ghassan Salame', Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya, for providing the
Security Council with an excellent briefing on the
situation in Libya and the progress being made in the
implementation process of the United Nations action
plan for Libya. We wish Mr. Salame every success in
carrying out the functions conferred upon him. We also
extend our thanks to Sweden as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya, for the important and
substantive information provided at this meeting. My
delegation also thanks the Secretary-General for his
12 February report (S/2018/140) on the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya.

Equatorial Guinea deeply regrets the current
situation that the Libyan people are undergoing. On
behalf of Equatorial Guinea, we convey our most
sincere support and solidarity for them and our desire to
see that country's ordeal come to an end. The Republic
of Equatorial Guinea emphatically condemns all armed
conflicts and any violation of international human
rights law and international humanitarian law, and
demands that priority be given to protecting the most
vulnerable civilians as well as all personnel providing
humanitarian and health assistance in the area.

Equatorial Guinea has always advocated for
dialogue as the primary means for settling conflicts
with the goal of ensuring bringing about peace. We
therefore acknowledge, commend and enthusiastically
support the role of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya in its work as mediator and in advancing
reconciliation at all levels through dialogue. We believe
that that is the way to achieve the political transition
for which the Libyan people have been yearning for
more than seven years, during which they have been
embroiled in a conflict that has resulted in the loss
of many lives, including among women and children.
We also underline the role of various regional and
international actors, such as the African Union, the
League of Arab States and the European Union, among
others, for their work to reach political solutions to end
the situation in Libya. Given the plight of the Libyan
people, we call on the parties involved to reach an
understanding and pool their efforts so as to make
the Libyan Political Agreement a reality and end the
protracted political transition, thereby allowing for
the holding of legislative elections, which would
lead to the re-establishment of peace and security in
Libya - a process that we want to see take place safely,
transparently, freely and democratically without any
interference from external third parties.

In conclusion, we are deeply concerned about a
situation marked by anarchy and insecurity and the
deterioration in the humanitarian situation caused by
persistent clashes among armed groups. We have also
seen abductions, assassinations, the rape of women and
children, arbitrary detention and torture - as has been
indicated in the report of the Secretary-General - as
well as the situation concerning refugees and migrants,
who, according to the report (see S/2017/466) of the
Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution
1973 (2011), concerning Libya, continue to be subjected
to degrading treatment, abuse, human trafficking and
other barbaric indignities. Faced with such unrelenting
facts, we therefore urge all Council members and the
entire international community to redouble their efforts
to end the situation on the ground, which does not seem
to have a clear end in sight.

