Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
The Argentine Republic associates itself with the
statement made by Peru on behalf of the Rio Group.
We are grateful for this opportunity to continue the
debate on international terrorism, which the foreign
ministers of countries members of the Security Council
began on 20 January. In Colombia, Indonesia, Kenya
and Russia, among other places, there have recently
been terrible attacks of horrifying brutality, which
make this debate all the more relevant.

In 1992, international terrorism attacked the
Argentine Republic, destroying the Israeli embassy in
Buenos Aires. In 1994, the attack on Argentina was
repeated with the destruction of the Asociacion Mutual
Israelita Argentina, the most important organization of
the Jewish community in Argentina. Those two attacks
left more than 100 dead. The organization that carried
out those attacks was mistaken if it thought it was
attacking only the Jewish community in my country.
They were an attack on the entire community of
Argentina, and Argentina understood them as such.

More than a decade ago, referring to the 17
March 1992 attack, the Foreign Minister of the
Argentine Republic, Guido di Tella, stated in the
General Assembly that,

"As for terrorism, there can be no questions,
only an answer in the form of the strongest, most
determined and implacable commitment of each
State to struggle against it until it is eradicated."
(A/47/PV.5, p. 77)

On 27 July 1994, after the second terrorist attack
to which I referred, my country sent a letter urging the
Security Council to step up cooperation to counter such
crimes (S/1994/890). The Council echoed that request
in its presidential statement of 29 July of that year
(S/PRST/l994/40).

Argentina has always maintained, and repeated
during its recent term on the Security Council, that it
regards all terrorist acts without exception to be
criminal and unjustifiable. The criminal character of
terrorism is independent of whatever motivation or
justification is invoked. Nothing excuses it. Terrorism
is a grave threat to international peace and security. My
country condemns unreservedly all acts of terrorism
and reaffirms the need to step up international
cooperation to prevent and combat them. In the view of
the Argentine Republic, this struggle should be legally
legitimate and grounded in respect for international
law, human rights and the United Nations Charter, as is
stated, inter alia, in General Assembly resolution
48/122 on human rights and terrorism.

In order to maximize its strength, terrorism joins
forces with transnational crime, uses new technologies,
obtains weapons of mass destruction and exploits
loopholes in the world financial system. That trend can

be seen, for example, in the case of Colombia, where
terrorism has allied itself with drug trafficking.
Just as this crime transcends the borders of a
given country, the response to it must necessarily also
transcend borders. As the Secretary-General affirmed,
the United Nations enjoys a unique position for
building a universal coalition to guarantee global
legitimacy in the long-term response to terrorism. Its
role is therefore essential, and Argentina supports it
unreservedly.

Terrorism is an assault on human life and seeks to
destroy principles, rules of civilization and values that
are common to all humanity. It is a murderous, pitiless,
inhuman and ferocious phenomenon that disrupts the
coexistence of human beings. For that reason, it is one
of the most serious and certain threats to the peace of
the planet. The Security Council, the General
Assembly, the specialized United Nations agencies and
regional organizations have long recognized that.

Following the attacks of 11 September 2001, the
Security Council set up the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, which has demonstrated its effectiveness
under the intelligent leadership of the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, Sir Jeremy
Greenstock, to whom we pay tribute for his work.

Argentina has supported all provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001), and from the outset it has
cooperated with the Committee, which is a vital tool
for coordinating counter-terrorism activities. My
country has submitted the report required under
paragraph 6 of the resolution and a second,
supplementary report.

We feel that, in addition to help States improve
their legislation, the Committee should cooperate in
monitoring their practical implementation. Cooperation
with regional organizations is also important, in our
view, and should be expanded. We therefore welcome
the initiative of increasing such contacts and of holding
a meeting with those organizations on 7 March.

Successful global cooperation to counter
terrorism must be based on a universally valid legal
framework. For that reason, we urge States to ratify
existing conventions. We agree that there is a need to
redouble efforts to reach consensus on the draft
comprehensive convention and the convention on
nuclear terrorism.

There is another aspect of the combat against
terrorism that we should not overlook. The Secretary-
General, on 20 January, reminded us that, just as
terrorism cannot be justified, neither we ignore the
injustices that criminals use as a pretext for it -
injustices such as extreme poverty, for example.
Underlying all these problems of insecurity are
the tremendous injustices and inequities besetting the
international community at this time. Only two years
ago, we adopted the Millennium Declaration, a text
that now has more force and validity than ever. Its
purposes and goals should have assisted us in taking
broader approaches to defeating groups that feel
themselves to be marginalized and desperate and that
use those root causes as an excuse for terrorism.

However, since the Millennium Declaration,
much has happened, and many new factors have
emerged that are causing fear, mistrust, poverty and
despair. We must understand that the concept of
security is now broader than it was traditionally.

We note with gratification that the Security
Council has begin to consider these problems
expressly. The declaration on combating terrorism of
12 November 2001 affirms that development-related
issues must be addressed in order to wage a broader
war against that scourge. Extreme poverty and the
internal and external causes that contribute to causing
it are not, therefore, irrelevant to the agenda of the
Council, in that they serve as a pretext for serious
threats to security.

The countries of the Group of Seven - a number
of which are represented here on the Council - will
understand that this is something they must see and
that they can do something in the effort to resolve these
problems, which, to a large extent, stem from unjust
trade barriers and the failure to meet targets for official
development assistance, technology transfer and
investment.

We should not overlook the climate of despair
that generates insecurity and terrorism. The
industrialized countries and the developing ones will
one day have to form a coalition for prosperity and
justice, the two most effective instruments to free the
world of insecurity, thereby depriving of their
arguments those who so perversely exploit the needs
and the despair of the peoples of the developing
countries.

