Mr. Sahovic' (Yugoslavia): It is a great pleasure
for me to see you, Sir, presiding over Security Council
deliberations, and I wish you every success in carrying
out your important tasks.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report, which we examined with immense interest. I
would also like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Haekkerup, for his
statement and his assessment of the current situation in
Kosovo and Metohija.

Very recently, Security Council members had the
opportunity to hear in detail the Yugoslav position on
the situation in Kosovo and Metohija from Mr. Neboj sa
Covie, Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia and head of
the Coordinating Centre for Kosovo. I will therefore
restrict myself to making just a few comments on some
of the most topical issues, among which, of course, the
elections of 17 November are central.

An important pre-electoral phase - the
registration of voters - has been completed, in what,
we believe, to be a satisfactory manner. As we consider
it vital that the United Nations Mission in Kosovo and
Metohija successfully implement its mandate, in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia made a
maximum contribution to the registration process. This
was amply demonstrated by the exceptionally good
response of Kosovo Serbs to the registration appeal,
particularly after the highest representatives of Serbia
and Yugoslavia called on them to register. According to
the available data, some 170,000 Serbs and other non-
Albanians responded to the call - a far larger figure
than the one often wrongly quoted as representing the
number of Serbs and other minorities living in the
province.

The biggest challenge, however - the elections
themselves - lies ahead. The Secretary-General has
reported that the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) sees the
next step - the participation of Kosovo Serbs and
other minorities - as being critical to both the
legitimacy of the elections and the Mission's goal of
bringing about inclusive provisional self-government.
We entirely share that view.

In recent months, ever since the elections were
scheduled, my Government has repeatedly emphasized
that the security situation and freedom of movement, as
well as conditions for the return of internally displaced
persons, must be improved so that Serbs and other non-
Albanian voters can participate and give legitimacy to
the elections. Unfortunately, the situation with regard
to those three issues, as well as to other problems, such
as the fate of missing persons, is still very grave.

In this connection, I would like again to refer to
the Secretary-General's report and emphasize some of
his comments. The Secretary-General pointed out that,
in the reporting period, the number of ethnically
motivated attacks against Kosovo minority
communities increased, and included incidents of
intimidation, harassment, assault, arson and murder, an
alarming number of them involving the use of
weapons. To claim that it is imperative for all
communities to participate in the elections if they wish
to have a say in the daily running of their affairs is
simply not enough. Conditions have to be created for
all to be able to campaign and go to the polling stations
without being afraid of what may happen to them. In
addition, I should like to recall once again that only 80
Serbs out of more than 250,000 displaced and expelled
non-Albanians have been able to return to Kosovo and
Metohija in the past two years.

I should also like to draw the attention of the

Council to the assessment, in paragraph 61 of the
report (S/200l/926), that,

"While the majority have certain responsibilities
towards the minority communities, the latter also
have a crucial obligation to participate in the
UNMIK-led election process."
It is our understanding that in democracies -
even aspiring ones - the majority have the primary
responsibility for ensuring minority rights. Those who
were in government in my country until not so long
ago - actually, until one year ago today - grossly
neglected this concept, and the consequences of that
neglect are now very obvious and very great. In this
context, we believe that calling on Albanian leaders to
fully contribute to ensuring security, freedom of
movement and the right of minority communities to
return would constitute an essential step towards our
common goals. Furthermore, we consider it necessary
to send a clear message that the forthcoming elections
should not in any way precipitate the decision on the
final status of Kosovo and Metohija.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is repeatedly
called on to encourage the Serbian community in
Kosovo and Metohija to take part in the elections.
Regrettably, for the reasons that I have stated,
Yugoslavia is not yet in a position to take a final
decision as to whether or not to encourage Kosovo
Serb participation in the elections. While there is a
genuine desire to support Serb participation, we believe
that better conditions must be created before we can
responsibly do so.

The message that has come from today's Security
Council meeting, however, is extremely important and
positive and provides us with a basis to advocate, in the
coming days and weeks, Serb participation in the
elections. For that I am grateful to Security Council
members.

On a more optimistic note, I would like to stress
the steady improvement in the relations between the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the international
community, in particular UNMIK, in working towards
the common goal of gradually stabilizing the situation
in Kosovo and Metohija. Furthermore, we recently
concluded an agreement with the United Nations on the
status of the United Nations liaison office in Belgrade,
and my Government expects to proceed quickly to
institutionalize cooperation with UNMIK by
concluding an agreement on the status of UNMIK's
Office in Belgrade, as well as a comprehensive status-
of-mission agreement. We would also like to intensify
cooperation with the international presence in Kosovo
and Metohija on a range of concrete issues, including
the implementation of the UNMIK Regulation on the
Prohibition of Terrorism and Related Offences, of last
June, as well as concerning related problems, including
those of organized crime, trafficking in drugs and
persons and the illegal flow of arms.
Finally, allow me to reiterate once again
Yugoslavia's full commitment to the consistent
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999) and our readiness to invest further efforts in this
direction. We are willing and able to fully contribute to
improving the situation and to making it possible to
hold viable elections next month. However, the greatest
responsibility in this respect lies with UNMIK which,
as the Special Representative has repeatedly noted, is
in charge of administering Kosovo and Metohij a.

