Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to add
my own congratulations to you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency. I also thank the Russian
delegation for its habitually professional Security
Council presidency last month.

I also thank you, Mr. President, for convening
a debate on this important issue. I thank the briefers
for their statements. Like others, I found them to be
thought-provoking. They serve as a reminder to us that
we should strive to incorporate different perspectives
when we select briefers for our meetings.

Silencing the guns in Africa is our shared ambition.
It will be impossible to achieve without the involvement
and empowerment of Africa's youth. I thought
Ms. Chebbi made powerful points about the use of
narrative and the way in which there can be a problem
narrative around youth, and I agree with her on that.

As this is the Security Council, however, let me
start, at least, on international peace and security
issues, before addressing some wider points. Every
young person deserves to grow up free of the fear
of violence. Sadly, that is still not the case for many
children and young people in parts of Africa. In South
Sudan, for example, while it is very positive to note
that 955 children were released by armed groups in
2018, it is a matter of some sadness and concern that
a further 453 children were reportedly recruited and
used by armed actors. The United Kingdom calls on all
parties in South Sudan to redouble their efforts to end
grave violations against children and tackle impunity.
We should ensure that we discuss that issue during our
forthcoming visit and that we are united in our demand
for action.
Wherever children and young people are affected
by conflict, they deserve support and services to help
them enjoy a brighter future. That must include access
to education. Last week, we were able to announce a
$630 million package to support education, particularly
for women and girls, and the United Kingdom recently
committed a further $110 million in funding to the
Education Cannot Wait initiative - the UNICEF fund
delivering education in emergencies. Those funds will
support 600,000 children in conflict-affected countries
in receiving an education.

Our task is huge, however, and I would remind
the Council that UNICEF estimates that at least that
many children - 600,000 - are out of school because
of political violence in Cameroon alone. We hope that
the recently announced national dialogue in Cameroon
will tackle the underlying causes of the crisis in that
country so that children and young people can receive
the education they need to thrive.

When children and young people are empowered
and involved in the decisions that affect their futures,
they can act as powerful agents for change, as the
Council recognized in resolutions 2250 (2015) and
2419 (2018). Africa's young people not only deserve
the opportunity to have a say in how societies are
run but also have a right to it; they not only deserve a
meaningful role in conflict prevention, resolution and
peacebuilding efforts but are also fundamental to the
success of those efforts. We know from our evidence
and research that peace and reconciliation efforts that
involve women and young people and are therefore,
by definition, inclusive, have a 35 per cent greater
likelihood of lasting for 15 years or longer.

We have seen the power of movements for change
led by young people in Africa in recent months, as they
spearheaded the Sudan's peaceful movement for an
accountable, civilian-led Government. I heard Prime
Minister Hamdok at the General Assembly last week
(see A/74/PV.10) and was inspired by what he had to
say, in particular his commitment to put women and
young people front and centre in building a better
Sudan. Worldwide, young people are still too often
marginalized in political and civic life - people under
the age of 30 make up more than half the world's
population but less than 2 per cent of elected legislators.

Again, young Africans are in the vanguard of
efforts to change that situation. In Nigeria, youth
advocates campaigned to tackle a barrier to young
people's participation in politics. The "Not too young
to run" bill, which was adopted in 2018, lowered the
minimum age requirements for elected officials and
has since inspired a global campaign, supported by
the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth. The United
Kingdom stands firmly behind the "Not too young to
run" initiative.

Young Africans who are too young to vote or run for
office are still mobilizing action on global challenges,
and I want to pay tribute to the leadership of teenage
activists like Leah Namugerwa, who campaigns for
action on climate change in Uganda, and Peace Ayo
Adegbola, who advocates for girls' education in Nigeria.
My apologies to both of them if I have mispronounced
their names.

If all of Africa's young people had the opportunity
to realize their leadership potential and achieve their
aspirations, the effect on the continent and the world
would be transformative. But for that to happen, all
of Africa's young people need what so many of the
world's young people take for granted - peace and
security, human rights and good governance, quality
education, health care and access to productive
employment opportunities. I agree with Ms. Chebbi on
the importance of the particular effort to tackle gender-
based violence, and I would add that the provision of
health care must include sexual and reproductive health.

The United Kingdom will continue working with
our African partners on initiatives to meet all those
challenges, including through the United Kingdom-
Africa Investment Summit to be held in London in 2020,
which is an indispensable element of our comprehensive
support for Africa's long-term peace and stability. I do
not need to say that the United Kingdom's relationship
with Africa and its peoples is enduring.

