Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset, allow
me to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
debate, which gives us a timely opportunity to continue
our discussions on this important matter. We particularly
welcome the participation of major troop and financial
contributors. Allow me to also thank Under-Secretary-
General Alain Le Roy and Under-Secretary-General
Susanna Malcorra for presenting us with a first
executive summary of the New Horizon non-paper.

Austria also associates itself with the statement to
be delivered by the Czech Republic on behalf of the
European Union later in this meeting.

We support the ongoing processes focusing on the
reform of United Nations peacekeeping. Austria would
like to thank France, the United Kingdom, Japan as
Chair of the Working Group of the Whole on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations, and Canada for their
efforts. We have already witnessed some first changes
in the Council's approach to mandate extensions,
including the more systematic use of benchmarks and
progress monitoring.

We have studied the executive summary of the
New Horizon non-paper, which identifies the key
challenges of United Nations peacekeeping, and we are
looking forward to more detailed proposals in the
non-paper.

This Department of Peacekeeping Operations
initiative is most timely. We also believe that the
Brahimi report, though written at a time when only
20,000 peacekeepers were deployed, has not lost its
validity. Some of its core issues need to be revisited,
but it can still provide useful guidance to our efforts.

Austria, as a longstanding troop and police
contributor to United Nations peacekeeping operations
and to other United Nations mandated peace missions,
supports initiatives for improved cooperation and
coordination between troop-contributing countries,
police-contributing countries and the Council. We need
a better inclusion of troop- and police-contributing

countries and financial contributors when planning and
reviewing peacekeeping mandates.

Clear and achievable mandates are key to the
success of United Nations peace operations. The
formulation of mandates ought to take into account all
the tools in question, on the basis of a needs
assessment. The tools we choose must be part of an
overall political strategy and serve clear goals. In many
cases, the resulting mandate will therefore need to
follow a phased approach. Given the unprecedented
expansion of United Nations peacekeeping and the
limits to human and financial resources, other available
options for responding to conflicts, in particular
preventive action, must be considered very seriously.

Shaping an integrated and coherent strategy in
close cooperation with other international, regional,
subregional, local and possibly non-governmental
actors will be crucial for the success of our future
approach. In this regard, we strongly support an
enhanced cooperation with interested regional
organizations. As far as peacekeeping on the African
continent is concerned, close cooperation with the
African Union (AU) must remain a particular priority.
Strengthening the capacities of the AU is an essential
prerequisite for fair and equitable burden-sharing in
contributing to peace and security and for stronger
regional and national ownership. For this very reason,
we are in favour of a substantial and open-minded
debate of the proposals contained in the Prodi report.

The lessons learned and the experiences gained by
the various missions on the ground, and in particular
by national contingents, can provide the Council with
comprehensive information for its deliberations on the
review and extension of mandates. Early and consistent
involvement of Force Commanders as well as troop-
and police-contributing countries will help to create
common understanding and trust, as well as an
increased willingness to effectively implement the
mandates adopted by the Council. While the Council
bears the main responsibility for establishing achievable
mandates, troop- and police-contributing countries and
other actors have the responsibility to deliver on the
ground and must therefore be given an adequate hearing.

In the Council's debate on the protection of
civilians this past Friday, we reiterated our support for
the strengthening of protection mandates in
peacekeeping operations. Their role in ensuring the
physical protection of the civilian population affected

by armed conflict, and in particular of women and
children, is of utmost importance. Their contribution to
the promotion of human rights, the strengthening of the
rule of law and an increased role for women in peace
processes and peacebuilding, as well as in the fight
against impunity, is invaluable. It is clear that, in order
to implement protection mandates, peacekeeping
missions must be more effective and better resourced.

We are convinced that the independent study
commissioned by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs on protection mandates in
peace operations will make important recommendations
and will thus add to the overall reform efforts of
United Nations peacekeeping. As I already mentioned
this past Friday, Austria hopes that the Council will be
in a position to make progress in this matter in the
framework of the debate on the protection of civilians
scheduled for the month of November.

We also believe that the international community
needs to pay increased attention to the interface
between security and development - particularly in
post-conflict and other fragile situations.

Peace operations can make important contributions
to a sustainable socio-economic development of the
region in which they are deployed. An increased
emphasis on local and regional procurement is just one
of the options that come to mind. Building on some of
the positions put forward during the Council's January
debate on peacekeeping, Austria has begun a dialogue
with DPKO, the Department of Field Support and the
Peacebuilding Support Office on how to optimize the
socio-economic impact of peace missions. We look
forward to working with other interested delegations
on this important issue.

Allow me to conclude by reiterating Austria's
dedication to the reform of United Nations
peacekeeping, a process that needs our urgent and
continued commitment if we wish to achieve noteworthy
results in the foreseeable future.
