Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): At the outset, may
I join others in expressing our condolences to the
Russian Federation on the terrorist bombing that
recently occurred in Grozny.

I would also like, at the outset, to acknowledge
the presence of Senior Minister Ana Pessoa Pinto, who
we are very pleased to see here in the Council Chamber
today, as well as of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Kamalesh Sharma, whose
leadership of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET) we very warmly acknowledge
and appreciate. It is fitting that both of them are able to
join us today as we reflect on what has been achieved
in Timor-Leste and what remaining tasks lie ahead.
Ambassador Sharma's goals, and those of the people
serving under him, have undoubtedly contributed to a
genuine, well-reciprocated partnership between the
United Nations and the Government and the people of
Timor-Leste.

New Zealand strongly supports the Secretary-
General's recommendation that UNMISET be extended
for a further 12 months. The reduced size and modified
mandate laid out in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2004/333) are, in our view, well judged and
appropriate for a final consolidation phase.

We are particularly satisfied with the emphasis
placed on the work undertaken by the Serious Crimes
Unit. This is a critical component of the United
Nations Mission, and we welcome the Security
Council's continued support for the principle that those
who have perpetrated serious crimes shall not enjoy
impunity. We commend the Serious Crimes Unit for the
progress made this year and for its commitment to a
strategy that will refocus resources on litigation and
defence in order to work towards completion of its
programme of work by 20 May 2005.

The resolution of outstanding justice issues is
also being pursued through the parallel work of Timor-
Leste's Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation, which New Zealand strongly supports
and to which it has contributed 1.2 million New
Zealand dollars during the past year.

There are two other aspects of the most recent
report of the Secretary-General that we would like to
briefly mention. First, the elaboration of the security
and stability component of UNMISET provides a clear
and meaningful picture of its composition and tasks,
and we appreciate the careful matching of capabilities
to practical requirements on the ground. Secondly, the
report highlights the deepening bilateral relationship
between Timor-Leste and Indonesia, which was also
referred to by Ambassador Jenie in the statement that
he gave to the Council just a few minutes ago. The
attention given by both parties to further developing
this important relationship is clearly to be welcomed
by us all.

Finally, we commend the determination and the
leadership of Timor-Leste as the United Nations
Mission enters this final consolidation phase. As a
regional neighbour and friend, New Zealand will
continue, through multilateral and bilateral
mechanisms, to support Timor-Leste's journey towards
self-sufficiency.

