Mr. Ramos-Horta (Timor-Leste): Before I
deliver my written remarks, I should like to express my
sincere condolences to the people and the Government
of Bangladesh and to the United Nations family for the
brutal murder of Bangladeshi peacekeepers in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We particularly
feel the peacekeepers' tragic death because we
cooperated closely with Bangladeshi peacekeepers in
my own country, Timor-Leste, when Bangladesh
contributed an army engineer battalion in 2000 and
2001. To the people and the Government of
Bangladesh and to the United Nations family, our most
sincere condolences.

I should also like to say a few special words
about your country, Mr. President. You might not be
aware that I visited Benin in 1977. Then an unknown
young representative of a national liberation
movement, I was there at the invitation of President
Mathieu Kerekou to participate in an international
conference in solidarity with Benin in the aftermath of
an attempted mercenary invasion of the country. When
Benin served on the Security Council from 1976 to
1977, it was one of our greatest defenders, and we will
never forget that. So it is quite ironic and interesting
that, more than 25 years later, you are presiding over
the Council at a time when the Council must make
some critical decisions regarding the future of the
United Nations presence in Timor-Leste. We trust that
under your guidance the Security Council will once
again make wise decisions, consistent with the
decisions it has made in the past five years, in ensuring
that the gains we have seen in my country will
continue to be consolidated. Thank you very much,
Mr. President.

I have a written text - some 11 single-spaced
pages - that might take some time to read. Therefore,
I shall try to summarize many of my points in order to
make the most of the Council's time.

First of all, I should like to recall that, when I
addressed the Council a year ago, on 20 February
2004, I had the audacity to say that I do not always
agree 100 per cent with the reports of the Secretary-
General, in spite of our respect and affection for him
and for the people around him, just as I would not say
that we agree 100 per cent with what the Bible says.
Therefore, forgive me if I have some disagreements
with the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. However, those disagreements are somewhat
minor.

When I see the reduced figures proposed in the
report for continued United Nations assistance, I recall
that my Prime Minister, Mr. Alkatiri, had clearly
highlighted our minimal requests to the Secretary-
General and to the heads of State or Government of
your countries. Those requests had been made after a
very careful assessment of our situation and our needs.
They represent the barest minimum of required
assistance secured through assessed contributions.

Let me begin with the requirement for a
continued presence of military liaison officers. I am
told that currently the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) has 42 military
liaison officers, who are undertaking the facilitation of
exchanges between our Border Patrol Unit (BPU) and
the Tentara Nasional Indonesia (TNI), monitoring
developments along the land border that could have an
impact on overall security and stability, and providing
mentoring and coaching to the members of the BPU.

The only legal agreement governing the
interaction and exchanges between the border security
agencies of our two countries is the military liaison
arrangement concluded between the United Nations
security force and the TNI. We have not been able to
put in place any successor arrangement, as we have
been preoccupied with defining our land border as a
first step towards cooperative border arrangements.
And we have regrettably come to the conclusion that
the capacities of the BPU, although developing, need
to be further strengthened.

Indonesia has made it amply clear that the main
security agency on its side of the border will be the
TNI - the Indonesian army - as is the case with
other land borders of Indonesia. That implies that the
training of the BPU needs to be provided not only by
police officers but also by military liaison officers, who
are most conversant with military matters. It seems
clear to us that if the military liaison officers have been
given additional training responsibilities, their numbers
should be increased or at least maintained at the same
level.

I have been asked whether the element
guaranteeing the security and support of the military
liaison officers could be reduced. I must state frankly
that if our national security agencies were capable of
assuring the safety and security of the liaison officers,
we would not be asking for their continued presence at
all. We are not, unfortunately, in a position to
guarantee their safety and security, and that has been
made clear in the letter from Prime Minister Alkatiri,
The report of the Secretary-General proposes a 144-
strong element for that purpose.

On the other hand, I can assure the Council that if
any country in the region were to offer stand-by
arrangements for evacuation and other logistical
support, Timor-Leste would be keen to discuss such an
arrangement. While we hear from some friends that
Timor-Leste could be more effectively assisted through
bilateral arrangements, we are puzzled that so far we
have not heard any positive reaction to the very
innovative suggestion that some of our closest
neighbors provide a stand-by evacuation force that
could be activated at very short notice. The negative
reaction, or silence, in regard to our creative proposal
makes us even more skeptical when we hear about
bilateral arrangements in lieu of a multilateral
mechanism.

Before moving on, I would like to express my
sincere thanks to the Council for having stationed the
125-strong Brazilian International Response Unit in
Timor-Leste since last May. Fortunately, we have not
needed to request its assistance over the last few
months. Moreover, our own security agencies,
particularly the Police Reserve Unit, have benefited
from the training provided by the United Nations
police and are functioning well in dealing with reports
of movements and sightings of ex-militia elements,
who are engaged in sporadic criminal activities.

The Council will be happy to hear that despite
predictions to the contrary from some quarters, the
elements of the National Police Reserve Unit have
behaved with remarkable discipline and are deeply
conscious of promoting and protecting the human
rights of all, including those of the former militia and
current criminal elements. It was for that reason that
we decided not to seek the continued retention of the
International Response Unit and agree with the
recommendation that it may be withdrawn when the
current mandate of UNMISET ends.

Allow me now to briefly touch upon our request
for police trainers. We wish to see the emergence of a
professional, ethical, accountable, responsive and
dedicated police service in Timor-Leste. We are
grateful to several bilateral and multilateral partners
who are assisting us in this direction, particularly the
initiative taken by Australia and the United Kingdom
for the Timor-Leste Police Development Programme,
and the United States, China and Malaysia. I am
pleased to inform Council members that a significant
number of East Timorese police officers will soon
receive training in criminal investigation and traffic
control in Indonesia.

Several areas such as forensics, the specialized
units, investigations unit and the like are not covered at
present by those initiatives. Hence we feel that the
retention of the 62 police trainers deployed in those
areas where multilateral and bilateral assistance is
currently unlikely to become available is essential. I
feel that the decision of the Secretariat to reduce the
number of police trainers requested by more than a
third may not be justified.

I would like to briefly outline our requirements
for critical civilian advisers to strengthen the
institutional capacity of our State institutions. Our own
assessment indicates that nearly 68 advisers will be
required. However, our friend, Mr. Hasegawa, who
seemed to know the Security Council even better than I
do, particularly advised me not even to think of asking
the Council for any more than the 58 critical advisers
currently deployed by UNMISET. We have reluctantly
heeded his advice and refrained from projecting our
actual requirements over and above the assistance
being provided by several bilateral and multilateral
partners, and have requested the Council to consider
providing only 5 8 civilian advisers.

Let me say that one reason why we have insisted
we need 68 advisors is because our experience with so-
called voluntary contributions provided through
bilateral arrangements has not been the most
remarkable. When we in East Timor, in particular
myself - and I am sure the Secretary-General and
some other recipient countries have observed this;
indeed we just need to ask our friend Hamid Karzai of
Afghanistan and a few other countries - hear the
phrase, "voluntary bilateral arrangements", it rarely
means that those promises are going to be delivered.
Therefore we are extremely skeptical when we are
asked to rely on bilateral arrangements. Of course, we
must pay due tribute to those countries who have really
contributed to United Nations Development
Programme funding to pay for advisers to assist our
Government. But if we were to rely exclusively on
bilateral funding, we would be in a very dire situation
in my country with regard to ensuring the functioning
and capacity-building of our institutions.

Our requests and the proposals contained in the
report of the Secretary-General are also in line with the
recommendations of the High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change (A/59/565). In its paragraph
224 the report of the High-level Panel clearly states,
"failure to invest adequately in peacebuilding increases
the odds that a country will relapse into conflict".

I am convinced that the Council, in its wisdom,
will find the unity and resolve to provide Timor-Leste,
through the United Nations and in a secure and
guaranteed manner, with the modest but critical means
to meet the challenges that lie before us.

I wish now to brief the Council on the joint efforts
of the Governments of Timor-Leste and Indonesia to
resolve some of the issues of our common past, in
particular that of the reported human rights violations
that occurred in 1999, in the context of the 5 May
Agreement between the United Nations, Indonesia and
Portugal. More than anyone else, the two Governments
are conscious of the need to deal with this burden of
the past in a manner that our two peoples may accept.
Hence, a Commission of Truth and Friendship was
established by a decision of Presidents Susilo Bambang
Yudhoyono and Xanana Gusmao and Prime Minister
Mari Alkatiri during a meeting of the three leaders in
Denpassar, Bali, on 14 December 2004.

Allow me to recall that following the events of
1999, both nations have taken actions within their
respective jurisdictions to respond to the well-
documented reports of human rights violations. In
Indonesia, an Ad-Hoc Tribunal on Human Rights
Violations in East Timor was established. Its work has
not ended. In the meantime, the Indonesian parliament
has passed a law establishing its own truth and
reconciliation commission. In Timor-Leste we have
responded to the need for truth and the desire for
reconciliation with the establishment of the
Commission on Reception, Truth and Reconciliation,
whose work has just ended. They are now preparing a
final report. In Timor-Leste the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, with the full legislative and
executive powers vested in the United Nations
Transitional Administrator of East Timor, created the
Serious Crimes Panel, to which Mr. Hasegawa has just
referred.

Justice comes in a number of forms, criminal
prosecution being the most common. Retributive
justice demands legal prosecution or punishment,
whereby the victim is the State, and the victim a
witness for the State. It is adversarial and focused on
the past. Restorative justice - the main focus of truth
commissions - is about people, where the victims are
the primary concern and not simply witnesses, and the
perpetrator is compelled to truth.

Timor-Leste requires the focus to be on
restorative justice so that primary attention is given to
people, participation, dialogue, needs and the future.
Our past is both tragic and bloody; if we are to reach
back into the past, how far do we go?

The greatest act of justice and blessing bestowed
on the people of East Timor is our freedom. Today we
are free. That is justice, for there can be no greater
justice than our freedom.

Indonesia, too, is free as never before and is
beginning to take steps to confront its own past in
order to extricate itself from a pervasive culture of
violence, abuse and impunity. Tens of thousands of
Indonesians were jailed, killed, tortured, branded as
"communists" and stigmatized for most of their lives.
Hence, Indonesia, in its national parliament, adopted
its own truth and reconciliation law.

Timor-Leste and Indonesia have a long way to go
towards consolidating democracy and the rule of law.
Timor-Leste is starting anew, from the ashes of the
violence of 1999. Indonesia, too, is starting anew, and
is struggling to reform its judiciary and armed forces.

Indonesia is the largest Muslim country in the
world, home to 230 million people; and now it is the
third largest democracy, however imperfect. In 2004,
that multi-ethnic and multicultural nation went through
two democratic elections, which were regarded by all
impartial observers as truly free and open. Radical
Islamic parties failed to make any gains. Yet, overall,
the democratic experiment in Indonesia is still an
incipient and fragile one, and there is no guarantee that
those elements will not gain influence and, ultimately,
power.

The East Timorese and the international
community must accept and understand the complex
challenges faced by the elected civilian leaders in
Indonesia in trying to consolidate their democratic
experiment with prudent reforms. Excessive outside
pressure on elected civilian leaders to meet the
expectations of the international community to have a
credible prosecutorial and trial process - that is, the
jailing of senior military officers - as desirable as that
may be for some, could result in unrest within the
armed forces, thus undermining stability and the entire
democratic experiment in the largest Muslim country in
the world.

Indonesian leaders and the Indonesian people
have shown a remarkable sense of pragmatism in
welcoming Timor-Leste as a sovereign, independent
nation. Former President Abdurrahman Wahid visited
Timor-Leste in 2000, and then President Megawati
Soekarnoputri attended our independence celebration
in 2002. The Indonesian military leadership has
displayed overall good faith in cooperating with the
United Nations civilian and military authorities in
Timor-Leste since soon after their evacuation from the
territory in 1999.

The several hundred armed elements that fled to
Indonesian West Timor in 1999 have been deterred from
destabilizing Timor-Leste thanks to the determined
policy of the Indonesian Government to contribute to
Timor-Leste's stability and to close cooperation
between the leaderships of the peacekeeping force and
the Indonesia Military Forces (TNI).

Land border demarcation talks between our two
sides have progressed in record time, and have now
reached some 96 per cent completion. Our two
Governments are determined to finalize the land border
demarcation process, but we cannot anticipate when
that process will be completed.

Hundreds of individuals of East Timorese origin
continue to be on the Indonesian civil service payroll,
and several hundred others continue to be on active
duty in the Indonesian national police and army,
without suffering discrimination.

We are aware that it is impossible to satisfy the
needs of all victims and that it is impossible to provide
perfect justice. The cross-jurisdictional nature of the
conflict in question lends support to the argument that,
in this case, a Truth and Friendship Commission is best
placed in a bi-national institutional context. It is time
for Timor-Leste and Indonesia to deal with our shared
and turbulent past, while securing our democratic
future.

Allow me briefly to share with Council members
some elements of the terms of reference for our Truth
and Friendship Commission, with a cautionary note
that, while the document has been thoroughly reviewed
at ministerial level, it still requires the signature of our
two Presidents and our Prime Ministers or Foreign
Ministers for it to become official and valid. We
anticipate that, in the next week or two, our two
Presidents and Prime Ministers will initial the terms of
reference of our Truth and Friendship Commission.

Because that document runs to more or less three
pages in my speech, I will simply summarize it in one
minute. In the discussions of the terms of reference we
have held with our Indonesian colleagues and friends,
the two sides have been very conscious that the terms
of reference of the Truth and Friendship Commission
must, above all, be credible and must gain the
acceptance of our own peoples, both in Timor-Leste
and in Indonesia. Members of the joint Commission
will number roughly 10; a final decision on this is to be
made by the two Presidents. They will be drawn from
independent individuals: academics, human rights
experts, jurists and historians from both Timor-Leste
and Indonesia.

Commission members will have full immunity in
the conduct of their work. They will have freedom of
movement in Indonesia and Timor-Leste, unrestricted
access to any documentation available from existing
sources - namely, from the Indonesian Ad Hoc
Human Rights Tribunal, from our serious crimes
process and from our Commission for Reception, Truth
and Reconciliation - and will have the authority to
interview any individual in Indonesia or Timor-Leste
they deem necessary to provide additional information
for their work. The Commission might have one to two
years of work and will finalize its work in a report
submitted to our two Presidents, who will then submit
it to our respective parliaments.

In deciding what would be the best mechanism
for our two Governments and countries to deal with the
events of the past, we for our part also took into
consideration the views of many. My President and I
spent a considerable amount of time consulting with
church leaders, members of civil society, non-
governmental organizations and all political parties
represented in our parliament. We are aware that this
initiative is unique. It is the first time in modern
history that two countries previously in conflict have
decided to deal with issues of violence through a joint
Truth and Reconciliation Commission. We believe that,
if this process is successful, particularly since it
involves a predominantly Catholic country - one of
the smallest and poorest in the world - and the largest
Muslim country - a vibrant functioning democracy -
it could indeed set a positive precedent for the rest of
the world. It would show that, at this time of debates
and so-called dialogue among civilizations, a
predominantly Muslim country and a predominantly
Catholic country, both from the developing world, have
the courage and vision to address their shared past and
bring to an end the most unhappy chapter of their past
in a manner satisfactory to our peoples, first and
foremost, but also meeting the expectations of the
international community.

In conclusion, on behalf of my President, my
Prime Minister and my people, I appeal to the Security
Council to consider positively our request for one final
year's extension of the United Nations mission in
Timor-Leste.

I know that, for those who have served on the
Security Council over the last five years, my personal
credibility is not very high, because this is not the first
time I have appeared here to request another six-month
or one-year extension. But members are familiar with
the Latin proverb, "errare humanum est". I have erred
in the past, being on the optimistic side, thinking that
by 2004 we would no longer need a peacekeeping
mechanism in Timor-Leste. We are requesting one
more one-year or six-month extension of the
peacekeeping mechanism.

It is a very small, critical mission. We know that
the Security Council faces extraordinary burdens
elsewhere. But since 1999 the United Nations has made
a tremendous contribution, under the Secretary-
General's leadership and under the Security Council's
leadership, to what today is one of the most successful
United Nations stories in the world.

We do not want to, as it were, blackmail the Council
with dire, dark scenarios, but the reality is that, as much
as we are all - the East Timorese leadership and
people, and the international community - rightly
proud of the achievements, peace in East Timor and the
institutions that have made that peace a reality are all

very fragile. We do not believe that a request for a six-
month to one-year mission extension, to consolidate
the peace that we have achieved, is asking too much.

I thank the Council; may God the almighty and
merciful inspire it in its deliberations.

