Archbishop Tauran (interpretation from French):
It is a great honour for me to take the floor in this
Chamber on behalf of Pope John Paul II, who has
instructed me to convey his cordial greetings and to tell
the Council how much he shares its concerns and its
desire to support the peoples of the African continent.
Just one month ago, during his pastoral visit to Nigeria,
he did not hesitate to introduce himself as "a friend of
Africa".

The Holy See is particularly grateful to the
Secretary-General for the report that he has prepared for
the international community, drawing to our attention his

 

vision of today's Africa. The Holy See shares his analyses,
which are marked by realism and solidarity.

As Mr. Kofi Annan notes, Africa is not lacking in
either material or human resources. The sense of family,
respect for elders and hospitality to refugees are
manifestations of the love for life and the fraternal spirit
that are so dear to Africans.
But who among us would disagree with other elements
that the report highlights? The ongoing degradation of
natural resources, the vast tracts of unproductive land,
widespread malnutrition, inadequate health-care policies,
cruel ethnic conflicts, a fragile spirit of democracy,
systematic corruption and the weight of external debt are so
many wounds to the spirit of kinship and harmony. In fact,
all these problems are linked. Injustices foster wars,
conflicts lead to poverty, extreme poverty results in the
displacement of individuals, and the impoverishment of
whole societies brings about despair and passivity.

All of these aspects of the African situation are
formidable challenges that the international community
must take up. Allow me to assure the Council that, in its
efforts to do this, it will always find at its side the Catholic
Church, whose solicitous concern for Africa has a long
history. Formerly, it was the generosity of missionaries;
today it is priests, nuns and indigenous laypersons who
have lent their voices to those who have none and who
have cared for, educated and shared the difficult and
laborious daily life of millions of Africans. That is why,
inspired by this solidarity with past and present Africans, I
would like to share with the Council the Holy See's
priorities with regard to Africa.

The lack of respect for the human person, which has
characterized the life of Africans, sows hatred and
continues to foster countless conflicts. This very
morning - despite many appeals for clemency, including
from Pope John Paul II - public executions took place in
several Rwandan locations, plunging Africans and their
friends into despair. Everyone knows that this is not the
way to foster the national reconciliation so needed in
Rwanda.

It is therefore necessary to create a new awareness that
respects life, ethnic diversity and the abilities of each
individual. The violation of the rights of the human person,
of which inter-ethnic massacres are the most tragic
manifestation, call for immediate and clear human rights
education to put an end to situations where might makes
right.

Persistent poverty has led to passivity and despair.
We must restore courage and optimism to those peoples
whose lands, as the Secretary-General states in paragraph
104 of his report,

"are rich and fertile enough to provide a solid
foundation for prosperity".

The international community must permit Africa to ensure
its own economic development. This would require an
immediate search for measures capable of leading to the
cancellation of foreign debt, as well as the opening of
markets without insisting upon burdensome conditions -
by providing, for example, preferential economic
assistance and appropriate transfers of technology. All of
this, of course, would have to be carried out in a manner
that takes into account the proper pace for African
development.

Armed conflicts are most often born of the thirst for
power. Only education that promotes democracy
respectful of local traditions, along with political dialogue,
will be able to bring about justice and peace. Pope John
Paul II, addressing the diplomatic corps accredited to the
Holy See last January stated,

"If violent attainment of power becomes the norm,
if insistence on ethnic considerations continues to
override all other concerns, if democratic
representation is systematically put aside, if
corruption and the arms trade continue to rage, then
Africa will never experience peace or development,
and future generations will mercilessly judge these
pages of African history."

The wisdom of leaders, enlightened by the progress in
political and administrative science, should help them
understand better that political activity is, first and
foremost, service to others.

The constant flow of arms of all kinds from one
country to another not only increases violence, it also
leads Governments to go further into debt, thus seriously
delaying economic and social development. The
international community is, fortunately, increasingly
aware that this cannot be justified and that exporting arms
becomes, in fact, a means of collaborating in conflicts and
genocides. No one can remain unmoved by such a
situation, nor can it be forgotten that it is armed violence,
along with extreme poverty, that was the source of the
tragic fate of the 8 million refugees mentioned in the
report.

 

Of course, the problems of Africa must be resolved by
the Africans themselves. But we must admit that they
cannot succeed if they are abandoned and left to
themselves, and even less if they become pawns of
hegemonies and foreign interference from near or far.
Africa needs disinterested friends who are inspired by a
political will to help the vital forces in their societies take
the path towards respectful political dialogue, equitable
public administration and fraternal solidarity. The economic
progress and social development that certain African
countries have already experienced, thanks in part to
effective regional cooperation, demonstrates that there is
hope. The efforts of all must be united in order to make
progress in this direction.

In conclusion, allow me to cite once more Pope John
Paul II:

"Africa bears the scars of its long history of
humiliations. This continent has too frequently been
considered only for selfish interests. Today Africa is
asking to be loved and respected for what it is. It does
not ask for compassion, it asks for solidarity."
[Angelus of 24 September 1995]

