Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): The
French delegation thanks the High Representative,
Mr. Petritsch, for his briefing this morning.

Once again, we regret that States not members of the
Council that are directly involved in the search for a
settlement in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and in particular the
presidency of the European Union, were unable to speak at
today's meeting.

Mr. Petritsch can count on French and European
Union support for his work to achieve what he has called
ownership of the future of the country by local leaders and
by the population of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Time is of
the essence. International assistance cannot continue at
current levels. Other matters demand attention and
resources. Local actors must be encouraged to shoulder
their responsibilities. This is no easy matter. The High
Representative has had to resort once again to his broad
powers to impose important legislation on which local
leaders were unable to agree. There continues to be a
dilemma between the need for the High Representative to
impose reforms and his wish to make sure that the
authorities understand the responsibilities they must
shoulder. That is another reason why we should
demonstrate our support for the High Representative and
encourage him to act decisively, maintaining the
necessary dialogue, to make progress in key areas he has
identified.

With the High Representative's permission, I should
like to offer a suggestion with respect to the preparation
of future reports to the Secretary-General. It might be a
good idea if he were to devote a portion of his reports to
detailed analysis of a specific problem or theme.

Our priorities echo those that the High
Representative has just outlined: to weaken the grip of the
nationalist parties, to strengthen and improve the
functioning of institutions, to create the context necessary
for the economy to take off, and to promote the return of
refugees and displaced persons.

With regard to refugees, the next few years will
probably provide the last chance for meaningful action to
promote return. Later on, refugee and displaced families
will have been away from the homes in which they lived
before the war for more than 10 years. Children will have
grown up there. Return will have become more difficult.
We must take advantage of the new situation, relating to
such factors as the political changes in Croatia, to resolve
the problem in a regional framework.

The recent municipal elections increased the
pluralism of Bosnian political life, and we hope that this
trend will be strengthened in the next elections. Media
reform and action in the area of the financing of political
parties should also contribute to this needed movement
towards greater democracy. In our view, such movement
would be encouraged also by the adoption of a permanent
election law.

In the economic sphere, much remains to be done to
overcome local authorities' resistance to reform. The
upcoming ministerial meeting of the Peace
Implementation Council ought to accord particular

 

importance to economic priorities and reform, including the
political effect of such measures. Greater importance should
be accorded to the creation of a common economic space
by eliminating all barriers and harmonizing the legislation
of the two entities. Privatization must resume; there have
been scanty results here, and the High Representative must
play a catalyzing role. The privatization of public services
is especially important. This economic reform must be
aimed, inter alia, at promoting foreign investment in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. All of this must be accompanied by a
strengthened fight against corruption and organized crime.

The strengthening of central structures has a certain
impact on such desirable developments. A true State, a
State based on the rule of law, must be established. Projects
carried out in close cooperation between the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Office of the
High Representative are aimed at evaluating the judicial
structure and establishing a border service.

The European Union and its member States, which are
by far the largest contributors in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
can play a decisive role. The European perspective involves
conditions that must be respected. The "road map" and the
agreements on stabilization and association are useful tools
in that regard. In our view, that European perspective is a
powerful lever for achieving the changes that are needed in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Let me put three questions to Mr. Petritsch. In his
View, would it be possible quickly to make a difference in
some of the important areas that he has mentioned?
Secondly, does Mr. Petritsch believe that the elections to be
held in the autumn will gradually enable a new generation
of politicians to come to power, encouraged by the results
of the recent municipal elections? And finally, in the longer
term, after those elections, what does the High
Representative consider can be done to strengthen
cohesiveness in Bosnia and Herzegovina?

