Mr. Dovganyuk (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Russian):
I would like to thank the Japanese presidency and
the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Ms. Bintou Keita, for today's
important briefing.

Over the past 60 years, United Nations peacekeeping
operations have served as one of the most effective
instruments in ensuring and maintaining international
peace and security. At the same time, current United
Nations peacekeeping operations are facing an
unprecedented upsurge in asymmetric threats, which
require a systematized plan to reduce such high risks
and the number of fatalities by adapting existing
approaches or creating new strategies. In that context,
the following measures are required.

First, we need a comprehensive annual review
of United Nations peacekeeping reform in line with
the recommendations set forth by resolution 2378
(2017). We would like to note that the United Nations
Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial, held in Vancouver
in November, provided a good platform for the troop-
and police-contributing countries to receive updated
information on the progress of the transformation of
United Nations peacekeeping, on the enhancement of
the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations and on
responses to challenges to peace and security.

Second, we need to tighten the requirements
and raise the standards for the selection and training
of peacekeeping military and police troops, their
personnel, armaments, materiel and technical base.

Third, we must intensify the professional training
of peacekeepers on the ground, including in-service
training, especially in high-risk situations of armed and
terrorist attacks.

Fourth, better strategies are needed to react to the
threats posed by illegal armed groups posing a threat to
peacekeepers, civilian personnel and local populations.

Fifth, we must heighten peacekeeper awareness on
the protection of civilians when there is an increase in
the displacement and movements of civilians.

Sixth, we need Closer dialogue and
ongoing consultations between the Security
Council, the Secretariat and the troop- and
police-contributing countries.

Seventh, we must increase the number of troop-
and police-contributing countries in peacekeeping
operations, which could strengthen and increase trust
in them on the part of the people in the areas where the
missions are conducted.

Lastly, it is important that information-sharing
is improved and that the best practices of individual
peacekeeping missions are disseminated to other
missions in a timely manner through the central
apparatus of the United Nations. These best practices
should be taken into account in preparing peacekeepers
for their tasks in peacekeeping operations.

It is clear that force generation alone is not
sufficient. Peacekeeping operations need to be effective
in fulfilling their mandates. It is therefore necessary
for police and military personnel to see themselves
as essential partners contributing to enabling peace
processes and implementing agreements. The
peacekeeping operations must support the work of the
civilian component in realizing the overall mandates
and objectives of the United Nations.

