Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his report and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Klein, for his briefing.

The Chinese delegation supports the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) and the International Police Task Force
(IPTF) in their work. We appreciate and welcome the
progress that UNMIBH has made in police reform and
police training. We note that this progress has been
made under very difficult circumstances.

We feel that progress in the recruitment of ethnic
minority police is not that satisfactory. Of course, we
note that a lot of efforts have been made by UNMIBH,
and we hope that such efforts will continue.

Moreover, progress in the return of refugees is
very slow, especially in the ethnic minority areas. This
situation is very disappointing. We hope this process
will be expedited. The process has been going on for
five years. This is not a short period. If it continues to
be prolonged, it could change the demographic
configuration and further complicate the situation.
Therefore, we hope that UNMIBH will make further
efforts to expedite this process.

Of course, the achievements of UNMIBH's
efforts to a large extent depend on cooperation and
political will on the part of the different parties in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the simple reason that
UNMIBH will not stay forever.

In the long run, the solution to the Bosnian
problem rests in the hands of the leaders and people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Part III of the Secretary-General's report deals
with joint activities of the United Nations system. We
appreciate the constructive role that the United Nations
system and other agencies have played in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to achieve peace, reconciliation and
peaceful reconstruction.

In our view, there must be coordination and a
clear division of labour among United Nations and
other international agencies in order to avoid any
duplication, overlap, waste of resources or shirking of
responsibilities. Mr. Klein's predecessor, Ms. Rehn, in
her briefing to the Council, made reference to the
progress made in the coordination among these
organizations and agencies.

The primary responsibility of UNMIBH rests in
the judicial area and in the promotion of democracy.
Indeed, greater cooperation and coordination among
United Nations agencies would further facilitate
progress in those areas.

In view of the requests made by the various
parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina and of the fact that
UNMIBH has a great deal of work still to do, we are in
favour of the Secretary-General's recommendation to
extend UNMIBH's mandate and will continue to
support its work.

