Miss Durrant (Jamaica): First of all, I wish to
express my delegation's pleasure in seeing you, Sir,
preside over the Council's deliberations during the month
of February. We are sure that under your wise guidance
and leadership the business of the Council will be
conducted in an efficient and effective manner. You may
be assured of my delegation's cooperation.

My delegation wishes to welcome the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in East Timor,
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, to the Security Council. We
wish to thank the Secretary-General for his very
comprehensive report and to thank Mr. Vieira de Mello
for his very lucid briefing on the work of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET). We listened with great attention to his
assessment of the situation there. We are aware of the
monumental challenges facing him as he and UNTAET
members, in collaboration with the East Timorese people,
seek to lay the foundation for a transition to
independence.

As Mr. Vieira de Mello pointed out, the East
Timorese have high expectations of the international
community, and of the United Nations in particular. They
face a perilous economic and social situation, with rising
crime, high unemployment, over 80 per cent of the people

 

without visible means of support and over 50 per cent
illiteracy. It is clear that the needs of the East Timorese
must be addressed at all levels. We are therefore pleased
with the ambitious programme outlined by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the objectives
he proposed for UNTAET for the first six months. We wish
to congratulate him and his staff on their dynamic and
energetic approach.

Jamaica strongly supports the work of UNTAET and
its unprecedented role in nation-building. Its role in
establishing a viable, democratic and sustainable system of
governance and public administration is critical. The
participation of the East Timorese in creating and building
these institutions is of fundamental importance, as this will
create for them a sense of ownership of the process. It was
therefore encouraging to hear from Mr. Vieira de Mello his
assessment of the work of the National Consultative
Council and of the participation of all relevant parties. We
see this as a positive step towards national reconciliation.
Some committees have already been established, and we
look forward, over the next few months, to hearing reports
of the establishment of the other committees and the work
they are carrying out.

We are encouraged by the cooperation of the
Government of Indonesia and hope that the relations
developed by UNTAET and the forthcoming visit of the
President of Indonesia later this month to East Timor will
lead to normalization of relations between Indonesia and
East Timor. We hope that this will allow for the
acceleration of the return of the refugees and the
resettlement of those who wish to return to Indonesia. But
while the rate of return of refugees has been encouraging,
with over 130,000 having returned so far, the Secretary-
General's report indicates that conditions in the refugee
camps are still a cause of concern, and for us the
obstruction of access of United Nations personnel to the
camps is unacceptable. We hope that this can be addressed
speedily.

So far, the cooperation and collaboration of the
international community, as evidenced by the level of
support demonstrated at the recent pledging conferences,
must be commended. But we note that Mr. Viera de Mello
has called for quick disbursement of these funds, and we
hope that the international donor community will seriously
address this.

As far as the security situation is concerned, we are
deeply concerned about the incidents of violence. These
incidents have served to undermine the generally stable
security situation, and we note that the United Nations
force will adopt a firm posture in maintaining security
throughout the Territory. However, the fact that these
incidents have continued to occur and have occurred very
recently, and their apparent contributing causes -
unemployment and frustration - all further demonstrate
the urgency with which UNTAET must continue to carry
out its mandate. We agree with the previous speakers who
have emphasized the law and order situation - that the
need for the deployment of the civilian police, the training
of judges and the establishment of the judicial system are
all necessary if the people of East Timor are to be
provided with a functioning judiciary and police
operation.

Mr. Viera de Mello referred to the need to re-
establish prisons and for the work of the military police
and detention centres of the International Force in East
Timor (INTERFET) to come under civilian operations,
and we are therefore pleased to note the involvement in
the training of East Timorese, both including judicial and
civil service personnel, as well as other officials.

The Secretary-General's report also emphasized a
number of positive developments, not the least of which
is the establishment of the Transitional Judicial Service
Commission and the Public Service Commission. We
wanted to commend those countries that have offered
training facilities for the East Timorese, and we believe
that the whole question of human resource development
is key to the progress of East Timor. We have noted the
efforts that have been made in the restructuring of the
education system, and we urge that a programme of adult
literacy be incorporated into this. The fact that we have
been told about the quick-impact projects with the World
Bank, also involving the United Nations funds and
programmes, should not make us lose sight of the fact
that we need long-term programmes which will address
the sustainable development of East Timor. We think it is
very important for this long-term programme to be
elaborated over the next few months.

The Secretary-General, in his report, emphasized the
need to produce tangible results for the people of East
Timor by creating employment and providing a range of
public services, while supporting the reintegration of
displaced persons from West Timor. The failure to
accomplish this could easily negate the efforts of all
concerned to bring peace and security to the people of
East Timor.

 

I want to make a brief reference to the reports which
have been presented pointing to serious violations of human
rights. We believe that these must be addressed by the
international community and by the Government of
Indonesia, and we have noted the determination expressed
by the Indonesian Government to prosecute the perpetrators.

In closing, I wish to express again my delegation's
support for the work of UNTAET and to wish Mr. Viera de
Mello and his staff all success in their efforts.

