Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to begin by thanking you, Sir, and your
country for convening this important debate. As you
well know, Costa Rica shares with Panama a particular
concern for children and a special love of peace, which
is expressed in the shared desire of our peoples to live
without a military force.

I thank the Secretary-General for his seventh
annual report on children and armed conflict, and
Ms. Coomaraswamy for her statement. I also thank
Ms. Veneman and Ms. Becker of Watchlist for their
statements, which have certainly enriched the debate.

The situation of children in zones of armed
conflict has been and will continue to be a source of
ongoing concern to the United Nations. The calamities
of war do not distinguish between children and adults
and afflict them equally; however, many of those
calamities are more serious with respect to children.
Being abandoned, orphaned, uprooted or disabled and
lacking opportunity particularly affect the hope for a
better life that children should always be able to
cherish. It is true that encouraging progress has been
made in the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of child soldiers in some countries, but it
is also true that there has been none in many other
areas affected by violent conflict, where the use of

08-2361]
children to settle the scores of their elders is a flagrant
violation of their most fundamental rights.

Children who are manipulated or forced to carry a
rifle instead of books beneath their arm need us to do
more than hold an annual debate. They need us to name
those who compelled them and to include those names
on the list of transgressors. They need decisive action
from this Council. It is imperative that we fight
impunity with determination.

Costa Rica maintains that children who are used
by armed groups and fall victim to abuse and grave
systematic violations of their rights need the Council to
engage in a serious assessment of applicable effective
measures and sanctions against those who persist in
such deplorable conduct. The Council has a
responsibility to the children of the world to ensure
that all its resolutions are complied with. In that
respect, the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict should regularly provide comprehensive
information on the crimes to the sanctions committees,
where such exist. The Working Group should also
recommend to the Council measures and sanctions
against those who consistently violate its resolutions
where no relevant sanctions committee exists.

It is time for the Council to address with greater
resolve the existence of solid national and international
mechanisms to ensure that those responsible for such
crimes are brought to justice. They cannot go
unpunished. If we are to guarantee the rights of
children, we believe it essential to set aside national
interests and convenience, which are always short-
sighted and far removed from our grand collective
objectives. The Council should not shy from referring
the cases of the most notorious perpetrators of crimes
against children to the International Criminal Court.
That would send a powerful message of intolerance of
those who do not hesitate to sacrifice children to their
narrow selfish concerns. Effective Security Council
action in that area requires us immediately to review
the criteria of the monitoring and reporting mechanism
so that we can more appropriately and effectively
address each of the six serious violations established in
resolution 1612 (2005).

I cannot fail to refer to the alarming increase of
sexual violence that is used as a weapon of war against
thousands of girls and that provides a clear argument
for why we should attach equal importance to all grave
violations. It is also incumbent upon the Council to
ensure that protection measures are commensurate with
the needs of each case. It is the responsibility of all
States to protect their peoples, and the responsibility to
protect is especially important with respect to children.
When a State is unable to protect its children, it is the
obligation of the international community to fill that

gap.

I cannot conclude without reiterating our
condemnation of the killing and mutilation of children
by mines and cluster munitions. For Costa Rica, it is an
unshirkable obligation of all those participating in
armed conflict to provide precise information on the
quantity and location of such artefacts, as well as any
other information relevant to the clean-up and
rehabilitation of contaminated areas. It is urgent that
we make progress in the Oslo process of drafting a
legally binding instrument to prohibit the use,
production, sale and storage of cluster munitions.

