The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Somalia, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Hashi
(Somalia), took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Somalia, document S/2004/469.

After consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council, recalling its
previous decisions concerning the situation in
Somalia, in particular the statement of its
President of 25 February 2004 (S/PRST/2004/3),
and welcoming the report of the Secretary-
General of June 2004 (S/2004/469), reaffirms its
commitment to a comprehensive and lasting
settlement of the situation in Somalia and its
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
political independence and unity of the country,
consistent with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.

"The Security Council reiterates its firm
support for the Somali national reconciliation
process and the ongoing Somali National
Reconciliation Conference in Kenya, launched
under the auspices of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), and
commends the IGAD leaders and in particular the
Government of Kenya for their efforts in the
search for peace in Somalia. The Council also
commends the international observers for their
active engagement in the process.

"The Security Council welcomes the
outcome of the fifth, sixth and seventh IGAD
Ministerial Facilitation Committee meetings on
the Somali National Reconciliation Conference,
which demonstrated the coherent regional
approach and commitment of IGAD member
States to national reconciliation in Somalia.

"The Security Council welcomes the
launching of phase III of the Somali National
Reconciliation Conference and encourages all
parties to continue in their ongoing efforts to
move the process forward and agree on a durable
and inclusive solution to the conflict in Somalia
and the establishment of a transitional federal
Government for Somalia.

"The Security Council recognizes that,
while the establishment of a transitional federal
Government will be an important step towards
establishing sustainable peace and stability in
Somalia, much effort will lie ahead if this
objective is to be achieved. The Council
emphasizes the need for the new Government,
once formed, to engage with the international
community and to use the transition period
constructively for the purposes of reconciliation,
stability and reconstruction.

"The Security Council reiterates that the
Somali parties should abide by and implement
expeditiously the Eldoret Declaration of 27
October 2002 on the cessation of hostilities
(S/2002/l359) and calls on the Somali parties to
continue working towards a comprehensive
security arrangement for Somalia.

"The Security Council reiterates that the
Somali parties themselves bear the main
responsibility for achieving a comprehensive
ceasefire throughout Somalia. The Council calls
on the Somali parties to fully implement the

ceasefire, to ensure security and to resolve their
differences through peaceful means.

"The Security Council condemns those who
obstruct the peace process, in this regard fully
supports the warning of the IGAD ministers, and
reiterates that those who persist on the path of
confrontation and conflict will be held
accountable. The Council will continue to
monitor the situation closely.

"The Security Council welcomes the
decision by the African Union to dispatch a
reconnaissance mission to prepare the ground for
the deployment of military monitors to Somalia
and calls upon Somali leaders to cooperate with
this initiative.

"The Security Council calls on the
international community to continue to support
IGAD in its facilitation of the Somali National
Reconciliation Conference, and calls on the donor
countries and organizations to contribute to the
Conference, the United Nations Trust Fund for
Peace-building in Somalia and the United Nations
Consolidated Inter-Agency Appeal for Somalia.

"The Security Council reiterates serious
concern regarding the humanitarian situation in
Somalia and calls on Somali leaders to facilitate
the delivery of much-needed humanitarian
assistance and to assure the safety of all
international and national aid workers.

"The Security Council reiterates its concern
over the continued flow of weapons and
ammunition supplies to Somalia, commends the
work of the Monitoring Group established
pursuant to resolution 1519 (2003) of 16
December 2003, and urges relevant States and
entities to comply scrupulously with the arms
embargo and to cooperate with the Monitoring
Group.

"The Security Council commends the work
of Mr. Winston Tubman, the Representative of
the Secretary-General, welcomes his visit to the
region in support of the IGAD-sponsored Somali
peace process, and encourages him to continue
his facilitation efforts.

"The Security Council welcomes the
Secretary-General's meeting with the Somali
parties on 8 July 2004 in Mbagathi, Kenya, and
requests the Secretary-General to keep the
Council regularly informed on developments at
the Somali National Reconciliation Conference
and to make timely recommendations on what
additional measures could be taken by the
Council in support of the Conference and its
outcome."
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2004/24.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

