Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): Let me first of all
express my appreciation to you, Sir, and to your
country in its capacity as President of the Security
Council during the month of December 2008, for
organizing this open debate on one of the most critical
issues of international peace and security. The
continuing terrorist acts around the world are a
constant and painful reminder that terrorism remains
one of the most serious threats to all States and
peoples. Terrorist acts cause the increasing mistrust of
people in the capability of the international community
to effectively respond to those inhumane acts of
violence.

The terrible events that took place in Mumbai
represent the most cruel and large-scale terrorist act
since 11 September 2001. Together with the rest of the
international community, Kazakhstan pays special
tribute to the innocent victims of the barbaric act of the
terrorists and expresses its solidarity with the
Government of India.

In his telegram of condolences to Indian Prime
Minister Singh, President Nursultan Nazarbayev
pointed out that, in this time of tragedy, it is necessary
to strengthen international cooperation in the fight
against terrorism. Kazakhstan is confident that only in
that manner will it be possible to confront any act of
terrorism.

Today we are facing unprecedented global
threats: inter-ethnic and inter-confessional conflicts;
international terrorism and organized crime; natural,
anthropogenic and humanitarian disasters; diseases and
epidemics; and energy and environmental problems.
The continued surge of terrorist acts throughout the
world has laid bare the transnational nature of
terrorism. One must recognize that terrorism is well
organized, financially self-sufficient and bolstered by
powerful ideological dictums that poison the
consciousness of an ever-greater number of people.
Against that background, the strengthening of the
international legal framework of counter-terrorist
cooperation is especially relevant. Kazakhstan supports
the adoption without further delay of a comprehensive
convention against international terrorism.

The United Nations, with its authority, universal
character and unique experience, continues to play an
indispensable leading and coordinating role in all
global affairs. Its effectiveness, however, depends on
our will; and we should, through joint efforts, reform
the Organization with a view to strengthening the role
of the Security Council in reacting expeditiously to the
main challenges to international peace and security.

We are sure that constructive and successful
cooperation among United Nations Member States on
the implementation of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy will strengthen regional and international
security and eliminate the issue of international
terrorism in the future.

Regional and subregional arrangements play a
critical role in the efforts to enhance the effectiveness
of global actions against terrorism. In particular, a
significant contribution to counter-terrorism efforts in
the Eurasian region could be made by the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization. The Conference on Interaction
and Confidence-building Measures in Asia is another
such structure.

In conclusion, we would like to express once
again our deepest sorrow over the loss of innocent
lives in all acts of terrorism and convey our sympathies
and condolences to the families of the victims. We
believe that the international community should join in
the efforts to ensure broad and effective cooperation in
the struggle to eliminate the threat of terrorism forever.

