I would like to thank the Federal Republic of Germany for convening today's open debate on "Women and peace and security: sexual violence in conflict". The theme for the debate, "Turning commitments into compliance", is important to note, as our focus must continue to be on implementing the commitments we have made to address sexual violence in conflict. South Africa wishes to express its sincere gratitude to the Secretary-General for his detailed annual report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2020/487), which forms the basis for our deliberations today. This open debate serves as a useful monitoring mechanism to assess the progress made in addressing the scourge of sexual violence in armed conflict situations and the challenges that continue to require the attention of the international community. Armed conflict situations across the world have had a devastating effect on women and girls due, in particular, to their unequal status in society. One traumatic crime to which women and girls are vulnerable is sexual violence committed by parties to armed conflict as a means of advancing their political, social and economic objectives. Over the years, global awareness about the effects of armed conflict on women has increased, owing primarily to the adoption in 2000 of the groundbreaking resolution 1325 (2000) and all other subsequent resolutions and decisions on women, peace and security. Through those outcomes, the Security Council has recognized, and correctly so, that sexual violence as a tactic of war, when used systematically to achieve military or political ends, constitute a threat to international peace and security. Regrettably, sexual violence continues to occur in most conflict and post- conflict situations, which remains a subject of grave concern for my country and must be so to for the Council. Ending that scourge, addressing the resulting trauma and stigma, and holding accountable those responsible for committing these heinous acts, as well as attending to the needs of the victims and survivors, should remain our priority. While the situation of women and girls, particularly those in conflict situations, remains desperate and unacceptable, we must not view women and girls as simply passive victims, but members of society with voices and competence. We must deepen our efforts to systematically change perceptions about women and girls and acknowledge their resilience, self-empowerment and the meaningful role they can play as agents of change and transformation. South Africa therefore recognizes that sexual violence is inextricably linked to gender inequality. We must continue to strongly advocate for the equal participation and full involvement of women in all processes in the maintenance and promotion of peace and security. The onus is on Member States to continually look at measures to strengthen the full and effective implementation of all Security Council decisions, including the recommendations of the 2015 global study pertaining to women, peace and security, in line with resolution 2493 (2019), unanimously adopted in October at an open debate on women and peace and security that emphasized the imperative of implementing all Council decisions on women, peace and security. Our thematic discussion today on converting commitments into compliance resonates with and reaffirms that urgent call. South Africa commends and reiterates its support for the efforts of the Office of the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict towards ending sexual violence in armed conflict situations. The work of the Office has become more important amid the myriad challenges brought about by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) global pandemic, particularly for women and children, internally displaced people, refugees and migrants. It is also thanks to the Office that we are able to monitor and express our concern about the reported rise of sexual and gender-based violence during the COVID-19 pandemic. We therefore reiterate the Secretary-General's call that addressing gender-based violence is also integral to COVID-19 responses. While policies have been put in place to mitigate the scourge of sexual violence, implementation is, unfortunately, lagging. There is still room for improvement in strengthening rule-of-law institutions and capacities at the national level to hold accountable perpetrators of that heinous crime. Measures taken to ensure accountability from perpetrators of sexual violence, such as prohibiting States listed for violations from participating in United Nations peace operations and making sexual violence a designation criterion in sanctions regimes, should continue to be implemented consistently across all country situations. While we recognize the constraints of reporting only on situations of concern, we would appreciate receiving reports on more than merely the 19 situations contained in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/487). Conflict situations in Palestine and Western Sahara, for example, where human rights violations are prevalent and women are affected by ongoing hostilities, should not escape our scrutiny. That will ensure that there is no selectivity or bias in reporting and will maintain the objective credibility of United Nations processes. As Member States, we must do our part to mitigate some of the serious negative impacts of sexual violence, such as stigmatization, discrimination, rejection and social exclusion. Such efforts require sustainable and predictable funding. There should therefore be consistent funding for programmes aimed at combating sexual and gender-based violence in conflict situations, including for ensuring the protection of sexual and reproductive health and rights, easy access to services for victims and survivors of sexual violence - such as clinical treatment for rape and medical, psychosocial and legal services - as well as reintegration support for victims and survivors. This is a significant year as we commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beiying Declaration and Platform for Action and the seventy-fifth anniversary of the signing of the Charter of the United Nations, among others. It is also the review year for the Silencing the Guns initiative on the African continent. Those commemorations will be hollow if we do not take steps to fulfil their objectives and implement the ideals and commitments that we have made by adopting those landmark outcomes. In that regard, South Africa underscores the need for enhanced cooperation through better information sharing, coordination and cooperation between the United Nations, regional and subregional organizations, as well as with civil society and women's organizations to advance the course of women's rights and empowerment. This meeting is convened a day before Nelson Mandela International Day, which will mark the one-hundred-and-second birthday of former President Nelson Mandela, who once stated that freedom cannot be achieved unless women have been emancipated from all forms of oppression. In that spirit, let us all do our part in charting the path for justice for the women and children of today and of the future.
