Mr. Al-Qahtani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to thank Mr. Egeland for his briefing,
which we followed attentively.

It is very sad to note today that the rape of
women has become a spreading cancer in the society of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is sad indeed
that those who commit such crimes do so with
impunity. I ask myself: Why do we forget that crisis,
only to focus on others? Where have we been while the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
deteriorated so drastically? Clearly, the situation in that
country requires surgery to remove the spreading
cancer. We therefore agree with Mr. Egeland that the
Council should do everything in its power to end
impunity and fully to apply criminal justice in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

History proves that national dialogue and
reconciliation represent the best hope for peace in
conflict situations, as borne out by recent
developments in Uganda. We must therefore continue
to support efforts for peace in northern Uganda. In that
regard, we again agree with Mr. Egeland that the
Council must help the Government of Uganda to settle
the problem in the North and to promote reconciliation
and national dialogue to address the root causes of that
problem in order to save innocent lives.

The main thrust of the statements made by
Mr. Egeland and representatives today is that the best
hope for achieving peace in Darfur lies not in
transferring authority from the African Union Mission
in Sudan to the United Nations Mission in the Sudan,

but in calling on the rebel movements to sign the
Darfur Peace Agreement, to enhance national
reconciliation and dialogue in Darfur, and to strengthen
the legal and judicial systems in order to bring to
justice all those who have violated international
humanitarian law and to pay the necessary
compensation to the victims of the violence there, in
accordance with the applicable legal and judicial
framework.

We reiterate our hope that such an approach and
such a philosophy will be applied to all the struggles in
Africa, not just that in Darfur.

