Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): Malaysia joins other
Council members in thanking the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandara Honore, for her
briefing, which we have listened to with much interest.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2015/ 157) on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), submitted pursuant to
resolution 2180 (2014).

Malaysia notes that the political and security
situation in Haiti remains fragile, owing in large
part to the expectations and anticipation among the
people that the long-delayed legislative, municipal
and local elections will be held. We note that, since
the 49 legislators' mandate ended on 12 January, a
key element of the country's political and institutional
framework that can check and balance executive power
has been rendered ineffective. We remain concerned
that continued political uncertainty could lead to
possible deterioration in the security situation in the
country. It is imperative for the Government to address
the people's grievances and allay their fears, including
concerns about the economy and unpaid salaries. In the
light of the recent economic growth currently being
experienced, Malaysia believes that the Government is
in a position to address such concerns.

Since the Council's recent visit to Haiti, in January,
the Government has taken what Malaysia views as a
number of gradual and important steps towards paving
the way for the elections to be held later this year. We
are encouraged by the steps taken so far, including the
establishment of a transitional Government and the
installation of a new provisional Electoral Council,
the promulgation and subsequent enactment of a new
electoral law, and the Government's recently proposed
election calendar, among other things. We believe
that those and other steps taken to date demonstrate
the Government's commitment to ensuring that free,
inclusive and transparent elections can take place this
year. Malaysia joins other Security Council members
in urging Haiti's political actors to work together
constructively to ensure that the elections take place
according to schedule.

We note that due to various factors, including a
series of natural disasters, coupled with a long period of
political impasse and related violence, the humanitarian
and human rights situation in Haiti remains precarious.
Nevertheless, we remain optimistic and are encouraged
by the resilience of the Haitian people in their efforts
to overcome such challenges. We encourage the
Government to consider further improving respect
in the country for human rights, including women
and children's rights and the right to health care and
education, and to take the necessary steps to establish
accountability where there has been impunity,
including for human-rights violations committed in the
past. We stress that such processes should be Haitian-
owned and -led. On a related note, we are encouraged
by steps that have been taken, including those aimed
at eliminating the still present cholera epidemic, and
the ongoing efforts to resettle, relocate and integrate
internally displaced persons and to include women in
the political process and development of the five-year
national strategy for child protection, among other
things.

With regard to the security situation, Malaysia
notes that the safety and security situation remains
stable overall. The Government should nonetheless
continue to focus its responses, particularly in
addressing violent crime, including murder, rape,
gang violence and abductions, among other things.
We note and commend the continued support of the
police and military components of MINUSTAH to the
Haitian National Police (HNP), including through the
provision of technical advice and operational support
for crowd-control operations and incidents of violent
public unrest in Haiti. We are encouraged by the fact
that the HNP appears increasingly capable of managing
such situations on its own. We further note and support
the Government's proposed plan to build and improve
the HNP's capacities and capabilities. We believe
that efforts designed to increase its competency and
professionalism will go a long way to building public
confidence in such a key national institutions.

In addition, the Government's ongoing efforts
to cooperate with MINUSTAH and other partners
and stakeholders to strengthen the legal and judicial
frameworks are positive and noteworthy steps towards
strengthening the rule of law in Haiti. In the light
of the upcoming elections, Malaysia is of the view
that MINUSTAH's possible reconfiguration should
take into account the need to retain a rapid-response
capability, among other things. In that regard, we note
the ongoing consultations within the framework of the
joint United Nations-Government steering committee.
We would also like to emphasize that such discussion
should be geared towards facilitating Haiti's transition
and future development. On the issue of MINUSTAH's
consolidation, Malaysia notes the progress that has been
achieved in areas that fall under the four stabilization
benchmarks - police development, electoral capacity-
building, the rule of law and human rights, and key
governance issues - and we look forward to further
updates.

I would like to take this opportunity to once again
express Malaysia's appreciation for MINUSTAH and
reaffirm our support to its mandate, its leadership and the
entire Mission team for their sustained and exemplary
contributions in support of the Government of Haiti,
particularly as it steps up to meet its responsibilities for
the maintenance of stability and security in the country.

In conclusion, Malaysia believes that 2015 will
present Haiti and Haitians with enormous opportunities
for fulfilling their aspirations. Working alongside
Council members, MINUSTAH and the wider United
Nations family, institutional donors and other partners
and stakeholders, Malaysia will continue to support
the ongoing transition and nation-building processes
currently under way in Haiti aimed at achieving its
goals for stability, security and development.

