Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): The United Kingdom
attaches great value to the role of the African Union
(AU) in preventing, mediating and resolving conflicts
on the African continent. This is an important element
not only of our collective work as the Security Council
but also of the United Kingdom's own bilateral strategic
partnership with the African Union.

We are proud to provide national support for
African Union priorities in this area, including the
continental early-warning system, electoral observation
missions, peace-support doctrine development and
predeployment training for African troop- and
police-contributing countries. We very much commend
the determination of the United Nations Secretary-
General and the Chairperson of the African Union to
reinforce the partnership between the United Nations
and the AU on peace and security.

Let me pay tribute personally and specifically
to the valuable work of the United Nations Office to
the African Union, under the leadership of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Tetteh,
and of her counterpart here at the United Nations,
Permanent Representative Observer Ms. Fatima Kyari
Mohammed, who both do excellent work for their
respective organizations.

The United Nations-African Union partnership in
peacekeeping and in peace-support operations continues
to develop. The United Kingdom supports in principle
access to United Nations assessed contributions for
future AU-led peace-support operations on a case-by-
case basis and subject to certain key conditions. A
key consideration in any future Council decision on
this issue is the African Union's own commitment to
funding 25 per cent ofthe costs ofits own peace-support
operations. This is an important symbol of African
determination to take ownership of African-led
solutions to conflicts on the continent.

Robust financial reporting arrangements, clear
joint planning and coordination structures and strong
compliance frameworks for human rights, international
humanitarian law and conduct and discipline will also
be key. May I at this point express my disappointment at
finding that in the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia discussions this year, posts dealing with
just these issues were not supported by members of
the Group of African States in the Fifth Committee.
We encourage the Secretariat and the African Union
Commission to continue their work on these important
technical areas.

At the Niamey meeting held on 8 July, Member
States agreed that detailed proposals for effective
division of labour between the AU and African
subregional organizations would be developed. We very
much welcome this. An enhanced partnership between
the United Nations, the African Union and subregional
organizations will be crucial in supporting progress
on issues such as the continued implementation of
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan, and let me here echo the words
of my colleagues about our visit to Juba this month
under the leadership of the South African presidency of
the Council and, of course, our American colleagues.
We left Juba with a clear agreement that we needed to
stick to the 12 November timeline and that all parties
needed to compromise for the good of the people of
South Sudan. The Security Council and the African
Union expressed their commitment to being part of
and monitoring the implementation of any outstanding
tasks after the transitional Government was formed
and expressed also a determination to take action
against spoilers.

Let me also say how important that partnership was
in the Sudan's transition to civilian governance; the
African Union was strongly supported by the Council
through the events of this summer, and, of course, for a
sustainable political settlement in Somalia.

On Libya, I would very much welcome an increased
African Union role, as we discussed when we were in
Addis Ababa. It is extremely important, as our German
colleague has pointed out, that the African Union be
fully represented as a key part of the Berlin process.
But I would also just like to highlight the key role that
other regional organizations, including the League of
Arab States, play, which I have no doubt the Kuwaiti
Ambassador and the observer of the European Union
will mention.

Closer coordination among the United Nations,
African Union and subregional organizations should
also support earlier and more effective action to
prevent slow-burning political crises from developing
into conflicts, with each leveraging their comparative
advantage. I think that this is entirely consistent with
the African Union's initiative to silence the guns by
2020 and the focus that the Secretary-General and,
indeed, the Council has put on conflict prevention.

We particularly recommend greater collaboration
with regard to Cameroon, where inclusive discussion
and follow-up on the recommendations of the national
dialogue are urgently needed to maintain momentum
towards peace. Close coordination among subregional
actors, the African Union and the United Nations is
also vital to resolving the political crisis in Burundi
and making progress towards credible and inclusive
elections in 2020.

We and each of our colleagues on the African Union
Peace and Security Council have, of course, our own
role to play in strengthening the United Nations-African
Union partnership on peace and security under Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. Our recent
annual consultations in Addis Ababa were a reminder
of how valuable it is for us to discuss these issues and
seek ways to leverage our comparative advantage. I can
only agree with the Ambassador of Germany that it
would be great to see even greater frankness, perhaps
most importantly where we do not agree, and a greater
focus on actions that we can take together.

Let me just say that I hope we can keep the channels
of dialogue between our two Councils open through
the coming year, ensure that our consultations foster
the development of even deeper and more meaningful
coordination, and do more together to make a reality of
peace on the continent of Africa.

