Mr. Gonsalves (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I have the honour to speak today on
behalf of the 14 States members of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM), and to align CARICOM
with the statement made by the representative of Egypt
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. CARICOM
welcomes the initiative of Japan, in its capacity as
President of the Security Council, for convening this
open debate and for its concept paper of 1 April (see S/2010/165), which is invaluable in shaping today's
debate on working methods. CARICOM. would also
like to thank the members of the Council for their
insights today and their own inputs on this issue.

CARICOM, more than most, takes particular
interest in the areas of transparency, efficiency and
interaction with non-members. Our interest is born of
our historical absence from this Chamber, and, indeed
the appalling dearth of small island developing States
(SIDS) in general among the membership of the
Security Council. The last CARICOM. State to serve on
the Security Council began its term one decade ago.
One year later, in 2001, Singapore became the last of
the SIDS to hold Council membership. Seventy-three
of the 192 United Nations Member States have never
served on the Council. Of those 73 Member States, 29
are SIDS. Therefore, although SIDS comprise only 20
per cent of the United Nations membership, they
represent a full 40 per cent of the States that have
never served on the Council. Over 78 per cent of SIDS
have never held a non-permanent seat on the Security
Council - a percentage that is replicated within our
own CARICOM. region. As such, our historical
position as Council outsiders has made CARICOM
acutely sensitive to the practical effects of working
methods on transparency and interaction with non-
members. From our unenviable position of largely
being on the outside looking in, CARICOM. recognizes
that recent measures and adjustments by the Council
have resulted in some improvements. However, a great
deal more can and must be done.

In that regard, and within the context and
constraints of this open debate, CARICOM. stresses the
following four points. First, it is critical for the
Security Council to accept that reform of its working
methods, however far-reaching or effective, must
necessarily take place within the context of wider
Security Council reform, including an increase in
permanent and non-permanent membership.
Non-members will have little interest in interacting
with a body whose legitimacy is compromised by its
stodgy refusal to reflect changing global dynamics.
Working methods therefore represent a single

component of a comprehensive reform exercise, and
must proceed in tandem with these complementary
reforms.

I note parenthetically that many Members today
bemoan the workload of the Council, but efficiency
demands that most organizations, bodies and
businesses, when faced with an increased workload,
expand to deal with and handle the increased workload.

Secondly, as a general rule, the Security Council
should refrain from encroaching upon the functions and
powers that the Charter or tradition has placed within
the purview of the General Assembly. It is far better for
the Council to construe its mandate strictly, and do a
small number of things well, than it is for it to be more
expansive and do a host of tasks poorly. The seemingly
inexorable mission creep of the Security Council is
troubling, particularly to Member States like ours,
which have been primarily creatures of the General
Assembly alone. Any unnecessary encroachment by the
15 members of the Council into the functions and
powers of the other 177 non-members will serve to
undercut the compelling logic and unique goals under
which the United Nations was established.

Thirdly, further adjustments to working methods
are required to enhance the transparency, openness and
interaction of the Council with the wider membership.
CARICOM. recognizes the Council's need for
efficiency and, indeed, supports greatly enhancing this
efficiency and effectiveness. However, optimizing
transparency, interaction and efficiency is not a zero-
sum exercise. In this regard, we View as particularly
useful the suggestions that have been made and refined
by the group of five small countries regarding, inter
alia, reports, consultations and the implementation of
decisions.

Fourthly, CARICOM. is curious as to the broad and
expansive reading that some States give to Article 30 of
the Charter. The argument that only the Council -
operating in a vacuum and advising itself - can adjust
its working methods unfortunately raises more thorny
questions than it answers. For example, CARICOM
questions how, as a practical matter, working methods
can be determined solely within a body in which two
thirds of its members are replaced every few years. If
we are to accept the concept paper's assertion that "[f]or
many elected members, learning the procedural aspects
of the Security Council is a challenge" (5/2010/165, para. 12) how can those elected members, in a limited
period of time, both learn and reform the working
methods, only to be replaced by a host of new elected
members that will have to repeat the process again? And
why would incoming members that would not have
contributed to the Council's working methods in any
way feel any fealty to them? Only the permanent
members of the Council would have any degree of
influence or allegiance to such an arrangement.

It is impossible to read Article 30 in such a way
as to make it immune from the General Assembly's
explicit authority to discuss and make
recommendations on any matters within the scope of
the Charter relating to the functions of any organ of the
United Nations - including the Council - and to
make recommendations to the Council on these
matters. Articles 10 through 12 of the Charter establish
the scope of the General Assembly's powers and its
limits with absolute clarity. The Council may have the
responsibility of formally adopting its rules of
procedure, but the General Assembly is clearly
empowered not only to discuss the Council's working
methods but to make recommendations to the Council,
whether or not those recommendations touch on and
concern the rules of procedure. Given the
acknowledged role of the General Assembly in
conferring legitimacy on bodies, decisions and norms,
the Council would be well advised to adopt rather than
to resist the relevant recommendations that may yet
arise from the wider membership.

In conclusion, the welcome changes to the
Council's methods thus far, as outlined in the concept
paper, have served to highlight the promise and
possibility of further beneficial changes. It is
universally accepted, we believe, that the Council is
not operating at its optimum efficiency, transparency,
accessibility or effectiveness. Adjustments in working
methods, as part and parcel of a wider range of
reforms, can assist in remedying these acknowledged
deficiencies. The continued evolution of the Council
and its working methods is therefore necessary and
desirable.
The Security Council is not a cocoon, a vacuum
or an impregnable and fossilized bunker. It is of this
world and of this membership. It must therefore reflect
this world and respond to this membership. CARICOM
hopes that one or more of our members will soon grace
the inner sanctum of the Council again. That hope
notwithstanding, we desire a Council whose working
methods establish it as a nimble, efficient, transparent
and accessible body that is open to the Views of the
wider membership and reflective of changing global
realities.

