Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I congratulate your country, Madam President,
on assuming the presidency ofthe Security Council and
wish you every success. We also commend Ambassador
Karen Pierce and the United Kingdom delegation on its
presidency of the Council last month.

We thank Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General; Mr. Robert
Mardini, Permanent Observer of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to the United
Nations; and Archbishop Warda for their briefings.
We wish Mr. Mardini every success in his future role
as Director-General of the ICRC. The State of Kuwait
reiterates its appreciation and support for the work of
the briefers in carrying out their respective mandates.

As a neighbouring country, Kuwait is following
developments in Iraq very closely after the protests that
began several weeks ago in a number ofgovernorates. We
regret the casualties that have occurred among civilians
and security forces, and we extend our condolences to
the families of the victims. In that context, we call for
non-violence, restraint and calm. We should not provide
those seeking to harm Iraq and the Iraqi people with the
opportunity to sow strife, instability and insecurity by
using live ammunition and attacking innocent protesters
and public and private property. We hope that Iraq will
be able to overcome those exceptional circumstances
and normalize the situation.

The recent past has shown the unity of the Iraqi
people, regardless oftheir political, ethnic and religious
affiliations, by eliminating the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant and overcoming the darkest and most
challenging chapters in its history. We wish the entire
Iraqi people lasting stability and prosperity. At the
same time, we welcome the steps taken by the Iraqi
Government to meet the demands of the Iraqi people
and to defuse the situation, including the establishment
of a committee to investigate the use of force against
protesters and holding accountable those responsible
for violations against them.

The next stage in Iraq will be important to the
country's recovery, and we are aware of the considerable
challenges it will face. It is important to address them
through a constructive and peaceful dialogue, which
requires the support and assistance of the international
community and the United Nations, while respecting the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Iraq and
avoiding any form of interference in its internal affairs.

The State of Kuwait is aware of the difficult phase
facing Iraq. We will spare no effort in supporting Iraq
and its people in accordance with their needs and those
of the Iraqi Government as they strive to address their
internal challenges. We welcome the vital role played
by the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq to
enhance those efforts, in line with its mandate, including
its proposal, in consultation with the President, the
Prime Minister and the Speaker of the Parliament, to
set up a reform road map that is in accordance with
the legal and constitutional framework and takes into
consideration the basic demands of the Iraqi people.

The question of missing Kuwaiti and third-country
nationals, which has been an item on the Security
Council agenda for three decades, is an important and
sensitive issue for the Kuwaitis and the families of the
victims, who have been eagerly waiting any information
on the fate oftheir loved ones for the past 29 years. This
is a humanitarian issue, and we hope it will be resolved
as soon as possible.

We call on the members of the Council to continue
their support and their serious endeavours to find a
solution that can end the suffering of the families of the
missing persons, determine their fate and locate their
remains. In that connection, we highlight the efforts of
the United Kingdom, France and the United States to
contribute to the work of the Tripartite Commission,
including by providing maps and archives from 1990
and 1991, which we hope will yield further positive
results, since we have now located the remains of a
number of missing Kuwaitis that are being analysed
to determine their identities. We also appreciate the
Government of Iraq's constructive contribution as
part of the Tripartite Commission and its Technical
Subcommittee, under the leadership of the ICRC. We
commend the ICRC for its role in determining the fate
of the remaining missing Kuwaitis and third-country
nationals in the past few years. This cooperation has
enabled us to determine the fate of 236 of 605 missing
persons. We hope it will continue and be stepped up
in its next phase in order to make substantive progress
in implementing the plans and programmes of action
agreed by the member States of the Commission.

With regard to the issue of Kuwaiti property, I
commend the efforts of the Iraqi authorities and all
the parties that have helped to facilitate the return of
Kuwaiti property, including most recently 200,000
books, as Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert mentioned in her
briefing. This is a positive step and part of Iraq's efforts
to implement the relevant Security Council resolutions.
We hope that Iraq will continue working to ensure the
return of all Kuwaiti property, including the national
archives. What has been returned is only a small part
of what is missing. The national archives that the
Secretary-General mentions in his report (S/2019/865)
have been missing since 1991 and are valuable to the
State of Kuwait for historical reasons. We previously
provided many lists of the archives that have not yet
been returned, most notably those of the Amiri Diwan,
the Office of the Crown Prince, the Office of the Prime
Minister and the Office of the Ministry for Foreign
Affairs, all of which were looted during the Iraqi
invasion of Kuwait. They are priceless and some of
them date back to the nineteenth century.

In conclusion, while we commend Iraq's efforts
to fulfil all of its remaining international obligations
to the State of Kuwait, as stated in the relevant
Council resolutions, we hope that those outstanding
commitments will be honoured. Kuwait was one of the
first to support Iraq in overcoming the obstacles to its
stability and security and in fulfilling its remaining
commitments since the liberation of the State of Kuwait
in 1991. We are certain that Iraq's implementation of
its remaining commitments, under the supervision of
the United Nations, will strengthen the relationship
between our two countries on a basis of respect for the
relevant Council resolutions.

