Mr. Sial (Pakistan): This restricted debate on exit
and transition strategies, convened under the French
presidency, is a timely initiative, especially in view of
the ever-increasing United Nations peacekeeping
engagements and the global financial crises, which
demand optimal resource utilization at the United
Nations. We thank Under-Secretaries-General Alain Le
Roy and Susana Malcorra, and the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General for their
excellent briefings. We also appreciate the dedication
of their teams in advancing the peacekeeping work of
the United Nations.
3
Pakistan aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Morocco on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

The United Nations as an institution derives its
inspiration from our common quest for peace and
security. However, the multiplicity of situations and the
wide variety of contributing factors make the
proposition of total and lasting peace impossible. We
therefore see the persistence, recurrence and new
eruption of conflict situations in various parts of the
world. In spite of the perpetual nature of the challenges
on the peacekeeping landscape, we Member States
have contributed to the noble objective of
peacekeeping in a wide variety of ways.

Pakistan has remained committed to the United
Nations collective approach to the maintenance of
international peace and security. Our commitment to
collective endeavours for peace has led us to become a
top contributor of uniformed personnel to United
Nations peacekeeping missions. Today, over 10,000
Pakistani uniformed personnel are working in United
Nations peacekeeping missions. Our unflinching
commitment to United Nations peacekeeping
operations has been tested time and again. More than
100 Pakistani peacekeeping troops have sacrificed their
lives in the service of the United Nations.

The inherent correlation between policy
formulation, planning and implementation necessitates
a comprehensive approach to individual peacekeeping
situations. In tandem with our field contribution, we
have invested our efforts in the area of policy planning
and formulation. Our successful advocacy of a
comprehensive approach, in collaboration with the
endeavours of other Member States, resulted in the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission.

We have seen that some missions have been
successful while others have had several shortcomings.
That calls for an urgent re-evaluation of our policy
formulation, planning and implementation concepts,
processes and parameters.

The fundamental flaw in policy formulation is
that policymakers succumb to the temptation of
creating parallel institutions and systems in
peacekeeping situations instead of investing in existing
national structures. Thus, from the very beginning,
most peacekeeping operations start as competitors of
local systems and, by virtue of being in a position of
power, contribute to the decapitation of local
structures.

The monopoly on policy formulation and
planning is also a huge impediment to ensuring the
success of United Nations peacekeeping missions. The
rhetoric of triangular cooperation is often repeated in
United Nations peacekeeping debates, but with little
accommodation. In addition, how can one claim that
triangular cooperation involving the Security Council,
troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and the Secretariat
is all encompassing while the parties on the ground -
the real stakeholders - remain outside the process?
The clear commitment of those parties and their
affinity to the objectives of a peace mission are not
only desired, but should be mandated through an
inclusive policy formulation process. Meaningful
quadrangular engagement at the very beginning, when
a peacekeeping operation is being conceived, will
therefore guard against the pitfalls that we very often
encounter.

The mechanics of the process itself, which are
also discussed in the Brahimi report (see S/2000/809),
necessitate the orderly closure of a mission. We are of
the view that brainstorming and consultations aimed at
determining clear and achievable objectives should
come first. That requires a thorough study of realities
on the ground, engagement with the parties in the field
and an assessment of resource needs and availability.
The presence of TCC-origin senior officials in the
Secretariat could be of great help at that stage in
setting achievable goals against the backdrop of the
most efficient use of resources.

Secondly, a peacekeeping mission should always
be built through a phased and staggered planning
approach that underpins the interconnectivity of
planning, execution and achievements under the
overarching rubric of a mission's main objectives.

Thirdly, we agree with the observation made in
the presidency's concept paper (S/2010/67) that there is
insufficient attention to and early investment in the
area of building national institutions. However, in that
connection, we would like to underscore that
peacekeeping, reconciliation and peacebuilding go
hand in hand and are not mutually exclusive.

The pre-eminence of political reconciliation after
the initial restoration of peace, within mutually agreed
parameters, is of paramount importance. The prospects
for peace are often better in the beginning, as third-

lO-23924
party intervention checks the hand of the aggressor or
the one at fault. It also opens doors for give-and-take
opportunities and strengthens the position of the third
party as an acceptable arbiter of peace.

The opposite of reconciliation would be the
driving of a wedge between parties by supporting one
over the other. Parties derive their existence mostly
from demographic realities that cannot be undone
through defeat or elimination. Peacekeeping without
reconciliation would mean rare success stories and
more sordid sagas. Yet, unfortunately, that Charter
provision has failed to command respect.

The integration of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding activities through institutional
arrangements is more a question of managerial
efficiency and managerial possibility. The nature of big
and cumbersome administrative structures limits top
management's ability to see through the system. It also
clouds the need for transparency. Hence, coordination
must be strengthened and overlaps must be eliminated.
But that should not happen at the cost of institutional
efficiency and transparency.

The mandates of peacekeeping missions should
be commensurate with ground realities. We have seen
the evolution of mandates from traditional to
multifaceted ones. Gaps between Chapter VI and
Chapter VII mandates are often covered through
different mandate variations. Pakistan supported such
variations during our most recent tenure on the
Security Council in order to ensure peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and peace enforcement in the cases of
Cote d'Ivoire, Haiti, Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. However, such missions
without adequate resources are an anomaly, for hosts as
well as for Member States, including TCCs. Therefore,
all mandates must be matched with adequate resources,
including a sufficient number of well-trained and well-
equipped troops having rapid-deployment capacities,
tactical and strategic reserve capabilities and the
requisite logistical support.

Failure sometimes ushers in perfect success, if
one is ready to rethink and readjust his engagement
strategies. Therefore, a delay in the successful
completion of a mission should not force us to abandon
a peacekeeping mission. In such a situation, we must
be guided by a deeper prognosis of the ground
situation, effective engagement with the parties, human
ingenuity and an unflinching commitment to the
mission. Failure is not an option in the domain of
international peace and security. We look forward to
further in-depth examination of the important theme of
transition and exit strategies in a relevant forum, such
as the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.

In conclusion, we would like to pay homage to
the men and women who recently sacrificed their lives
or suffered injuries while performing United Nations
peacekeeping duties in Haiti.

