Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): Allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, for organizing this
important debate on post-conflict peacebuilding. This
debate is opportune and takes place at a time when the
general membership of the United Nations is seized
with the review of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC). In that regard, the views of Member States will
be critical as we take these discussions forward.

Allow me also to welcome the presence and
participation earlier today at this important meeting of
the Secretary-General, the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Japan, Afghanistan and Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Minister of Defence of Sierra Leone
and the Minister of Justice of Timor-Leste.

South Africa wishes to associate itself with the
statement to be delivered by the Ambassador of
Bangladesh on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission almost five years ago by both the General
Assembly and the Security Council was a step in the
right direction in an effort to address the challenges of
preventing countries emerging from conflict from
relapsing into conflict. The critical role of
peacebuilding, therefore, is both to consolidate the
gains achieved as a result of the peace process and to
prevent relapse into conflict.

South Africa is of the view that peacekeeping
operations have an important role to play in early
peacebuilding efforts and as such should create an
environment conducive to establishing the foundations
for sustainable development, the rule of law and good
governance. Peacekeeping and peacebuilding should
therefore not be viewed as linear, sequential processes.
An integrated approach that incorporates early peace
building activities during the start up of peacekeeping
missions is required to create, maintain and sustain
peace. This will ensure the early delivery of peace
dividends, which is critical to sustaining and
consolidating the peace process. In this regard,
integrated peace missions have an important role to
play in maximizing the impact of the United Nations
response on the ground.

Our experience in African peace missions has
shown that peace agreements alone are not sufficient to
bring stability to a country and that the holding of
successful elections does not on its own ensure long-
term stability. Effective communication and inclusive
dialogue between national actors and the civilian
population are critical to building confidence in the
peace process.

South Africa believes that the success of
peacebuilding must be directly linked to measurable
impacts and concrete deliverables on the ground. These
should include the improvement of socio-economic and
security conditions. As such, the priorities in the post-
conflict environment should centre around four basic
pillars of post conflict reconstruction: security sector
reform, socio-economic development, justice and
reconciliation, and good governance and inclusive
participatory systems.

Peacebuilding can be successful only when it is
done with the Governments concerned; it cannot be
done on behalf of a Government or a country. National
ownership must therefore be ensured by aligning
peacebuilding activities with the national priorities of
the Government concerned. This, we believe, will
ensure ownership and the long-term sustainability of
the process.

More often than not, countries emerging from
conflict are faced with the challenge of a lack or a
shortage of the resources needed for immediate
reconstruction and development programmes. Ensuring
that sufficient resources are mobilized to assist these
fragile States is an important investment in the long-
term stability and sustainability of the peace process.
The international community has been willing to
contribute generously to peacekeeping efforts; it is
important that this commitment also be carried into the
post-conflict peacebuilding phase. The international
community has to avoid putting countries emerging
from conflict into the challenging position of having to
graduate from a well-resourced peacekeeping operation
to an under-resourced peacebuilding process.

It is very important in this regard to devise a
funding mechanism that would ensure adequate and
sustainable resources to countries emerging from
conflict. Financial and flexible donor support is
therefore critical to allowing post-conflict States to
deal with the myriad challenges that confronts them.
The role of the international financial institutions in
recognizing the peculiar needs of post-conflict
countries and in providing flexible financing can
therefore not be overemphasized.

In conclusion, my delegation is of the view that
the review of the Peacebuilding Commission will offer
yet another opportunity for the international
community, and the United Nations in particular, to
reflect on these challenges and to position themselves
to address peacebuilding in a more integrated and
holistic manner.

