Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman and Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Armed Conflict
Pramila Patten for their reports on the situation in
Rakhine state in the Republic of the Union of Myanmar.

Bolivia reiterates its vigorous condemnation of
the serious violent situation that has affected several
communities in the Rakhine state, in particular the
Rohingya community.

According to data issued on 1 December by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, since the beginning of the crisis in August
more than 640,000 refugees have been displaced to
Bangladesh. If we add to those the more than 300,000
Rohingyas who became refugees before the crisis, the
current displaced population in that country amounts
to over 1 million people. Unfortunately, this sensitive
situation is exacerbated by the outbreak of diphtheria
in the Rohingya refugee camps in the Cox Bazar
community in Bangladesh, where, according to the
World Health Organization, more than 550 cases and 9
deaths had been reported as of 11 December.

Moreover, we are deeply disturbed by reports of
humiliating and degrading treatment, gender-based
violence, acts of sexual aggression and gang rapes
against Rohingya women and girls allegedly committed
by members of the Myanmar armed forces. In this
regard, we urgently call on the relevant authorities
to begin the necessary investigations to identify the
perpetrators of these reprehensible acts so that they are
brought to justice and impunity is avoided in the face of
these serious violations of human rights.

Bolivia reiterates that the only way to resolve this

crisis is through dialogue, and to that end the parties
must commit to implementing strategies that strengthen
mediation, consultations, good offices, negotiation and
avoid at all cost any confrontation-based rhetoric. In this
regard, we note the signing of the bilateral agreement
between Myanmar and Bangladesh on 23 November to
establish guidelines to allow for the return of displaced
Rohingya to their places of origin. We remind the
parties that efforts to facilitate the return of refugees
must abide by the principles of international law and
that returns must be voluntary, safe and carried out
under dignified conditions.

Moreover, we underscore the development by the
Government of Myanmar of public policies in different
areas to alleviate the situation ofthe Rohingya refugees
and we highlight the willingness shown by the parties
to address the crisis in a crosscutting manner and
look forward to their progress. Similarly, we call on
the Government to continue making its best efforts
to implement the recommendations of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State, which include,
among others, the implementation of strategies that
promote socioeconomic development, citizenship,
freedom of movement, community participation and
representation, intercommunal cohesion and the
safety of all communities. In this context, we note the
establishment of the ministerial-level committee for
the implementation of the recommendations, and the
organization and distribution of tasks to implement
them. We believe that its work and coordination
with different United Nations agencies will be
important in implementing the road map outlined in
the recommendations.

In order for our actions to be effective and
sustainable, we must continue working steadily on
measures to alleviate the situation of the affected
Rohinyga community. To that end, it is important
to allow and guarantee full and unrestricted access
for humanitarian assistance to all peoples who are
displaced, since the only way to respond effectively to
this crisis is to address the problem in all its dimensions.
In this regard, we highlight the willingness of the
Government of Myanmar to work with different United
Nations agencies and we call on them to deepen further
their coordination efforts.

Finally, we recognize the willingness and
cooperation shown by the people and Government of
Bangladesh in addressing this crisis; and we call on the
regional organizations and the international community
in general to continue cooperating to that end.

