Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
The maintenance of international peace and security,
human rights and sustainable development lie at the
heart of the goals that the United Nations system strives
for. Switzerland is fully committed to the Charter and
to a strong United Nations. It is in that spirit that we
approach today's debate and welcome it. I will address
four issues.

First, the Charter is the expression of our common
commitment to the supremacy of law over force. The
prohibition of the use of force, as set out in Article
2, paragraph 4, of the Charter is of fundamental
importance. It seeks to ensure the security of all
States - big or small, rich or poor. In addition, Member
States have the duty to protect their populations, in
particular from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity. They must use appropriate
means, notably diplomatic and humanitarian ones, in
accordance with the Charter, to protect populations from
such crimes. Switzerland supports France's initiative
to limit the use of veto in the case of mass atrocities.
We invite all members of the Security Council - both
permanent and non-permanent - to voluntarily to
refrain from voting against Council action aimed at
preventing or ending mass atrocities.

Secondly, the Charter recognizes that the respect
and protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms is crucial to guaranteeing and maintaining
international peace and security. Switzerland aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Austria on behalf of the Group of Friends of the Rule
of Law. The duty to fight impunity when violations
of international law have occurred is inherent in the
Charter. To ensure that a set ofjointly agreed rules will
last, we must ensure respect for them and sanction their
violation. Switzerland's emphasis on the fight against
impunity demonstrates our commitment to the Charter.
United Nations fact-finding efforts, the International
Criminal Court and other mechanisms are crucial in
that respect.

Thirdly, achieving sustainable peace is impossible
in the absence of a political solution, as shown by
the situations in Ukraine and Syria in particular. The
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
has promoted inclusive dialogue in order to advance in
the search for a political solution, in particular to the
Ukraine crisis.

Switzerland is convinced that political solutions
and inclusive dialogue are crucial. We welcome the
good-offices missions of the Secretary-General and
encourage the United Nations to continue enhancing its
capacities, in particular in the area of mediation, and to
strengthen its cooperation with regional organizations.

Fourthly, the Charter recalls the key importance of
multilateralism. Today's challenges are too great and
too complex to be tackled by a single State. Threats
such as those posed by foreign terrorist fighters or the
Ebola epidemic are illustrations of the fact that now
more than ever we need a forum where all States can
work together for effective solutions.

Member States have conferred on the Security
Council the primary responsibility for international
peace and security, and the Council acts on their behalf.
It is our common responsibility to ensure that the Council
fulfils its role in the most effective manner possible. As
the coordinator of the trans-regional Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group, Switzerland
will continue its efforts to reform the working methods
of the Security Council. Switzerland aligns itself also
with the statement read earlier by Maldives on behalf
of the ACT Group.

Today the world is ridden by conflict, and civilians
are the primary victims. Human rights and fundamental
freedoms are cast aside. The Charter provides a unique
and universal framework to enhance and maintain
international peace and security. What is needed most
is genuine political will on the part of all Member States
to provide the United Nations with all of the relevant
capacities to promote international security, human
rights and sustainable development across the world.

