Ms. Beerli (spoke in French): I thank the Senegalese
presidency for having inviting the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to participate in
today's important debate and give its views based on its
experience on the ground.

(spoke in English)

None of us can live without water. We need water
to drink. We need water to grow food. We need water to
cook. And we need water to stay clean. Water is a basic
human need and the most fundamental humanitarian
requirement. Water is a symbol of life in the poetry of
every nation. In the great musical culture of Senegal,
the stringed kora of the Griot is made from the same
gourd that people use to carry water. The Griot knows
that water is for the body what song is for the soul.

In the ICRC's experience, the vital importance of
water often makes it ahighly contested resource in armed
conflicts. Water points become strategic - whether
they are rural wells in arid lands or pumping stations
in sophisticated cities. In many wars, water systems are
also caught up in fighting, becoming damaged, degraded
or destroyed. Even when supply exists, accessing water
can become extremely dangerous - especially for
women and girls who have the responsibility in many
societies for water collection. Children can spend hours
queuing and collecting water when they should be
at school.

Water is directly linked to public health. Polluted
drinking water or insufficient water for washing causes
people to get ill, which puts additional strain on health
facilities and medical personnel already struggling to
cope with high demand and limited capacity. Water
supply is also clearly linked to forced displacement
and migration. When water supply fails, a civilian
population has no option but to move. People are forced
to leave their homes, leading to large movements
of populations.

The provision ofa safe, sufficient, regular and clean
water supply is a humanitarian priority for the ICRC.
In over 80 countries, our water teams work daily to
provide water for populations affected by conflict and
violence. We work with local authorities, commercial
partners, local communities and national Red Cross and
Red Crescent societies to ensure our water programmes
are sustainable.

Last year, we covered the urgent water needs of
28 million people. The rise in protracted urban warfare
in the Middle East and increasing concentrations of
internally displaced persons in urban areas in the
Lake Chad Basin have caused an exponential increase
in the scale and technical complexity of our water
operations. Our water operations often see us working
across conflict lines, as we repair pumps and pipes
that are essential to all sides. Encouragingly, in several
conflicts, opponents will cooperate on water when they
will not cooperate on anything else, giving us the access
and supply chains we need to keep the water flowing.

Armed conflict has direct and indirect impacts
on people's access to water and, over the many years
of a protracted conflict, both types of impact have a
degrading cumulative impact on water supply. The
direct impacts of armed conflict are immediately
obvious. Damaging attacks on electricity substations,
water-storage installations and piping can render them
unusable, cutting off tens of thousands of people in
a single strike. Skilled personnel may also be killed,
injured or displaced. Indirect impact is less obvious but
equally significant. The lack of skilled personnel and
shortage of critical supplies means no maintenance for
essential infrastructure, which soon deteriorates to the
point where water is unsafe or entire populations are
cut off.

In protracted armed conflict, this cumulative
impact on services is hard to reverse. We have seen this
phenomenon recently in Syria, Iraq, the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo and the Central African Republic,
where water services are severely reduced and we have
resorted to water trucking.

International humanitarian law is clear on the
humanitarian significance of water. It places various
obligations on parties to conflict to protect water
installations. International humanitarian law provides
special protection for objects indispensable for the
survival of the civilian population, like drinking-water
installations and irrigation works. Objects containing
dangerous forces, such as dams, are also protected from
attack. International humanitarian law also provides
important general protection against attacks on civilian
objects and attacks that affect civilian populations.
Parties to conflict must take precautions in attack
and refrain from attacks expected to cause excessive
incidental damage and also consider the reverberating
effects of their actions on civilian populations.

Despite these clear rules for the protection of
essential services like water, the ICRC continues to
see populations suffer the consequences of a lack of
respect for international humanitarian law. The risk of
reverberating effects from damaged water installations
is a reason why the ICRC urges parties to conflict
to avoid using explosive weapons with wide areas of
impact in densely populated areas. Even when aimed at
achieving military objectives, the use of such weapons
can incidentally damage vital infrastructure located
in the vicinity of the targets, severely disrupting the
provision of services on which civilians depend for
their survival. Parties to conflict have an obligation to
ensure that the basic needs of the civilian population
are met and that their dignity is protected. Water is
essential to a life with dignity, and parties to conflict,
Government donors and humanitarian organizations
must work together to support resilient urban services
during armed conflicts.

The ICRC welcomes the initiative of the delegation
of Senegal to discuss such an important topic here
today and we urge members of the Council to take
the following measures on water and armed conflict.
First, they must respect international humanitarian law
and take into account the interdependence of essential
services, such as water, health and electricity, and
the cumulative impact of protracted armed conflict
on essential water supplies for civilian populations.
Secondly, they must recognize that dialogue on water
needs between warring parties is critical, and they must
help to facilitate it. Thirdly, they must prioritize and
support effective partnerships between local authorities,
service providers and humanitarian organizations to
ensure resilient water services. Finally, the Council
must ensure that the Council remains seized on the issue.

(spoke in French)

We thank the President for giving the ICRC the
opportunity to speak to the Council today on such an
important topic and for providing each one of us with
water while we are here.

