Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): My delegation wishes to
express its appreciation to you, Mr. President, for your
comprehensive briefing and for the excellent work that
you have been doing as Chair ofthe Committee pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We also wish to thank you for
your comprehensive briefing on its activities as well
as those of the Group of Experts on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We are pleased to welcome the
Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Regional Integration of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

We also acknowledge the presence of the families
of Miss Zaida Catalan and Mr. Michael Sharp, the
two selfless members of the Group of Experts who
were mercilessly killed while on United Nations duty.
We take this opportunity to once again pay tribute to
them for their courage and dedication in discharging
their duties under extremely challenging circumstances
that, unfortunately, cost them their lives. We express
our deepest condolences to the families for their
tragic loss and hope that everything possible will be
done to bring the perpetrators of this heinous crime to
justice. In this regard, we take note of the findings and
recommendations of the Board of Inquiry, and we look
forward to the discussion on the matter next week.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is indeed
facing enormous challenges. Political tensions persist
in relation to the implementation of the December 2016
agreement although there is still hope that it can pave
the way for the holding of elections and the end of the
transition period. As the latest report of the Secretary-
General (S/2017/672/Rev.1) indicates, the proliferation
of violence in different parts of the country continues to
erode State authority, weaken institutions and hamper
the socioeconomic development of the country, which,
in effect, prolongs the situation of conflict. However, we
realize that the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is very complex. The African Union and the
countries of the region have an enormous responsibility
to assist the country to regain peace and full stability.
That can be done provided the other challenges are
also addressed.

The negative activities of the armed groups in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have been fuelled by
the illegal exploitation of the mineral resources of the
country, especially gold and diamonds, which suffer
from a lack of traceability. In this connection, there is a
need to vigorously monitor the incidence of fraudulent
use of gold and diamond exports, as well as the illegal
taxation of local populations. The open briefing held on
4 August on the illicit exploitation of national resources
was indeed very relevant to the Committee. The work
of the Group of Experts on this matter will continue to
be extremely vital.

The human rights and humanitarian situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as so
many colleagues have mentioned, is no doubt also of
serious concern. Various forms of violence are being
committed against civilians, particularly women and
children, in the Kivus, Kasai and Tanganyika regions.
The briefing received from the Presidential Adviser
on Sexual Violence and Child Recruitment in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the informal
consultations held by the Committee with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
were very important.

In general we appreciate the work that the
Committee and the Group of Experts have been doing
to try to address the many difficult and complex
challenges facing the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and to promote peace and stability in the country. In
this regard the continuous efforts being made to consult
with the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and countries of the region, including within the
framework of the Peace and Security Council, as well
as to forge greater synergy and cooperation with other
regional and international partners is commendable.

We take note of the Chair's intention to visit the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in October, and we
hope the visit will provide an opportunity to understand
the current dynamics and facilitate the implementation
ofthe various measures outlined in the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

Let me conclude by assuring the Chair of the
Committee of Ethiopia's continued support and
cooperation to him in the effective discharge of
his responsibilities.

