Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation
commends you for convening this meeting of the
Security Council in response to the request of the
Chairman of the Arab Group to consider the current,
very grave situation in Palestine.

Since the Council last debated this issue, the
situation has further deteriorated. The violence there is
threatening to spiral out of control. To date, more than
1,200 people have died since September 2000, more
than 1,000 of them Palestinians. Clearly, with the
certainty of more deaths and injuries in the coming
weeks and months, the situation cannot be allowed to
continue. It is high time for the Council to take
decisive action to immediately ease the tension, de-
escalate and end the violence, restore calm and provide
a basis for constructive dialogue between the
conflicting parties, which remains the only viable
approach towards a lasting solution to the problem.

Malaysia strongly believes in the Council's
responsibility with regard to the maintenance of
international peace and security. We reject the
argument advanced by some quarters that the United
Nations, and the Council in particular, have no role
whatsoever in intervening on this issue. Because of
this, the Council has over the years been effectively
sidelined and prevented from playing its legitimate role
in the search for peace in the Middle East. If the
Council cannot intervene at this critical time, when,
one may ask, will it be allowed to fulfil its
responsibility?

My delegation welcomes the decision of the
Council to discuss the situation in Palestine on a
regular basis. This represents a positive change in the
way it deals with the issue. However, it is not enough
for the Council merely to consider the situation in its
informal consultations, or even in this Chamber, and
then fail to take decisive action to end the violence and
assist in the search for a final resolution of the conflict.
Council members should have realized by now that it is
not enough for the Council to periodically express its
concern about the situation in that troubled land and
then quickly turn its attention away from the problem,
in the hope and on the assumption that it is for the
parties themselves to resolve the conflict.

Clearly, as the tragic events have borne out, that
hope is misplaced and that assumption fallacious. To
continue with this line of approach would be to
continue to ignore the situation indefinitely, with all
the consequent risks to international peace and security.
Continued inaction by the Council is tantamount to
continuing to appease the occupying Power, which can
only deepen the sense of frustration, hopelessness and
despair of the Palestinian people and aggravate the
situation even further. It would also further undermine
the credibility and prestige of the Council.

Last week, when the Secretary-General addressed
the Council, he had chosen his words very carefully,
but he did not fail to describe the situation on the
ground as grim. He justifiably raised the alarm when he
said that we were nearing the edge of the abyss and
that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict risked sliding
towards full-fledged war. Malaysia and others had
voiced similar warnings of that grim possibility since
the beginning of the intifada.

The Secretary-General's warning must be heeded.
Indeed, the entirety of his message to the Council,
based on a sound analysis of the problem, must be
given the attention it deserves. We agree with him that
the issue of security, while important in itself, cannot
be dealt with in isolation. It must be seen in a context,
and that context remains the continued Israeli
occupation and the illegal and unabated expansion of
Jewish settlements on Arab lands. Clearly, the
Secretary-General recognized that, given the deep
mistrust between the two sides, the Palestinians and the
Israelis will not be able to find a solution to the
problem, and there is an urgent need for a "third party
role", as he put it. The situation demands the
intervention of the international community, including
the Council.
As the Council grapples with this issue in the
context of its own responsibility, we would encourage
the Secretary-General and his Special Coordinator,
Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen, to intensify their efforts and
consultations with the parties as well as with other
important international actors who can and are
prepared to make a difference in the situation. In this
regard, the ideas being promoted by Saudi Arabia, as
reported in the news media, constitute an important and
welcome contribution by an influential regional actor.
It deserves the serious attention of the international
community in the overall context of finding a
comprehensive settlement of the Palestinian Middle
East issue.

My delegation strongly rejects the approach of
apportioning blame to and placing demands solely
upon President Arafat while ignoring or condoning the
provocative policies of Prime Minister Sharon. We
condemn all forms of violence, including the violence
perpetrated by the military and other security forces of
the occupying Power, which involves, inter alia, house
demolitions, closures of Palestinian National Authority
institutions and other facilities, confiscation and/or
destruction of lands and property, torture of detainees,
extrajudicial killings oftargeted Palestinians, which are
on the increase, and continued illegal expansion of
Jewish settlement activities in the occupied territories,
including Al-Quds al-Sharif.

All of these must be put to an end immediately;
they must not be allowed to continue with impunity.
The international community must act to ensure that
the Palestinian people will no longer endure the
grievous violations of their rights and the other
indignities to which they have been subjected. Their
leader, President Yasser Arafat, must be allowed
complete freedom of movement.

Malaysia continues to believe that the United
Nations can intervene effectively by dispatching a
United Nations mission which would monitor the
situation, ease the tension and maintain peace and
security on the ground. More or less similar proposals
involving the establishment of a United Nations or
other international presence to monitor the situation
have been tabled for Council consideration.
Regrettably, all of these proposals have met with
opposition in the Council. We are convinced that if any
had been acted upon, the situation in Palestine today
would have been vastly different.

We understand that in recent days, an idea was
floated concerning the dispatch of a Council fact-
finding mission to the area. Unfortunately, it has not
been formally presented to the Council because of a
lack of necessary support from certain important
quarters. We would urge the Council not to abandon
this laudable and technically feasible idea. We hope
that through further consultations, the necessary
political will will be found to authorize such a mission,
in the same way as the Council has sent missions to a
number of conflict areas. Surely, the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory deserves the same, if not
greater, attention from the Council as conflict
situations in other parts of the world.

We believe that the Council should use its
tremendous prestige and political clout to influence the
situation, as it has done in other conflict areas. The
world will surely be waiting to see whether, in the face
of the grim situation on the ground, the Council will be
able to muster the necessary political will to do what
needs to be done or will once again fail to rise to the
challenge.

