Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Zerihoun and Under-Secretary-
General O'Brien for their briefings on the security and
humanitarian situation in the Lake Chad basin region.
I also wish to thank Ms. Askira for her briefing via
video teleconference.

The security challenge faced by the region,
including but not limited to the threats of terrorism and
violent extremism, should indeed be a matter of huge
concern. Both Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun
and Under-Secretary-General O'Brien were very
convincing in their description of the magnitude of the
challenge that the region is facing. At the same time, we
take note of the progress that the countries of the region
have made in the fight against Boko Haram through the
Multinational Joint Task Force of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission. However, we know that that terrorist

group continues to pose serious a threat to peace and
stability in the region by targeting innocent civilians,
particularly women and children.

The attempts by Boko Haram to forge links with
known regional and international terrorist networks,
including Al-Qaida, Da'esh and Al-Shabaab, present
a matter that needs to be taken seriously. Assistant
Secretary-General Zerihoun has highlighted the various
dimensions of the threat posed by Boko Haram, and we
share those concerns. We believe that it is critical to
support the countries of the region and their various
existing security mechanisms by sharing intelligence
and by building their capacity to handle old and new
security challenges.

In that regard, we take note of the work being done
by the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
(CTITF) in cooperation with other United Nations
bodies, and we encourage the CTITF to help the region
develop a comprehensive and integrated strategy to
counter terrorism and violent extremism. Furthermore,
the need for the coordination of efforts among the
United Nations, the African Union and their respective
regional mechanisms cannot be overemphasized. In that
context, we believe that the proposal for the Security
Council to undertake a visit to the region together with
the African Union Peace and Security Council would
send the right message. We fully subscribe to that idea
and share the sentiments of United States Ambassador
Power on that matter. She was very convincing, as she
was with regard to the other matters that she mentioned.

We are trying to cooperate with some of the
countries of the region bilaterally in order to exchange
experiences and share intelligence, particularly on
linkages among various regional terrorist groups. It is
our hope that there will be more enhanced cooperation
and coordination on the basis of a common strategy
among the countries of the region. We understand the
deteriorating humanitarian situation in the Lake Chad
basin region. It has resulted from a number of factors,
including the security threats that it has been facing.
Although there are competing priorities for addressing
the worsening humanitarian situation around the world
and the available resources are not commensurate with
the challenges at hand, we believe that the situation
in the Lake Chad basin region, particularly the
plight of women, children, girls and minors there, is
excruciatingly painful. We therefore remain hopeful
that the United Nations and the rest of the international
community will redouble their efforts to respond to the

humanitarian challenge facing that region.

Moreover, we cannot overlook the impact of
climate change and the extent to which it fuels conflict.
That is one of the areas in which the imperatives of
development, humanitarian concerns, the dangers of
conflict, the problems associated with climate change
and human rights concerns converge. It is therefore
critical that the challenges facing the region be
addressed in a comprehensive manner.

In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to express my appreciation to Under-Secretary-General
O'Brien for the major contribution that he continues to
make in discharging the mandate ofhis Office, not only
with respect to the Lake Chad basin region but also in
connection with our own region - the Horn of Africa.

