Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, this debate is the last public meeting of
the Security Council under South Africa's presidency
as an elected member of the Security Council. I would
like to start by paying tribute to your leadership and
lucid conduct of the Council. You are a worthy
representative of a country with high ethical values, the
only one that has dismantled its entire nuclear arsenal,
a State respected in Africa and the entire world.
For Costa Rica, to participate in a debate on any
question related to arms reduction, whatever they may
be, is a moral obligation. For sixty years now, my
country has made disarmament a national cause and a
priority of our foreign policy.

However, small arms still compromise the
security of our communities. They have been and still
are instruments of war in neighbouring countries and
are objects of illicit trade for those who traffic in death.
For this reason, we actively support the work that this
Council has been doing on small arms since 1999.
However, few aspects of the true process of civilization
have encountered as many obstacles as has the
regulation of the arms trade. Progress is slow, and it
cannot be otherwise. As has occurred in other scourges
of humanity, such as climate change, profit is an
irrational stimulus and much more powerful than
rationality in human beings.

Every day, there are more industrial plants in
more countries devoted to arms production. Every day
that goes by, illicit trafficking represents a larger
percentage of the arms trade. Every year, the small
arms and ammunitions manufactured and sold are
sufficient to kill all of humanity twice over.

That is why we welcome the work of this
Council. Around the table today are at least seven
States that are among the biggest manufacturers of
small arms in the world. Looking at the candidacies
submitted, next year we could have nine of the major
stakeholders in the small arms industry. No other
intergovernmental forum brings together so much
power nor has so many instruments for action as this
Council. It is just a question of will.

In the nine years since the Security Council
decided to address this issue, the international
community has produced important instruments.
Perhaps the most important among them is the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, adopted in 2001. However,
as the Secretary-General points out in his report, that
framework has not generated all the necessary action,
either nationally or regionally, to transform it into a
more useful instrument. After the difficult process of
adopting an international instrument of such nature and
scope, we still need to overcome tremendous obstacles,
as the biennial meetings of the Programme of Action
and its review conference demonstrated.

The Secretary-General indeed points out that one
of the reasons why there has not been progress in the
implementation of the Programme of Action is the fact
that it is not binding. That could be the fundamental
barrier. In this area, rules are not binding for States and
never become anything more than mere declarations of
principle.

I would like to digress from the topic at hand to
look at a parallel process, in which some members of
the Council are working, which seeks to open a
window of opportunity to work on binding instruments
related to armaments. I am referring here to the Group
of Experts appointed by the Secretary-General to
examine the feasibility of a binding instrument to
regulate the arms trade.

This initiative came about in 1995 when a group
of Nobel Peace Laureates, led by the President of
Costa Rica, launched the idea of an international code
of conduct. That idea was taken up by the United
Kingdom and a significant number of other countries
and non-governmental organizations, who converted it
into a resolution of the General Assembly at its sixtieth
session. We hope that with the passage of time and
intensification of the endeavours of all of us who
believe in the need to effectively regulate the arms
trade, we will succeed in making the international
instruments in this area binding.

Just for a moment, I would like to focus on the
report of the Secretary-General. Costa Rica agrees with
the priority granted to the reactivation of the
coordination of this Organization's action on small
arms and to the strengthening of exchanges between
the General Assembly and the Security Council on
containing the illicit flows of arms to zones of crisis
and conflict.

We are also grateful for and support the
recommendations in the report, three of which we
consider are the primary responsibility of the Security
Council. First, the question of small arms and light
weapons must be incorporated in the mandates and
reports of the political, the peacekeeping and
peacebuilding missions. Secondly, in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes, the
component relating to disarmament and destruction of
weapons stocks must be strengthened. Thirdly,
monitoring mechanisms must be revitalized and
Security Council sanctions imposed, in particular with
regard to arms embargoes.
These are clear responsibilities of the Council, to
which my delegation would like to contribute.

