Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2350 (2017), which
closes the Mission in six months and establishes a new
successor mission, which will deal with issues related
to police, rule of law and human rights, in accordance
with the recommendations of the Secretary-General.
This is an important decision, and we welcome the fact
that the Council adopted the resolution unanimously.

Thirteen years having passed since the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
was established, it was time to register the success
achieved by the Mission in terms of stabilizing Haiti,
and to move toward a new type of United Nations
presence, one more tailored to the needs of the country
and the conditions on the ground, which have evolved
considerably and in a positive direction.

The work carried out by MINUSTAH in recent
years will enable us to get Haiti out of the emergency
situation in which it found itself until recently, by
restoring a climate of relative security, participating
in reconstruction efforts after the 2010 earthquake,
or contributing to the substantial strengthening of the
Haitian National Police - the increase in authority of
which is a token of stability for the country. Much of the
credit is due to the United Nations and the Council, but
also to the troop-contributing countries, without which
the Mission would have been unable to play its role.
The new operation, which will begin in October, is
to consolidate the advances already made by making
the Haitian National Police an autonomous actor. It will
also engage in other major projects in the areas of the
rule of law, the fight against impunity, increasing the
professionalism and the independence of the judiciary,
and the establishment of a correctional system that is
compatible with the needs of the country and respect
for the rights of detainees.

The human rights situation, which remains an area
of concern, should also be monitored attentively, and be
the object of regular recommendations. We believe that
is critical to maintaining an effective and lasting peace,
and is therefore inextricably linked to other activities of
the next mission.

France has long called on the Council to shoulder
its responsibility with regard to the question of Haiti
by taking the necessary measures to ensure that the
Organization's means of engagement in the country
remain, over time, as appropriate and efficient as
possible. That was done today and we are quite
pleased. However, this new stage does not spell the
end of United Nations engagement with Haiti. On the
contrary, it demonstrates the ability of the Council to
develop, in an ongoing manner, United Nations activity
in the field - activity of which the primary concern
is to respond in the best possible way to the needs of
the people concerned. This new stage also signals the
establishment of a more appropriate and more effective
tool for the benefit of Haiti and Haitians.

I should like to conclude by also paying tribute to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Sandra Honore, and to the staff of MINUSTAH.

