Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his presence, his
statement and his efforts to help and assist Iraq and the
Iraqi people.

Let me thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this important meeting, at which the Council has
adopted resolution 1770 (2007), concerning the
extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for another year.
The resolution expands UNAMI's mandate to take new
developments into account, especially following the
Baghdad meeting for neighbouring countries held on
10 March 2007 and following the launch of the
International Compact with Iraq on 3 May 2007 as well
as the expanded Sharm el-Sheikh conference held in
Egypt on 4 May 2007.

We all know that the Government of Iraq is
currently confronting several challenges, especially at
the national, regional and humanitarian levels. Of
prime importance at the national level is the issue of
dialogue and reconciliation, which requires a review of
controversial laws, the constitution, the adoption of the
hydrocarbon law and other debatable issues. We are
keen to proceed in that direction in an attempt to
overcome all obstacles by all available means.

On the regional level, we believe that the
expanded neighbouring countries meetings held in
Baghdad and in Sharm el-Sheikh and the establishment
of the three committees - namely, the committees on
energy, on security and on refugees - have placed a
number of obligations on neighbouring countries. The
most significant obligation is to assist Iraq and the
people of Iraq in overcoming the difficulties facing
them, especially with regard to reconstruction, the
humanitarian situation of the Iraqi people residing in
recipient countries, the establishment of security and
stability and combating terrorism.

On the humanitarian level, Iraq's present
circumstances and the consistent attempts of terrorists
to provoke sectarian strife have a negative impact on
the humanitarian situation, which has led to an increase
in internal displacement and to the flow of Iraqi
refugees to some countries in the region. We thank
those countries that have shown generous hospitality.
Such situations have created a national, regional and
international responsibility to coordinate and deliver
assistance to all people in need.

We are aware that these challenges should be
addressed by the Government and the people of Iraq.
The Government of Iraq is working hard to fulfil this
responsibility and to proceed in its efforts in spite of all
difficulties. While we realize that this is, in principle, a
national responsibility, we, however, cannot achieve it
without the assistance of the international community,
represented by the United Nations, especially the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq. For three
years, UNAMI has stood by the Iraqi people and
successive Iraqi Governments during that period,
especially the current democratically, constitutionally
elected national Government. It has stood by Iraq upon
its request and has accomplished immense
achievements in cooperation and coordination with the
Government of Iraq.

We now look forward to a greater role for
UNAMI, consistent with the expanded mandate set out
in the resolution adopted by the Council today. We
reaffirm the need of the Government and the people of
Iraq for that assistance. As His Excellency the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Iraq mentioned in his letter
addressed to the Secretary-General on 6 August 2007,

"During the coming period, the interests of
Iraq require that the role of UNAMI should be
expanded and activated on both the humanitarian
and political tracks, at home and in the region,
and that the specialized United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes should be brought back to
work, each in its area of specialization, to
reconstruct and stabilize the country, to
contribute to the coordination and delivery of
humanitarian assistance pursuant to the
obligations contained in the Charter and to launch
comprehensive campaigns to address the
deterioration of the infrastructure". (S/2007/48], annex)
Thus, we further reiterate that UNAMI still has a very
active role in assisting us to reach the goals we seek in
order to build a productive and prosperous Iraq living
in peace with itself, with its neighbours and with the
world.

I wish to thank all the members of the Security
Council, and especially the sponsors of today's
resolution, for their understanding of the situation in
Iraq and for their help and assistance.

Before concluding, I would like also, since today
is his last day in the Security Council, to extend my
sincere thanks and appreciation to His Excellency
Ambassador Emyr Jones Parry for his excellent work
and for his assistance to Iraq and to the Iraqi people. I
wish him the best in his future personal and
professional life.

I would like finally to welcome Ambassador
Jean-Maurice Ripert of France. We look forward to
working with him in the service of our friendly
countries.

