Ms. Robinson: It is a privilege to speak to the
Council today at this important meeting on conflict
prevention and mediation - two issues that lie at the
very heart of the mission of the Security Council and
the wider multilateral rules-based system.

I am speaking today in my capacity as Chair of
The Elders, the group of independent global leaders
founded by Nelson Mandela, who work for peace,
justice and human rights. I am honoured, too, to be here
alongside someone who needs no introduction to people
in the Chamber: His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
former Secretary-General, who today serves as one of
the Deputy Chairs of The Elders, together with Graca
Machel. I am also happy to be joined by President Juan
Manuel Santos Caldero'n.

On behalf of all the Elders, I would like to sincerely
thank His Excellency Sheikh Sabah Khalid Al Hamad
Al Sabah, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the State of Kuwait, for extending
the invitation to address the Council as part of
Kuwait's presidency.

I recall when serving as the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes of Africa and
the Democratic Republic of Congo in 2013 and 2014,
how invaluable it was to have a united Security Council
to report to. I know that President Santos had the same
appreciation of the support of the Security Council for
his work on peace in Colombia. The Elders want to urge
all members of the Security Council today to approach
the topics under discussion in the same spirit ofinclusive
dialogue and willingness to work for compromise and
consensus in the interests of peace. We know that the
world is more divided and polarised at the moment,
but the Council has a unique responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations, and we encourage the
10 elected members to play as full a part as possible in
their work.

When Nelson Mandela founded The Elders in 2007,
he charged us with a precise mandate: "Support courage
where there is fear, foster agreement where there is

conflict and inspire hope where there is despair." I
believe it is testament to both Mandela's perspicacity
but also to the grim realities of our world that his words
continue to feel as urgent in 2019 as they did when he
uttered them on stage in Johannesburg a dozen years
ago - not least when we think of conflict prevention
and mediation.

Fear, conflict and despair are all too obvious, from
the streets of Khartoum to the townships of Harare; the
bombed-out hospitals of Idlib to the ruined schools of
Yemen; and the slums of Gaza to the Rohingya refugee
camps of Cox's Bazar in Bangladesh. In all these cases
and so many more the world over, the Security Council
should be seen as an instrument of deliverance, a
defender of rights and a provider of protection.

But too often over the decades the Council and, in
particular, its five permanent members have failed to
live up to their responsibilities and favoured realpolitik
or short-term power stratagems rather than meeting
the solemn commitments outlined in the Charter
of the United Nations. Nowhere has this been more
apparent than in the repeated use of the veto by certain
permanent members on draft resolutions aimed to
prevent mass atrocities, including the use of chemical
weapons on civilians. In the words of my immediate
predecessor as Chair of The Elders, the late and sorely-
missed Kofi Annan, "you cannot put down a veto,
paralyse operations, create a stalemate and not propose
a way forward".

To propose positive ways forward in our
deliberations today, I would like to focus on three
specific areas where we, The Elders, believe that
the Council can play a proactive and positive role
on conflict.

The first is the importance of prevention. Everyone
here in the Chamber will recognize that prevention is
by far the most effective way to deal with conflicts. But
that should not be narrowly viewed in terms of securing
immediate security and stability or distorted to justify
deals with unscrupulous leaders who pay lip service to
peace and mediation as a way to retain power without
ever taking the necessary steps to address the root
causes of conflict and division.

Inclusive government and a commitment to justice
and human rights are also crucial. Violations of or
disrespect for the fundamental values of human rights
and undemocratic and unaccountable actions by long-
serving leaders have often festered to become bigger
crises. I have also felt for a long time that insufficient
attention has been paid to the role and voice of women
on the ground in terms of conflict prevention. The
Council has shown leadership on that issue in past years,
particularly through the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000). It should now redouble its collective efforts to
make sure that women's perspectives and experiences
are reflected in the mainstream of peacekeeping and
conflict prevention policy. I echo the strong emphasis of
the Secretary-General today on the full participation of
women. Overall, the international community has too
often not paid enough attention to all those issues, and
the citizens of conflict-blighted countries and regions
have paid far too high a price for that neglect.

The second is climate change. Together with
nuclear weapons, there is no greater existential threat
to our planet than climate change. The United Nations
has shown commendable leadership on the issue,
brokering the Paris Agreement on Climate Change in
2015 and ensuring that climate is an integral element
of the Sustainable Development Goals. The Elders are
pleased to see that the issue of climate change continues
to be of concern to the Security Council. We feel that
if the Council were to adopt a more holistic approach
to conflict prevention, including climate change, this
would both make it more effective and support the
mandate of other parts of the United Nations system.
We support the creation of an institutional focal point,
in the form of a Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, to pull together expertise on climate change
from across and beyond the United Nations in order
to help the Council assess the diverse, complex and
shifting impacts of climate change on conflicts.

The third is the impact of technology. Another
aspect of a more long-term and more holistic view
of the causes of conflict and how to prevent it needs
to be the impact of technology, including artificial
intelligence and automation. As Elders, we make no
claims to be part of the vanguard of the debate here, but
again I would recall a wise epigram from Kofi Annan:
"You are never too young to lead, and never too old to
learn." We need to listen to and learn from the young
people e the digital natives who are fluent in the brave
new world of technology but who also risk paying the
price for progress as previously secure jobs and career
paths become obsolete.

Youth unemployment is especially high in the
Middle East and Africa and has been a driver of social
unrest in many countries. Similarly, social media, while
being a powerful tool for connecting people around the
world, has also been used as a tool for enabling violent
extremism and for spreading misinformation, which
has contributed to violence and social unrest. There is,
additionally, an urgent need to develop global norms and
rules around cyberconflict prevention. Currently, there
is no international mechanism to regulate offensive
cyberthreats, and States and non-State actors alike are
able to operate with a large degree of impunity. As a
minimum, we need to develop a process whereby States
and Governments become more transparent about their
cybercapabilities and deterrence mechanisms. The
international community must not wait until a major
tragedy occurs to develop those rules. We believe that
the Security Council is uniquely placed to lead the
efforts to find a progressive, inclusive consensus.

I thank you again, Mr. President, for the opportunity
to raise those issues with the Council today. It is now my
pleasure to hand over to my colleague, His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, who will expand upon more of our
priorities and concerns.

