Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The humanitarian situation in Darfur, in the Sudan, has
recently been a source of concern for the international
community. The United Nations, the African Union and
a number of countries are working actively to facilitate
the resolution of the situation there.

We believe that the satisfactory resolution of the
political situation in Darfur requires, first, the speedy
alleviation of the severe humanitarian situation;
secondly, that political negotiations be expedited so as
to reach, as soon as possible, a comprehensive
agreement based on respect for the Sudan's sovereignty
and territorial integrity; and, thirdly, that the
international community honour its assistance
commitments expeditiously, provide effective logistical
support and increase its contributions.

The Chinese Government, concerned about the
humanitarian situation in Darfur, has provided goods
worth 5 million Chinese yuan to the Sudanese
Government for humanitarian assistance.

China commends Secretary-General Annan and
his Special Adviser for their efforts to alleviate the
situation in Darfur. We welcome the joint communique
issued by the Secretary-General and the Government of
the Sudan. We note that the Government of the Sudan
has taken a number of measures aimed at honouring the
commitment it made in the communique, which has
resulted in the improvement of the humanitarian
situation in Darfur.

China hopes and believes that the Government of
the Sudan will continue actively to honour its
commitments, particularly its commitment to disarm
the Janjaweed and other illegal groups, so as
effectively and materially to improve the security
situation in Darfur.

China appreciates and supports the leadership
role played by the African Union in resolving the
situation in Darfur. We commend highly the efforts it
has made, including the deployment of a ceasefire
monitoring commission and a protection force. We
hope that all States will provide further assistance
supplementary to the efforts of the African Union.

We welcome the political negotiations hosted by
the African Union on 15 July, which urged both sides,
especially the rebel group, to resume negotiations
unconditionally.

China believes that the Government of the Sudan
bears primary responsibility for resolving the Darfur
situation and that the international community should
make every effort to assist the Government of the
Sudan. The Security Council should listen attentively
to the voice of the African Union, and its actions
should be conducive to securing the cooperation of the
Sudanese Government, facilitating the resolution of the
problem and contributing to the security and stability
of the Sudan.

The draft resolution proposed by the United
States and other countries, although some amendments
have been made to it, still includes mandatory
measures against the Sudanese Government. As all the
parties are speeding up diplomatic efforts, such
measures cannot be helpful in resolving the situation in
Darfur and may even further complicate it.

China had hoped that the sponsors of the draft
resolution would have taken seriously into
consideration China's concerns and made the
appropriate adjustments so as to arrive at a consensus
in the Security Council. Regrettably, that proposal was
not accommodated or responded to. We can therefore
only abstain in the voting on this draft resolution in the
Security Council.

