Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Chinese delegation welcomes the Security
Council's open meeting today to consider the question of
Libya. We also would like to welcome the Foreign Minister
of Libya to our meeting. We have listened to his statement
carefully.

The Security Council is the main United Nations organ
for maintaining international peace and security. Since the
Council acts on behalf of the entire membership, in
accordance with the Charter, it should listen to the broad
range of views of Member States while deliberating on the
question of Libya. This meeting is a good opportunity for
the Council to do that.

The Chinese Government's position is clear cut. China
is opposed to terrorism in any form and is of the view that
terrorists should be brought to justice. The tragic accident
over Lockerbie resulted in the death of innocent passengers
and inflicted agonizing pain on their families, who have our
deepest sympathy. The priority now is to settle the case in
a prompt and proper manner because this will be beneficial
to all parties concerned, including families of the victims.

The key to resolving the Lockerbie case is for the
parties concerned to agree at an early date on the venue and
method of the trial of the two suspects. In this regard, we
are pleased to note that the League of Arab States and the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) have put forward
three options concerning questions about the trial. Libya has
agreed to the trial by Scottish judges at The Hague in
accordance with Scottish law. We support these proposals,
which are constructive and reflect the flexibility of the
parties concerned. We hope that other parties will also
show flexibility by responding to these proposals and
moving to resolve the Lockerbie question through
negotiations as soon as possible.

We have taken note of the recent decision of the
International Court of Justice to accept the Lockerbie case.
This is a positive decision. We support the settlement of the
issue through peaceful means, including legal procedures.

The sanctions against Libya have brought untold
suffering to the Libyan people, especially to the women and
children. They have undermined the development of Libya
and have affected the economic development of third world
countries. We are gravely concerned about the adverse
effects of the sanctions. Facts have proven that sanctions,
rather than solving the problem, only aggravate matters. In
our view, they should be lifted as soon as possible.

We support the reasonable request raised by the
League of Arab States and the OAU on numerous
occasions to lift the sanctions against Libya at an early
date. The League of Arab States, the OAU and other
Member States will address the Council today. We are
convinced that their opinions will help the Council in
making a correct judgment and decision in its future
deliberations on the question of Libya.

The Secretary-General recently sent a fact-finding
mission to Libya to look into the negative impact of the
sanctions. This is very useful. The mission report is
essentially an accurate account of the situation there. We
are of the view that the Security Council and its sanctions
Committee should consider it seriously and take measures
to ease the situation.
