Mr. Taula (New Zealand): I wish to thank you,
Madam President, for having convened this meeting
and for Nigeria's long-standing engagement in security-
sector reform (SSR). I also thank Assistant Secretary-
General Titov for his update and the progress made
since the adoption of resolution 2151 (2014), as well
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Bangura and Assistant Administrator Nakamitsu for
their briefings.

New Zealand considers effective SSR to be critical
for sustainable peace. We recognize SSR as a strategic,
long-term process, and we have seen some successes,
such as in Timor-Leste and Sierra Leone. But we
acknowledge that each situation is different and that
tailored approaches are required. There is also a need to
learn lessons from where SSR efforts have fallen short,
for example in South Sudan, as noted by Mr. Titov.

As this is an inherently long-term challenge, it is
important that we better coordinate Council-mandated
SSR activities with related efforts by other parts of
the United Nations system and other international
actors and bilateral donors. As noted in the concept
note for this briefing (S/2015/614, annex), Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General could have a
greater role to play in this regard. Although there is a
heavy focus on SSR in many peacekeeping missions,
SSR functions are now also being mandated across the
spectrum of United Nations peace operations, from
prevention to post-conflict stabilization, for example in
the SPMs?? Special Programming Missions?? in Libya
and Somalia and United Nations offices such as United
Nations Office in West Africa.

We need to look carefully at how SSR is mandated
in peace operations, particularly in the context of the
peace operations review and its recommendations
concerning phased mandates. We believe that it
is important for SSR to be embedded in mandates
from the start, including when peace agreements
are being conceived and negotiated. New Zealand
acknowledges the development of the United Nations
2011 policy framework for defence sector reform, and
its continued implementation. While components of
SSR do not work in isolation, it is critical to develop
accountable, professional and effective security
forces that support and adhere to the rule of law. We
see merit in the Council's considering empowering
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General to
more directly support nationally owned security sector
reform policy and implementation frameworks. We also
support the concept of SSR compacts between missions
and host Governments. Those could both encourage
host country engagement and tie the achievement
of SSR benchmarks to the ultimate exit strategy of a
mission. We also stress the importance of women's full
and effective participation in SSR processes.

Given the critical nature of SSR to the ultimate
success of a mission, we believe Council oversight
should be improved. In order to support that, we would
like to see more meaningful reporting on SSR and
regular mission reports. Reporting needs to be both
more consistent and of higher quality, providing a frank
assessment of progress, key obstacles and options for
addressing them.

In conclusion, we believe that resolution 2151 (2014)
was a very important step. But we need to work harder
to make SSR more effective, and therefore improve the
environment for sustainable peace and security.

