Mr. Lolo (Nigeria): Let me join others who have
spoken before me in thanking Mr. Alain Le Roy and
Ms. Valerie Amos for their very useful briefings.

We are pleased that our meeting today to mark
the first anniversary of the devastating earthquake in
Haiti on 12 January 2010 has not ignored the overall
challenges that still exist in the country, which have
been made worse by the outbreak of the cholera
epidemic. The earthquake and the epidemic have
resulted in the deaths of more than 203,000 people,
including United Nations personnel, and has rolled
back many years of development gains achieved in the
areas of infrastructure, health, shelter and education in
Haiti, the poorest and least developed country in the
western hemisphere, as Ms. Amos reminded us this
morning.

I would like to convey Nigeria's gratitude to all
those who responded positively and stood shoulder to
shoulder with the Government and people of Haiti in

ll-21162
their darkest hour of need. The generosity of the
international community in providing assistance for
relief, recovery and reconstruction in the aftermath of
the tragedy has no doubt made a tremendous difference
in Haiti. Nigeria was among the many contributors that
provided assistance in cash and in kind. Our assistance
to Haiti in the past year exceeded $10 million,
including cash and relief materials. I should note also
that, under a bilateral agreement, Nigerian Technical
Aid Corps volunteers had been providing assistance in
Haiti in diverse fields for several years prior to the
earthquake.

The role of the United Nations - in particular
that of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) - in leading the
international efforts in Haiti is most commendable.
Nigeria is pleased that its police contingent is part of
MINUSTAH, which has continued to carry out its
mandate with distinction under very trying
circumstances. May I therefore salute the courage,
dedication and sacrifice of the gallant men and women
of MINUSTAH, led by Mr. Edmond Mulet, as well as
of all humanitarian workers in Haiti.

Much remains to be done to restore Haiti to its
pre-earthquake state. As we have been reminded,
800,000 Haitians still live in makeshift camps. Other
challenges include malnutrition, poor sanitation and
weak health systems and basic services. In the face of
those challenges, the international community must not
take its focus from Haiti. We must continue in our
bilateral and multilateral efforts to assist Haiti to grow
better and faster from the devastating effects of the
earthquake and the cholera epidemic. It is our hope that
donors will not only fulfil outstanding pledges but also
respond favourably to OCHA's 2011 consolidated
appeal for $906 million to address the humanitarian
needs in Haiti. We urge the United Nations to continue
to enhance its coordination efforts with other
humanitarian actors.

The political uncertainty in Haiti is a matter of
serious concern. We recognize the important role and
contribution that the Organization of American States
(OAS) can make in helping to resolve the ongoing
electoral crisis in Haiti. We encourage the Provisional
Electoral Commission to take into account the report
submitted by the OAS verification mission in
determining the candidates for the run-off election. In
that connection, we call on the Provisional Electoral
Council and all of Haiti's political leaders to fully
respect the will of the people and refrain from any
action that will derail or undermine Haiti's march
towards democracy and legitimate governance. There
is an urgent need for a date and candidates to be
announced for the run-off elections. The longer it takes
to resolve the political crisis, the longer Haiti will
remain mired in its myriad problems.

Nigeria hopes that Haiti's leaders, past and
present, will see the need to put the interests of their
people above personal and partisan interests in order to
move their country forward, with the international
community providing continuous support and
encouragement.

