Mr. Moreno (Inter-American Development Bank) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to focus my
statement on the recent work of the Inter-American
Development Bank (IADB), and recall what was said
by President Santos - that this is the time to think
about the long term. I think that now, over a year since
the earthquake, there is no doubt that this is the phase
that we are in.

I would like to start by expressing my great
gratitude to President Preval. There have been
earthquakes and hurricanes in Haiti, but during his
presidency, democracy prevailed. I believe that this is
one of his great legacies for the future, in addition to
many other things. I would also like to say that, in the
period preceding the earthquake and even earlier, the
Inter-American Development Bank, which has worked
in Haiti for over 50 years, had significantly increased
its contributions to Haiti in the form of donations.

Exactly a year ago, with the increasing capital
provided by the IADB, we became one of the major
donors in Haiti. Thanks to a large contribution from
Latin American countries, the IADB has earmarked
$200 million a year to Haiti for the next 10 years,
along with debt forgiveness of almost $500 million.
This obviously provided us with a very broad range for
action and allowed us to create an action group devoted
exclusively to Haiti. Today, we have over 50
professionals in Port-au-Prince, enabling us to carry
out very important work there and complement the
efforts of other donors. I think this was one of the best
experiences that we could have had following the
earthquake, thanks to the establishment of the Interim
Haiti Recovery Commission (IHRC).
In this way, we support a long-term vision. I
would also like to mention briefly a few of the sectors
in which we have been working. There are six priority
sectors where we have been working with different
donors, in addition to the contributions of the IADB.
These areas are infrastructure, transportation, water,
sanitation, energy and education. On this last issue, I
would like to highlight one of the great visions of
President Preval. For many years, he has been working
on the first education policy to include all Haitians. In
this context, there is one important fact. In Haiti, 80
per cent of education is private, and of course the
quality varies according to the school; more important,
however, is the fact that about 1.2 million children do
not have access to education today.

Thus, our Bank will initially contribute $250
million to this very ambitious education programme,
involving $2 billion over the next five years; we have
also managed, with other donors, to come up with
another $250 million. I say this because we are
basically making direct transfers to teachers, making
use of best practices and really generating profound
change in Haiti.

The third issue is related to infrastructure. When I
recently met President Preval, just after his election, he
told me that he would like to start in Jeremie, go
through Port-au-Prince and arrive in Cap-Haitien. I
think that we could have achieved that if it were not for
the earthquake. The most important lesson here is that
there are many ideas but few projects. How we carry
out projects is one of the main issues. I think that, here,
the work with the IHRC has been crucial. For example,
on roads, we have worked with the Canadian
Government and IADB resources, as well as with the
European Union, with which we have basically been
working along these lines.

There is also the issue of private sector
development. Here, before talking about this issue, I
would like to mention something else concerning
education. We sometimes forget that the earthquake
destroyed almost 50 per cent of the schools in Haiti,
but today many students are still going to school. I
think this is something that is very important to
highlight. It is very easy to speak negatively about
Haiti, but many positive things are happening there.

The other matter that I wish to raise concerns the
development of the private sector, which I believe is
one of the most important issues. When President
11-29077

Clinton was appointed United Nations Special Envoy
for Haiti, we organized, well before the earthquake, a
conference for investors. More than 600 investors
attended it, many of whom were from the Latin
American region. Now, thanks to cooperation provided
by Spain, we have a fund that should support the
development of small and medium-sized businesses;
the fund now totals over $60 million, with a component
that includes extensive training.

We must also take into account the fact that
95 per cent of companies in Haiti are informal. On the
other hand, we are working on a project that has been
referred to here and that I would also like to highlight.
In northern Haiti, there is an industrial park that should
create 20,000 jobs. In today's world, any president of
any developed country would be pleased to inaugurate
a project that would generate 20,000 jobs. This is going
to happen within the year, when we conclude the
arrangement with the United States Government, the
IADB and a Korean investor. We hope that this type of
initiative will continue, because we think that the
development of the private sector in a country like
Haiti is absolutely crucial.

I would also like to tell you, Madame, that we are
working with the National Federation of Coffee
Growers of Colombia to develop coffee production
involving Haiti. Haiti cultivates coffee on a large scale,
which has been neglected for some years. Furthermore,
thanks to Coca-Cola, today a brand of mango juice is
being distributed in the United States and Canada. This
has made it possible for the IADB to organize 25,000
mango producers, and Coca-Cola is buying all their
products.

To conclude, I note that we have also worked
with the Union of South American Nations
(UNASUR). The Bank has established an account to
which many UNASUR countries have made
contributions that have gone directly to the
Government of Haiti. Of course, we also work with the
Organization of American States. We are partners and
brotherly institutions within the inter-American
system.

Finally, I would also like to acknowledge the
work that has been done by Prime Minister Bellerive
and President Clinton with the Interim Haiti Recovery
Commission. I believe that, given all the complexity in
Haiti, the fact that they have been able to bring
together all the different donors has made it possible to
11-29077
start speaking more about projects and less about ideas;
those projects, of course, will be the main challenge.
But the most important thing is that these have been
developed in the context of a strategy that, in the final
analysis and as has been reiterated several times here,
originated with the Government of Haiti.

