Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French):
Madam President, I would like to congratulate you
once again on assuming the presidency of the Council
this month. I should also like to pay tribute to your
predecessor, our Irish colleague.

Today I would like to welcome the Foreign
Minister of Liberia. I should also like to join preceding
speakers in thanking Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani,
Chairman of the sanctions Committee on Liberia; the
Panel of Experts; and the Representative of the
Secretary-General, all for introducing their respective
reports on the matter of sanctions against Liberia.

At our consultations on the same matter on 2
November, Ambassador Mahbubani asked us a few
very pertinent questions, and my delegation would now
like to offer our contribution to this very important
debate.

First, have sanctions proved effective? There is
no easy answer to this. The Panel of Experts and the
Secretariat agree that the peace process in Sierra Leone
has made significant progress - for example, in
implementing the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programme - and that this is
thanks to a change in attitude by the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF), which is attributed to pressure
brought to bear by the Liberian Government through
the sanctions. If sanctions are indeed responsible for
this development, one can only answer Ambassador
Mahbubani's question in the affirmative. However, the
situation on the ground is not quite so simple. First,
one has to remember that whatever support the RUF
may have received from the Liberian Government, the
rebel movement has always had its own agenda and
would have pursued that agenda by whatever means
possible, while also recognizing that external support
to rebel groups prolongs conflict.

Secondly, the Panel of Experts reported a number
of sanctions violations. This shows once again that
there is a need to set up on the ground a mechanism for
monitoring compliance with the sanctions regime.

Thirdly, the Secretary-General notes in his report
that although sanctions have not had a direct impact on
the Liberian population, they have led to a devaluation
of the currency and domestic inflation. Even more
serious, international assistance to Liberia has dropped
significantly during 2001, since sanctions were
imposed. Given all of those facts, one can only
question the validity and viability of what are called
targeted sanctions or smart sanctions, whose
application in the case of Liberia has shown their
flaws.

The second question is whether some of the
sanctions in place should be changed or adjusted. Here
again, the answer is not simple. First, one would have
to determine how and why one would change or adjust
the sanctions. In our view, there are two basic factors
that must be taken into account here. On the one hand,
it is necessary to maintain dialogue with Liberia, which
has to be an active party in finding a solution to the
crisis afflicting the Mano River Union countries. On
the other hand, one must maintain and strengthen the
momentum that has been achieved in the management
of the conflict in Sierra Leone. In this spirit, my
delegation endorses the recommendations of the Panel
of Experts on the travel ban and on the ban on the
travel of Liberian-registered aircraft. I agree with other
delegations on this point.

As for the question of diamonds, we believe we
should call on the bodies involved to provide urgent
assistance to the Liberian Government so that a reliable
regime for the certification of origin can be set up,
following the example of the regime established in
Sierra Leone. Steps must also be taken to put an end to
the illegal trade in Liberian diamonds. As for the arms
embargo, the appropriate response to the violations
reported by the Panel of Experts is not, in our opinion,
to broaden the arms embargo to all non-State actors in
the Mano River countries. Rather, a monitoring
mechanism must be established on the ground. This
mechanism would investigate, inter alia, the
provenance and origins of these weapons. Let us
remember that arms-trafficking is always catastrophic
in this type of conflict. Everything possible must be
done to put an end to it.

The third question is whether new sanctions
should be imposed. When considering this question and
the recommendations of the Panel of Experts, the case
of Iraq, along with all the ongoing debate on that issue,
immediately comes to mind. The similarities between
the sanctions regimes for the two countries - in the
event that the Council starts expanding the regime
under discussion - are quite striking in terms of their
impact on the population, their complexity and
comprehensiveness and the difficulty of monitoring
them. When we read the Secretary-General's report on
this subject and on the very disturbing situation of the
Liberian people, we cannot simply ignore the possible
devastating impact that any additional sanctions might
have on the Liberian people. We believe the Security
Council must preserve the credibility of the sanctions
regime on Liberia by avoiding any steps that would go
beyond the framework for action established in
resolution 1343 (2001). I concur on this point with my
colleague Ambassador Ouane of Mali.

I would like to emphasize again that the Security
Council must avoid resorting to purely punitive
measures or measures that are not directly related to
the objectives established in resolution 1343 (2001). In
any event, we believe that the Council should refrain
from action on the Panel of Experts' various
recommendations until it has proceeded, pursuant to
paragraph 12 of resolution 1343 (2001), to an
evaluation of the implementation of existing
sanctions a that is, until the time frame established for
the current sanctions regime has expired.

The fourth question is how we can ensure that
new or existing sanctions are very carefully targeted.
The answer seems obvious to us if it is explained as
follows: first, we have to avoid imposing sanctions
when we know in advance that they will have
devastating consequences for the civilian population. I
repeat: we have to establish a mechanism for the
regular review of the sanctions' impact on the
humanitarian and economic situation in the country.

This brings us back to the problem of smart
sanctions. We can only say once again that in the case
of Liberia smart sanctions are not quite as smart as one
would like to believe.

In concluding, I would like to stress that in our
opinion the following parameters should guide our
future consideration of sanctions on Liberia.

First, consideration of the Panel's many different
recommendations must be placed in the context of the
multidimensional approach that has been followed by
the Council and recommended by the United Nations
inter-agency mission dispatched by the Secretary-
General to West Africa in March 2001 - in particular,
this approach's political component and regional scope.

Secondly, the views and proposals of the
Economic Community of West African States must be
fully taken into account during the Council's
consideration of follow-up action to the proposals of
the Panel of Experts and the observations and
recommendations of the Secretary-General, which we
consider extremely relevant.
Thirdly, whatever action the Council may take on
Liberia, we must make absolutely sure that we do not
jeopardize the significant progress made to date on
Sierra Leone and thereby worsen the situation in
Liberia. Let us remember that the Sierra Leonean
conflict will certainly not be resolved through civil war
in Liberia. Let us also remember that the Sierra
Leonean conflict actually has its origins in the Liberian
civil war and that history has shown us that the destiny
and future of the countries of the region are necessarily
shared ones.

