Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank Special
Coordinator Robert Serry for his briefing. We have
attentively listened to the statements of Palestine and
Israel.

After three years of stalemate, we have heard good
news from the Middle East. Palestinians and Israelis
will return to direct peace talks. What is more, the talks
will start soon, and they will not be talks about talks
but about the issues hampering the peace process.

We congratulate United States Secretary of State
John Kerry for his resolute statesmanship. Despite
warnings of failure, Mr. Kerry persevered in his
diplomacy and persuaded the two sides to resume
negotiations. The parties cannot afford to procrastinate.
The window for a two-State solution is narrow, one to
two years. There is an urgency to press ahead with the
peace process. Palestine and Israel have welcomed the
resumption of talks. President Mahmoud Abbas has
said that agreement on certain principles has led to the
decision to resume talks. Prime Minister Netanyahu has
characterized the resumption of the peace process as
a vital strategic interest. The Middle East Quartet has
called this a huge achievement. Both sides are inclined
to take concrete steps and show some flexibility.
We welcome the announcement about the release of
Palestinian prisoners.

There are two other core concerns: a halt to the
construction of settlements in the occupied West
Bank and East Jerusalem, and Israel's recognition of
the pre-l967 borders and using them as a baseline for
negotiations.
The best way to give those talks a chance is to keep
them away from the public glare to the extent possible.
Critics and cynics are already predicting the failure
of the renewed engagement. Rumours and refutations
continue to stalk the peace process. It is therefore
important to salvage this initiative.

But there is no cause for euphoria either. The road
ahead is rough and rugged, and there is no panacea or
shortcut. The agreement to resume talks is still being
finalized, yet this first step is better than a complete
hiatus. For success, the two sides should ensure a
measured pace for engagement.

Both sides should work towards an atmosphere
conducive to negotiations. Easing the blockade on Gaza
will be a huge confidence-building measure and also
provide relief to the population.

It became evident that without the intercession of
a third influential party, the deadlock on talks would
not have been broken. It is therefore imperative that the
Security Council, the Quartet and regional organizations
support the peace process to give it broader ownership.
We applaud the ambitious call made by Mr. Serry to
achieve tangible progress by the next session of the
General Assembly.

On the eve of these negotiations, we reiterate that
the only viable solution for the Palestine-Israel conflict
is the creation of an independent, sustainable and
contiguous State of Palestine based on the 1967 borders,
with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, living side by
side with Israel in peace and security. Alternatives to
this proposed solution are not likely to work.

For peace in the region, Israel must vacate Lebanese
lands and the Syrian Golan. The sovereignty, territorial
integrity, unity and political independence of Lebanon
must be respected.

As we meet in this Chamber, Syria is burning. The
bloodshed continues. Guns are not going to win the war,
and, as Mr. Brahimi said, arms will not make peace.
The Council and the international community should
take steps to stop arms supplies to all sides and bring
the Syrian Government and opposition representatives
to Geneva for talks that will lead to a political solution
and national reconciliation.

The dates for the Geneva conference have been
slipping, from June to July and now to September, and
even beyond, because each side wants to demonstrate
military superiority before moving to the negotiating
table. More arms will lead only to more bloodshed, not
to peace. We believe that in this war there will be no
victors, because Syrian is killing Syrian. The whole
Syrian nation is suffering. A meltdown in Syria will
fracture the entire region. Pakistan believes that all
hurdles to the Geneva conference should be removed
as soon as possible. All countries with interest and
influence, including those in the region, should
participate in the talks for a viable and enduring peace.

We welcome the Secretary-General's call for a
ceasefire during Ramadan. It has not been heeded, but
it still has a symbolic value. We also welcome the visit
to Damascus this week of the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Angela Kane, and the head
of the United Nations mission to investigate allegations
of the use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab
Republic, Mr. Ake Sellstrom. We call on all sides to
provide the team will full access in order to enable it to
complete its task.

