Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to extend our heartfelt condolences to the
United Nations family, to the brotherly delegation of
Nigeria and, through it, to the Government and people
of Nigeria and the families of the victims following the
attack on United Nations House today - an act that we
all condemn.

I would also like to extend to the brotherly
delegation of India our sincere congratulations on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and on its distinguished performance in
a month very busy with important and sensitive issues.
I would also like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
choosing the topic of our debate and Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his participation in the discussion and
his statement to the Council.

We associate ourselves with the statements made
by our brother from the Kingdom of Morocco on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and by the
observer of the African Union.

Tunisia has participated in peacekeeping
operations since 1962. It has deployed hundreds of
soldiers to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, sent
troops to Cambodia, Albania and Somalia, and
contributed observers to United Nations forces in
various parts of the African continent and the world. In
that regard, I cannot fail to mention the late He'di
Annabi, one of the best and most able experts of
Tunisia, who was killed in the earthquake that struck
Haiti in January 2010 while performing his duties in
committed service to the noble principles of the United
Nations and its mission to maintain peace and security.

Our experience is based on the following issues.
With regard to the discussion of peacekeeping
operations, we stress the importance of the effective
participation of States Members of the Organization, in
particular troop-contributing countries, in any
discussion on establishing any mission, its
implementation or its amendment. We believe that the
General Assembly and its specialized committees, in
particular the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, are the best forums to debate all such
matters in a discussion involving all Member States,
the Secretariat and members of the Security Council,
and to consider their proposals and those of other
specialized working and ad hoc groups on
peacekeeping operations in order to ensure
transparency in all decisions on peacekeeping
operations, their implementation or their amendment.

With regard to the functioning of peacekeeping
operations in the field and their guiding principles, we
believe them to be crucial to the functioning of
peacekeeping operations, in particular consent by the
parties concerned, non-use of force except in self-
defence, and the observance of complete impartiality.
We also believe that we must have a clear vision of the
nature of such missions and United Nations forces, as
well as advance exit strategies to avoid any security
vacuums in countries where the Organization has
worked so hard. To that end, I believe that we must
recognize the inseparable and complementary nature of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations.

On the other hand, we believe that it is important
to conduct extensive consultations with the troop-
contributing countries on logistical issues relating to
their components in peacekeeping operations, in
particular when such forces are restructured,
redeployed or given a new mandate. Naturally, the
issue of resources cannot be avoided, since it is one of
the main causes of the limited efficiency and
effectiveness of the current forces and greatly reduces
the ability of the United Nations and regional
organizations to conduct peacekeeping operations in
conflict areas.
I also note that the discussion that has been
ongoing since 2008, in particular on cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union, and
consequent recommendations and reports, such as the
Prodi report (S/2008/813), all need to be implemented.
We must identify possible approaches to the financing
of African missions sanctioned by the United Nations.

In any case, we believe that conflict prevention
and pre-emptive action remain the best way to spare
the United Nations and its Member States heavy
financial, logistical and political burdens. Therefore,
the international community must focus on preventive
action in dealing with conflicts before they begin or
spread, and pay sufficient attention to events
throughout the world in order to ensure that the
Organization adopts a comprehensive approach in
seeking to preserve international peace and security
and addresses the various phases of such efforts in an
optimal manner.

In conclusion, I affirm that, as it begins a new
phase of its history, Tunisia will always remain
committed to upholding the pillars of peace, stability
and security throughout the world. We will spare no
effort to contribute and participate effectively in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We believe that,
despite the difficulties that such operations face, they
represent one of the greatest successes of our
Organization and a source of hope for all people who
suffer the scourge of war and conflict.

