Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Sandra Honore for her briefing
and for her astute leadership of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

The El Rancho Accord remains crucial in the
resolution of Haiti's political situation. We acknowledge
the strong commitment of President Martelly to acting
in line with the provisions of the Accord. We note in
particular the President's determined efforts to ensure
the holding of elections in October. However, they
cannot take place due to a technicality. It is our hope
that the political leaders of Haiti will reach a consensus
on the way forward so that the long-delayed elections
can take place.

As President Martelly rises to the enormous
challenges of his office, the support of the Haitian
people will remain vital. The security challenges
facing the country will require the Haitian authorities
to develop plans and resilient security institutions that
will effectively address the issues. We take positive
note of the operational presence of MINUSTAH, which
has so far proved successful in managing the security
situation of the country.

We would like to acknowledge the progress Haiti
has made in two important areas: agriculture and social
development. In regard to agriculture, we commend the
Haitian authorities for the remarkable progress made
in the production of yam, with output increasing from
354,500 metric tons in 2010 to nearly 500,000 metric
tons in 2013. While this is below Haiti's potential in
yam production, we note that the authorities are making
efforts under the triennial agricultural recovery
programme 2013-2016 to address the constraints
faced by producers in the sector. We look forward to
the adoption of the policy for the yam industry, which
the Ministry of Agriculture is reportedly working on.
Yam has the potential to contribute to Haiti's foreign
exchange earnings and improve national prosperity. We
therefore encourage the Haitian authorities to continue
to work on boosting its production.

In terms of social development, we applaud the
Government of Haiti for the high priority it attaches
to the eradication of illiteracy in the country. We note
that the Government is motivated by the desire to
reduce social inequality, fight extreme poverty and
improve social inclusion for all Haitians. In this regard,
252,000 Haitians have benefited from the efforts of
the Government over the past two years. Furthermore,
under the sixth national functional literacy campaign
launched in March, the Government has reportedly
set a target of achieving literacy for 450,000 Haitians
across the country by March 2016. We encourage the
Government to continue to promote literacy in order to
strengthen social cohesion and improve the lives of its
citizens.

Despite these positive developments in Haiti,
challenges still exist, and MINUSTAH remains
relevant in meeting these challenges. In this regard, we
take positive note of the progress that MINUSTAH has
made in achieving its stabilization benchmarks.

Concerning MINUSTAH's consolidation and
reconfiguration beyond 2016, we believe that a phased
drawdown based on an overall assessment of overall
stability, the security situation and the capacity of the
National Police will provide optimal results. We welcome
the United Nations integrated strategic framework and
look forward to the outcome of the strategic planning
process being undertaken by MINUSTAH, the United
Nations partners and the Government of Haiti.
