Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): I thank both
Mr. Kouchner for his briefing and the Secretary-
General for the submission of the report on the
activities of the United Nations Interim Administrative
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).

We have noticed many positive developments in
Kosovo due to UNMIK's efforts in all areas of its
responsibilities, specifically the completion of the civil
registration process, the issuance of a number of
regulations, in particular on self-government of
municipalities and municipal elections, the adoption of
the Airlie Declaration and many others.

In our view, the real achievements of the Mission
over the past three months have been the ongoing
participation of the moderate Kosovo Serbs in the joint
interim structures, the completing of the Kosovo
Turkish representation in the Kosovo Transitional
Council, and the appointment of more than 400
additional local judges and prosecutors on a multi-
ethnic basis as well as the appointment of additional
international judges and prosecutors to the district
courts of Kosovo.

At the same time, the dire security situation in the
province, in particular with regard to the protection of
minority communities and human rights, continues to
cause us grave concern. Ethnically motivated violence
is not decreasing. Since ensuring a secure environment,
public safety and order is one of the major
responsibilities of the international civil and military
presences in Kosovo, it is to a very significant degree
the yardstick by which the overall success of UNMIK
and KFOR activities is judged. Against this
background, UNMIK and KFOR activities are not fully
satisfactory and should be intensified. The table
circulated to us is very good, but it is not fully
convincing because it has one flaw in its title:
"Reported major offences in Kosovo". What about the
under-reported offences, and who is to determine the
difference between major and minor offences?

Nevertheless, we support the relevant initiatives
of UNMIK and KFOR; in particular, the decision of
UNMIK police on developing a Special Security Task
Force to combat ethnically targeted violence. It is our
hope that a special police unit from Ukraine, which
completed its deployment in Kosovo last week, will be
helpful in this regard. The recent seizure by KFOR and
UNMIK police of illegal weapons and explosives in
Gracanica are also praiseworthy. Given the rise in
politically motivated violence in Kosovo in the run-up
to the municipal elections, UNMIK's activities to
establish both an Information Coordination Group and
an Operational Task Force to implement security
strategies against political violence are timely.

We assess positively the decision of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights to appoint
Ambassador Amneus of Sweden as her Special Envoy
on persons deprived of liberty in connection with the
Kosovo crisis in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
According to the Secretary-General's report, the
Special Envoy's mandate will cover all persons
deprived of liberty, including prisoners, detainees and
missing persons in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
regardless of ethnicity. In our view, the mandate
reflects an objective and balanced approach to this
highly sensitive issue.

The initial phase of civil registration, despite
almost no participation by the Serb and Turkish
communities, was generally recognized as successfully
completed more than a month ago. In August it was
announced that about 1 million applications from
Kosovo residents had been registered, and the list of
5,500 political candidates for municipal elections was
issued. A large number of those applications are now
undergoing a review that is to be completed by the end
of September. We acknowledge the work done by
UNMIK in preparation for the October municipal
elections. At the same time, there are different pieces
of information - including the one referred to by
Ambassador Lavrov - that indicate the registration
process did not go so well. We are afraid that it would
be difficult to rectify the situation before the 28
October elections. We would like to invite
Mr. Kouchner's comments on this issue.

With regard to the matter of the Zvecan lead
smelter, as we said in August, the intentions of UNMIK
to undertake a clean-up of the plant and the
surrounding environment are more than welcome.
However, there are still doubts about whether it was
really necessary to assume control of the complex
through the use of force. It is also important to ensure
that all the former workers at Trepca - whose
demonstrations still continue - will not be deprived of
the opportunity to get their jobs back as soon as the
complex is reopened.

We learned from the Secretary-General's report
about the presentation by Mr. Kouchner of his initial
concept of a pact for Kosovo society, which will
involve the elaboration of a legal framework for
substantial autonomy and community protection during
the interim administrative period. Since that concept
has not been presented to the Security Council, we
request Mr. Kouchner to do so as soon as it is finalized.
In our view, in adopting the pact one should avoid the
risk of prejudging in it the final status issue, as the
document will touch upon the legal side of the
substantial autonomy of Kosovo. Therefore, we call on
Mr. Kouchner to be vigilant about the substance of the
pact and to ensure that it is not seen as a substitution
for the would-be outcome of possible negotiations on
Kosovo's final status.

I could not overlook in my comments the most
important recent event in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, that is, the Yugoslav presidential, federal
and municipal elections held three days ago. We are
convinced that whatever the results of the elections in
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, UNMIK and
KFOR must continue to pursue their efforts towards
fulfilling their main responsibilities under resolution
1244 (1999), namely, to promote Kosovo's substantial
autonomy and self-governance within the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia while fully respecting the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of that country.

In conclusion, I wish Mr. Kouchner and all the
staff of UNMIK and KFOR every success in pursuit of
their mandates.

