Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I would like to thank the
President for placing this issue on the Security Council's
agenda today. We have heard impressive statements this
morning, including those by the Secretary-General, the

Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and the Special Rapporteur. I also
found the statement made by the Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union, Mr. Chergui,
very interesting and encouraging, especially in the
sense that the African Union takes this challenge very
seriously and that they are working very hard on the
matter across the African continent, which, as we know
from recent reports in Libya, faces many problems
relating to human trafficking.

Allow me to make three points. The first is, of
course, to support what the Secretary-General said. I
think his report (S/2017/939) makes for a very impressive
document. I want to highlight his consideration of the
issues of impunity and the need to gather evidence
from both within and beyond conflict areas so as to
pursue perpetrators.

The second point is that we must make trafficking
unprofitable. Trafficking is, unfortunately, a highly
profitable business. The risk of being caught is not very
high, nor is the risk ofbeing put in prison. That is what
we need to work on, and so I refer once again to what
the Secretary-General underlined in his report: we
must devote more attention to the analysis of financial
flows. In that context, we note that the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and
the Financial Action Task Force have been carrying out
very professional work in following those illicit flows.
I also believe that we should profit from the expert
recommendations of the OECD. In following money
flows, it is important that we, at the same time, uphold
the rule of law and find the right balance between
effective law enforcement and the protection of the
right to privacy.

Next, I wanted to share with the Council the steps
taken by the Federal Government. As members knows,
we have had a lot of refugees from various backgrounds
arrive in Germany over recent years. The first step is to
identify the victims and provide services so as to give
them direct psychological support and assistance when
they are in refugee shelters.

With regard to the psychological work that has to
be done, the Council of Europe's Group of Experts
on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings
has provided a lot of advice, and we should give our
support to the draft report that it is still preparing.
As mentioned earlier on the subject of impunity, we
have to look at law enforcement. Within the crime of
trafficking, there are those who are responsible for the
direct exploitation of people in need, such as refugees,
and those people who knowingly and willingly take
advantage of persons being trafficked for labour or
sexual exploitation. Since 2016, we have had a new
provision in the German Penal Code, under which such
people - the indirect benefiters of trafficking - are
punished. It is important that people benefiting from
trafficking be criminalized.

The Slovak representative, speakingjust before me,
mentioned that we have to get business and enterprises
engaged. On the subject of labour exploitation, the
German Government included a provision in its 2016
national action plan on business and human rights, under
which international companies are made responsible for
ensuring that decent labour conditions are implemented
in their supply chains. It is important, therefore, that we
focus on the victims, law enforcement and companies.

We have received various impressions from the
pictures that have come in from Libya. Last year, the
Chancellor received Nadia Murad, a Yazidi, as the
Council knows, and Germany among other countries
had an exhibition in this Chamber on the plight of
the Yazidis. It is always good to follow up on what
has happened to witnesses, and Nadia Murad is an
example of someone who has contributed to keeping
our response to the Yazidi situation alive. Germany
hopes that today's debate and resolution will lead to an
improvement in that situation.

