Mr. Ayari (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I would
like to welcome Mrs. Ogata, the High Commissioner
for Refugees, and thank her for her exhaustive and
instructive statement on the activities of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR). I hope that the presence here of Mrs. Ogata,
who has admirably served the refugees for long years,
will contribute to even further raising the international
community's awareness of the tragedy of refugees
throughout the world and prompt it to undertake new
efforts on their behalf

The tragic plight experienced by millions of
refugees and displaced persons throughout the world is
a source of great and constant concern and demands the
attention of all of us - in particular since the problem
of refugees is expanding and becoming ever-more
complex. The exodus of civilian populations stricken
by conflicts can indeed seriously endanger peace and
international security. Moreover, and in the light of its
transborder nature, the problem of refugees has serious
regional ramifications and is a threat to peace and
stability for neighbouring countries affected by the
displacement of refugees.

Tunisia, which adheres to the major international
legal instruments on the protection of refugees - and
in particular to the 1951 Convention relating to the
Status of Refugees - would like to express its
solidarity regarding refugees and displaced persons,
and in particular the most vulnerable of them, namely
women, children and the elderly, who are often
exploited by the warring parties.

We would also like to voice our appreciation of
the role played by international organizations and the
competent bodies and organs of the United Nations for
the protection and assistance to refugees. In particular
we would like to express our gratitude to the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
for the tireless efforts it has been making under the
professional leadership of Mrs. Ogata to alleviate the
refugee crisis. In this regard we subscribe to the
proposal that has just been made by the High
Commissioner in her statement.

While new emergency situations are continuing to
arise, UNHCR finds itself confronted with a chronic
lack of resources. Here we would like to emphasize the
critical need for financing for humanitarian activities.
The international community, and in particular the
donor countries, must provide UNHCR appropriate
political and material support to allow it to carry out its
mandate effectively.

We welcome the fact that UNHCR has been able
to organize the return of a great number of refugees.
Relocating refugees in third countries and integrating
them in the host countries are also solutions for many
refugees. Here we would like to express our gratitude
to those countries that have opened their doors to
thousands of refugees in a spirit of solidarity and
hospitality and that are continuing to grant protection,
aid and assistance to these refugees. We urge the
international community to come to the assistance of
these host countries, in particular in Africa. These
countries are themselves confronted with serious socio-
economic problems as well as by pressures linked to
the environment.

Tunisia remains convinced that a resolution of the
problem of refugees and of the mass and forced
displacement of populations lies in the elimination of
their underlying causes. This means in particular the
elimination of extreme poverty; rectifying the
deterioration of the socio-economic situation in several
regions of the world; and addressing the proliferation
of deadly conflicts, internal and ethnic wars, and
massive violations of human rights. In particular there
is a need to work to eliminate the underlying causes of
conflicts which are the source of the problem of
refugees and of massive displacements of populations
with their humanitarian consequences. It is then up to
the international community to make the necessary
political and financial efforts for post-conflict
reconstruction.

International attention has often been focused on
those humanitarian crises that are the most telegenic,
while other crises that have taken place - particularly
in Africa - have not benefited from similar attention.

The issue of refugees remains of great concern in
Africa. Dealing responsibly with the humanitarian
situation today represents a major challenge for the
international community as a whole and in particular
for the Africans. In this context we fully subscribe to
the proposals as well as to the recommendations
contained respectively in the reports of the Secretary-
General and of the Working Group on the causes of
conflict in Africa, and we urge the international
community and the competent bodies of the United
Nations system to assist in the implementation of these
recommendations regarding measures to be undertaken
to find adequate solutions to the problems of refugees,
repatriated persons and displaced persons in Africa.

We believe, however, that humanitarian
assistance and the carrying out of humanitarian
assistance activities must absolutely abide by the
principles of strict respect for the sovereignty of States,
their political independence and their territorial
integrity and of non-interference in the internal affairs
of States, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and international humanitarian law.

Finally, I would like to conclude by reiterating to
Mrs. Ogata our gratitude and our thanks for having
succeeded in making the problem of refugees among
the highest priorities of the international community. I
would also like to pay her a well-deserved tribute for
the tremendous volume of work she has done for
refugees during her tenure as the head of UNHCR, and
to wish her every success in her future activities. I
would also, finally, like to take this opportunity to
renew our warm congratulations to her successor,
Mr. Ruud Lubbers, and wish him all success in
carrying out his mandate.

