Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): Mr. President, we
would like to thank you for having organized this very
important debate on piracy and also for having prepared
the comprehensive concept note (S/20l2/8l4, annex).
We thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for
his useful and comprehensive briefing.

South Africa is concerned about the scourge of
piracy and particularly its impact on the safety of
navigation and the danger it poses to seafarers. More
generally, piracy has a negative impact on the political,
social, economic and humanitarian situation of affected
States. We thus applaud the efforts of various States
and entities such as the United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime in combating piracy.

South Africa remains committed to doing its part
to lend support by cooperating and coordinating with
other stakeholders on anti-piracy initiatives pursuant
to its international legal obligations. In the Southern
African Development Community region, South Africa
has deployed its naval assets and allocated 63 million

rands for anti-piracy operations in the Mozambique
Channel.

We recall that international law, as reflected in
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
sets out a comprehensive legal framework applicable
to piracy and armed robbery as well as other ocean
activities. It is important that current efforts to combat
piracy be fully consistent with that international legal
framework. Article 100 of the Convention affirms the
duty of all States to cooperate, as far as possible, in
the repression of piracy on the high seas. Moreover,
article 105 permits all States to seize a pirate ship and
exercise universal jurisdiction over persons committing
piracy. Those provisions should guide all States in the
fight against piracy. We should thus avoid seeking to
create new norms, as the emphasis should be on the
implementation of the existing framework.

The international community should also enhance
efforts aimed at the sharing of information and the
development of a strong network to alleviate the
challenges related to piracy. Stronger international
coordination could assist in addressing crucial issues
such as money laundering associated with piracy, the
involvement of international crime syndicates and
other major challenges related to piracy.

Allow me to turn to the issue of piracy off the coast
of Somalia, which in the View of my delegation is a case
sui generis. South Africa continues to insist that piracy
off the coast of Somalia must be seen in the context
of the peace challenges facing Somalia. In our View,
resolving the problem of piracy off the coast of Somalia
will require holistic solutions and an end to the current
conflict.

Piracy remains a symptom of a greater problem,
which is the political, security and economic challenges
on land. The international community should therefore
direct more efforts and resources towards addressing
the root causes of the Somali conflict while also
maintaining the required pressure at sea against the
perpetrators of piracy.

South Africa notes that the number of incidents
of piracy has decreased significantly since the recent
security and political gains in Somalia. In the light of
that development, the new Somali Government needs to
be equipped with its own mechanisms to combat piracy
on land and sea. In that respect, international support
for strengthening its maritime security ability and its
judicial and correctional service infrastructure, as well
as the provision of economic opportunities for coastal
communities, will be crucial.

In that regard, the report of Mr. Jack Lang, Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on Legal Issues
Related to Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, indicated
that:

"New measures to enhance the effectiveness of
counter-piracy efforts and successfully prosecute
alleged pirates will be crucial. The recommended
solution is to implement, on an extremely urgent
basis, a comprehensive multidimensional plan
comprising three components - economic, security
and jurisdictional/correctional - that would be
brought to bear simultaneously." (S/2011/30, annex summary, 17.3)

As stressed by the African Union Peace and
Security Council, one ofthe many issues that have to be
addressed in our search for solutions in Somalia must
include the curbing of the illegal plundering of Somali
resources, including the illegal fishing and dumping of
waste off the coast of Somalia. Somali authorities must
be assisted in their efforts to ensure that the benefits of
Somali resources are enjoyed by Somalia and its people.

We note that the Secretary-General has reported
that there is a lack of information regarding the
illegal fishing and dumping of waste off the coast of
Somalia. We hope that in the context of paragraph 24 of
resolution 2020 (2011), those States and organizations
with a naval presence in the area will provide the
Secretary-General with the information necessary
to enable the Council to take this matter further. If
we fail to take decisive action in that regard, we risk
creating the impression that the Council is willing to
act to curb piracy only because the vital economic
interests of some countries are threatened. Conversely,
any lethargy in acting against the plundering of Somali
resources could be construed as indicating a lack of
interest in the livelihoods of ordinary Somalis.

South Africa supports the call for Somalia to declare
an exclusive economic zone. However, the absence of
a declared exclusive economic zone cannot be used to
justify the illegal exploitation of Somali resources in
the zone. There is nothing in the Convention on the
Law of the Sea that suggests that the existence of an
exclusive economic zone is subject to its declaration by
the coastal State. Thus, even as we await the declaration
of an exclusive economic zone by Somalia, fishing and
dumping in the maritime zone 200 nautical miles from
its coastline without the consent of its authorities is
illegal.

Finally, I wish to conclude by stating that the
Council's mandate remains the maintenance of
international peace and security. The Council can act
in relation to piracy only to the extent that a specific
situation, such as the piracy off the coast of Somalia,
amounts to a threat to international peace and security.

