Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea would
like to thank Mr. Huang Xia, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes region, for
his first briefing, in which he extensively explained
the situation of the Great Lakes in general and the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region in particular.

Despite the progress made in the Great Lakes region,
it continues to face significant challenges with regard
to security, stability and development - including the
activities of armed groups - the illegal exploitation of
natural resources, rape and ethnic and sexual violence
and a large-scale humanitarian crisis affecting millions
of its inhabitants. Many of those challenges are cross-
border in nature and require regional cooperation. In
that context, we believe that establishing alliances and
strengthening State structures in the region, as well
as promoting and empowering women, civil society
and the private business sector, is fundamental to the
promotion of sustainable development, which will
alleviate poverty, curb frequent migration and famine
and confront armed groups in the region.

We welcome the recent positive developments
in the region. Those include the holding of peaceful
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
peaceful transfer of power, the election of the Prime
Minister and the formation of the new Government,
the steps taken by His Excellency Mr. Antoine Felix
Tshisekedi Tshilombo to open up the political space
and the momentum of the regional dialogue that has
been initiated. Those are all good indicators. The
signing of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, under
the auspices of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, and the signing of the memorandum of
understanding between Uganda and Rwanda in order to
alleviate tensions are two other positive developments.
The current situation and return to normalcy in
Burundi, including the adoption of its new Constitution
and new electoral code, its presidential, legislative
and local elections scheduled for 20 May 2020 and the
decision of His Excellency Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza to
fully finance the elections are signs of a strong and
positive political will.

We appreciate the efforts deployed by the authorities
of the Central African Republic, in coordination with
its international partners, in the signing on 6 February
of the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation between
the authorities of that country and 14 armed groups
within the framework of the African Union Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic with a view towards an inclusive Government.
We appreciate the efforts of the Central African
Republic to stabilize itself and welcome the efforts of
its Government to mobilize a platform to support the
political process during the presidential and legislative
elections to be held in 2020 and 2021. That constitutes
another step towards achieving reconciliation as well as
future and permanent stability in the country.

We commend the work that the Advisory Board
of the Women's Platform for the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework is doing to ensure women's
genuine participation in the political, peace and security
processes in the region. We appreciate the approval by
ministers responsible for gender issues of the regional
action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). In that regard, we must continue to support the
regional efforts undertaken by the Great Lakes Judicial
Cooperation Network to achieve peace and security,
safeguard human rights and fundamental freedoms and
combat impunity. The Republic of Equatorial Guinea
reiterates its firm commitment to the formal declaration
of the African Union to silence the guns by 2020. That
initiative is outlined in resolution 2457 (2019), which
was preceded by an open debate organized by the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea (see S/PV.8473).

Despite the measures that have been implemented
by the Governments of the Great Lakes region to
address the critical humanitarian situation, we remain
concerned about the large number of forcibly displaced
persons, who remain exposed to malnutrition, cholera,
measles and Ebola, all of which require the provision
of adequate technical and financial assistance from the
international community. We condemn the frequent
attacks in the Great Lakes region by illegal armed
groups, both foreign and domestic, as well as the
constant and sporadic clashes with armed forces and
State security, humanitarian personnel and means
of transport and equipment. Those actions violate
international humanitarian law.

Our delegation is confident in the capacity of
the joint efforts of the United Nations, the African
Union and regional and subregional organizations to
deal adequately and in a coordinated manner with the
conflicts in the region. We welcome the recent report
(S/2019/759) of the Secretary-General on strengthening
that partnership with regard to issues of peace and
security in Africa. Our delegation deeply appreciates the
renewed political will shown by the leaders of the Great
Lakes region to strengthen ties among their countries,
address differences through trust and dialogue and
investigate cross-border incidents in a constructive
manner in order to advance international cooperation
and integration. We appeal to the African Union,
the International Organization of la Francophonie,
the Southern African Development Community and
international partners to continue to develop synergies
with the member States of the International Conference
of the Great Lakes Region in order to implement of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework agreement
in the region and to take advantage of the current
climate so that the countries of the region, especially
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi and the
Central African Republic, can be fully involved in the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and African
Union Agenda 2063. We would like to conclude by
congratulating the various United Nations missions and
offices in the Great Lakes region on their hard work.

