Mr. Kovanda (Czech Republic): Burundi has for
some time now been balancing on the edge of a precipice.
With an ethnic composition very similar to that of
neighbouring Rwanda and with distrust between the two

 

ethnic groups similarly pronounced, there have been
periodic fears that Burundi, too, might witness a
Rwanda-style genocide.

The differences between the two countries, however,
are very important as well. While Hutus constitute an
overwhelming majority of the population of both countries,
in Rwanda the Hutus had also been in control of the
military and security. The Hutus in Burundi, on the other
hand, have the numbers, but it was only in 1993 that they
won a significant piece of the political pie in the country's
first democratic elections.

The results of those elections were tragically marred
when, in October of that year, the newly-elected President
Ndadaye, whom the Hutus of the country thought of as
their own Nelson Mandela, was assassinated. The culprits
were never publicly identified, let alone brought to justice.
And in the aftermath of the assassination a tidal wave of
revenge led to the slaughter of perhaps 50,000 people,
mostly Tutsis. Again, culprits were never identified, let
alone tried.

The political situation in the country has been tottering
from one crisis to the next ever since, periodically verging
on an explosion of one sort or another. The Security
Council has felt it necessary to dispatch two missions to the
country in the past year or so. Burundi is the only country
in crisis which has received attention of this intensity. I
have had the privilege of serving on both of these missions.

There are one or two indelible impressions which
Burundi leaves on a visitor. One is the corrosion of the
body politic caused by what has been aptly described as "a
culture of impunity". It is difficult to instil respect for
human life, let alone a sense of political responsibility, if
crimes - even political crimes, even political
assassinations, even an assassination of the country's
President - go unpunished. The international commission
of inquiry which would be set up according to the draft
resolution before of us would continue the excellent work
of the Mission of Ambassadors Ake and Huslid, whose
sensitive report of May 1994 is mentioned in the first
preambular paragraph of the draft. The persons identified as
having participated in the assassination of President
Ndadaye or in the subsequent slaughter of Tutsis, which the
Burundian authorities describe as genocide, will then
presumably be dealt with by the arm of the law, which in
Burundi would demonstrate for the first time in years that
crimes do lead to punishment.

There is one other indelible impression that one gets
in Burundi. With the 1993 elections, the country set out
on a democratic path. Democracy as the rule of the
majority is one thing we all understand. In Burundi
especially, though, democracy's other aspect comes into
play - the protection of minorities. The Tutsi minority
now distrusts its country's democracy and sees sufficient
self-protection only in having control of all the country's
guns. Over the coming years, sufficient trust will have to
develop between the two ethnic groups, trust which will
allow all segments of the population to participate in all
aspects of the country's life.

The commission of inquiry might be of assistance
here as well inasmuch as it might make recommendations
concerning appropriate legal, political or administrative
measures, for such measures are probably necessary if
Burundi is in the future to avoid not only the vortex of
Rwanda, but also the twin dangers of a dictatorship based
on the predominant majority of one ethnic group as well
as a dictatorship based on a firepower monopoly of the
other ethnic group.

