Mr. Fedotov: I would like to thank the Security
Council for the opportunity to update it on the threats
posed by drugs and organized crime in West Africa.

With increased drug trafficking, signs of drug
production, growing drug consumption, piracy and
insecurity, West Africa represents one of the key
challenges for the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), and it continues to be one of our main
priorities. Illicit drugs and transnational organized crime
are undermining stability in the region and affecting
health, democracy and economic development.

In 2011, approximately 30 tons of cocaine were
trafficked in West Africa. However, only 2.7 kilograms
were reported seized, in Guinea-Bissau, during the
same period. Cocaine trafficking in the region is
estimated to generate approximately $900 million in
profits annually for criminal networks. In addition,
there has also been an increase in heroin trafficking.
UNODC reported 20 kilograms seized in 2008, 210
kilograms in 2010 and almost 400 kilograms in 2011.
Recently, methamphetamine laboratories have also
been discovered in West Africa.

UNODC is continuing to analyze the overall
situation. A Threat assessment for the region,
emphasizing the trans-Atlantic route for cocaine, will
be issued later in the year. But let me be clear: West
Africa is no longer simply a transit route for cocaine
from Latin America to Europe; it has also become a
final destination. There are now up to 2.3 million
cocaine drug users in West and Central Africa, with
the majority reported in West Africa. That means a
greater need for prevention and treatment of drug users,
particularly injecting drug users, as well as a focus on
HIV/AIDS.

Drug money is also being reinvested in the region to
feed all sorts of criminal activities and illicit trafficking.
There is also a growing threat of piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea, where 36 pirate attacks were recorded in 2010,
49 in 2011 and, to date, 16 in 2012. A United Nations
assessment mission, mandated by resolution 2018
(2011) to support Benin was co-led by UNODC and the
Department for Political Affairs (DPA) in November
2011. As a follow-up, UNODC will address piracy
and maritime security as part of a national integrated
programme for Benin.

UNODC is also carefully monitoring terrorism
in the region, which has the capacity to destabilize
countries such as Mali. As Ambassador Djinnit has
said, today the northern part of that country is under
the control of terrorist and criminal groups. That could
further lead to the deterioration of security and good
governance in the region. We are closely reviewing
possible links between terrorism and transnational
organized crime. UNODC fully supports the Council's
endorsement of the mediation efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). If
successful, we will be able to restart our operations in
that country, after they were suspended following the
coup d'etat.

The situation in Guinea-Bissau remains a serious
concern for UNODC. There are fears over the
connections between elements of the military forces
and illicit drug trafficking, and there is a prevailing
culture of impunity hindering effective law enforcement
activities.

In the face of all those challenges, UNODC is
building political commitment through regional
platforms, especially ECOWAS, developing inter-agency
approaches and delivering solutions through its
integrated regional programmes. The West Africa Coast
Initiative (WACI) offers technical assistance in law
enforcement, border management and justice reform,
among other areas. Under WACI, we are working at
the field level with DPA, the United Nations Office
for West Africa, including closely with Ambassador
Djinnit, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
INTERPOL and the World Customs Organization
(WCO). That is allowing us to combine our mandates
and create multidisciplinary responses.

I also welcome the renewal of the ECOWAS regional
plan of action. UNODC will continue to assist Member
States in confronting those transnational issues.

The ECOWAS Commission has a pivotal role to
play in building commitment among Member States, as
well as in promoting sustainable reforms.

In the area of inter-agency activities, UNODC is
currently drafting, with DPA, the Secretary-General's
report on the impact of transnational organized crime
in West Africa and the Sahel region, as requested by
the Council.

The United Nations Task Force on Transnational
Organized Crime and Drug Trafficking, established
by the Secretary-General in 2011, is also promoting
inter-agency collaboration and joint actions. UNODC
is working with the Peacebuilding Commission to
help to mainstream drugs and crime as a threat to
peacebuilding across the region.
In the area of operations, our network of prosecutors
against organized crime in Central America, which was
set up in 2011, will soon be partnered with a similar
network in West Africa.

The Global Container Control Programme, which
UNODC co-manages with the WCO, now operates on
both sides of the Atlantic and is supported by a similar
programme at the region's airports.

We have also established transnational crime units
in Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea-Bissau.

Through those initiatives, we are building judicial
and forensic capacity and, significantly, the ability to
intercept money being laundered.

West Africa faces complex challenges that represent
a severe test for the individual countries and for the
region as a whole. Our aim must be to help countries
sustain their development, while also ensuring peace
and prosperity in the region. To achieve that, UNODC
will continue to work with all partners to build the
commitment and develop the necessary solutions in
this extremely fluid and fast-moving environment.

