The Secretary-General: I thank His Excellency
Minister Harold Caballeros for convening this timely
discussion.

When it comes to peace and justice, we are living
in a new world. Those who contemplate committing
horrific acts that shock the conscience of humankind
can no longer be confident that their heinous crimes
will go unpunished. Rulers and warlords who perpetrate
atrocities can no longer trade their power for amnesty
and then slip away, unpunished, to some safe haven.

We live in an age of accountability. It is an age
in which there is an ever-growing emphasis on the
responsibility of States to end impunity and to prosecute
those responsible for genocide, crimes against humanity,
war crimes and other egregious crimes. It is an age in
which United Nations envoys and representatives will
not, as they negotiate and mediate peace agreements,
promote or condone amnesty for genocide, crimes
against humanity, war crimes or gross violations of
human rights. It is also an age that Security Council has
played a central role in bringing about by establishing
the tribunals for the former Yugoslavia, Rwanda and
Lebanon, and the Special Court for Sierra Leone.

At the centre of the new system of international
criminal justice stands the International Criminal
Court (ICC). In that regard, I welcome warmly the
participation of The Honourable Judge Sang-Hyun
Song, President of the International Criminal Court.

Both the Court and the Council are frequently
active in the same situations. The grave crimes that
the ICC deals with threaten, in the words of the Rome
Statute, the peace, security and well-being of the world,
the very peace and security that the Council is charged
to maintain.

It is not surprising, then, to find the Court
investigating, prosecuting and trying situations that are
on the Council's agenda, such as those concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Cote d'Ivoire and
the Lord's Resistance Army. Of course, the Security
Council has itself referred certain situations on its
agenda to the Court's Prosecutor, as we saw in the cases
of Darfur and Libya.

However, the Court is not simply an autonomous
international organization. It is also a judicial body,
independent and impartial. Once set in motion, justice
takes its own inexorable course, unswayed by politics.
That is its strength, its distinctive virtue.

It also, frankly, presents challenges to those who
have to navigate the new environment that is created
when justice enters the scene. When the Court takes
up a situation, whether because of a Security Council
referral or otherwise, the whole landscape changes. It
is likely to keep changing, as cases are investigated,
arrest warrants are issued, suspects are detained and
transferred to The Hague, trials are opened and verdicts
and sentences are handed down.

The Court and Council both operate in that fluid
setting, and both should explore the many ways in
which they can complement and leverage each other's
work, from prevention to enforcement. In that regard,
the Council, where it has referred a situation to the
Prosecutor, can greatly assist the Court by acting to
secure the necessary level of cooperation from Member
States.

Ten years have passed since the Rome Statute
entered into force and the world's first permanent
international criminal court became a new part of the
global system. A considerable amount of experience
has been accumulated since that time. We have seen the
value of a Court that pursues justice in all regions. We
have seen how the actions and inaction of the Court and
the Security Council can have an impact on each other.
Most importantly, we have seen how the activities of
each one can assist the other.

Only if perpetrators of grave crimes are prosecuted
and held to account can there be any hope that future
such crimes will be prevented and peace preserved.
Justice is crucial for breaking cycles of violence and
fragility. Even the possibility of ICC engagement in a
given situation can create an incentive to set up local
mechanisms to deliver justice.

That gives the Council a critical role to play when
mandating peacekeeping or special political missions:
to strengthen the national capacity of a country to
prosecute serious crimes. In the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, for example, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission has worked with the
national authorities to set up and support prosecution
support cells to investigate and prosecute serious
crimes in the eastern part of the country.

The Court, for its part, can help to strengthen
national responses to serious crimes through the
domestic incorporation of provisions of the Rome
Statute. In addition, its outreach work is intended to
stop cycles of violence from recurring.

The Council and the Court can also support
each other in building local justice responses and in
strengthening the rule of law.

The Council and the Court frequently operate in
the same political space. They share a common interest.
The Court can help advance the purposes of the United
Nations - above all, to maintain international peace
and security. The Council, by understanding and
respecting the work of the Court, can advance its own
cause and better discharge its responsibilities

In this new age of accountability, in this period
of growing demands for justice, let us do our utmost
to draw solid lessons from a decade of advances and
challenges. Let us do everything we can to see that the
Council and the Court work together to deliver both
justice and peace. I look forward to a constructive
discussion.

