Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Unfortunately, today the Security Council
has effectively shown its inability to achieve consensus
on how to manage and resolve the horrible tragedy
faced by the people of Syria since the beginning of the
war. The fundamental reason for the lack of unity is
based on the fact that certain permanent members of the
Security Council are deeply involved in the conflict and
supported the development of this type of asymmetric
war, a new and absolutely illegal mechanism designed
to overthrow Governments.

We entirely subscribe to the statement made by
the representative of Egypt because, unfortunately,
hundreds of thousands of Syrian people are dying on the
ground and are paying the price for a disastrous policy
in the Middle East. In our view, this is a warning to the
non-permanent member of the Security Council, and
we must thoroughly consider that we are encouraging
conflicts by taking steps that are in flagrant violation
of the Charter of the United Nations and everything
represented by the international legal system.

We are a sovereign country, but we have no military
or geopolitical interests beyond our borders. We see the
need to raise our voice to ensure that the international
community will defend those principles underlying the
United Nations, including respect for sovereignty and
the non-interference in the internal affairs of people
and the concept that sovereignty lies in the people of
any given country. Those are fundamental principles.
No one in the Security Council can decide whether the
Government of Syria is legitimate. No one in the Security
Council has the right to suppress the sovereignty of the
Syrian Government over its own territory.

We have already had painful experiences that need
to be analysed and discussed in depth in assessing the
question of whether the Security Council is fulfilling
the role that it was given when the United Nations was
founded. We see ourselves in the middle of a conflict
between powerful countries, and we need to defend such

principles. Much pressure is being generated to ensure
that brotherly countries, particularly non-permanent
members, align themselves with one position or another.
We appeal to everyone to respect the principles as the
only means to come up with a political solution not
only to the Syrian conflict, but also to the conflicts in
Yemen and Palestine, among so many other countries.

The exercise of the right of veto by Russia was
criticized. We believe that the right of veto serves in
many instances to establish balance in situations that
are otherwise totally out of balance. If only they could
have exercised the right of veto in connection with the
intervention in Iraq or the NATO bombings in Libya, we
would not be facing the regrettable situation in which
we find ourselves today. Double standards are often
used in addressing a situation. Some Council members
that are directly involved in the conflict tell dramatic
accounts of human suffering, which are of course
deeply regrettable, yet they remain in inexplicable and
complicit silence when faced, for example, with the
suffering of the Palestinian people during the terrible
Israeli attacks on the Gaza Strip, or remain inexplicably
silent on the matter of other conflicts, such as the
situation in Yemen.

We voted in favour of the second draft resolution
(S/2016/847) proposed by the Russian Federation
because we believe that, like the draft resolution
proposed by New Zealand, it contained elements that
could have led the Council to unite regarding the
need to end civilian suffering in eastern Aleppo and
throughout Syria.

I believe that once the Council has publicly
demonstrated its lack of unity in that regard, it should
work constructively, beyond its members' own national
agendas, to find a political and negotiated solution to
the tragedy. The massacres in Syria must end. State
interventionism in Syria must end. The delivery of
weapons to groups that are not able to disassociate
themselves from terrorist groups must end. The United
Nations and the Security Council must arrive at a
negotiated solution to the conflict or, as already has
been said, the phenomenon of terrorism will continue
to bring suffering to the people of the Middle East.
