The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
distinguished Heads of State and Government, the
Secretary-General, Ministers and other distinguished
representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their presence is an affirmation of the
importance of the subject matter to be addressed.

The Security Council summit will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw Council members' attention to
document 8/2010/461, containing a letter dated
1 September 2010 from the Permanent Representative
of Turkey to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

Before I give the floor to the Secretary-General,
allow me to say a few words on the rationale behind
this important meeting. First of all, it is not very often
that the Security Council convenes at such a high level,
so I wish to express my gratitude to all of you for
accepting my invitation and attending this meeting. I
truly believe that our gathering today represents an
opportunity for an exchange of views on the evolving
security environment and the effectiveness of the tools
available to the Security Council.

In this regard, we have to admit that the world
has changed dramatically since the foundation of the
United Nations in 1945. The core threat that the United
Nations was created to prevent - war between
States - has now been overtaken by new regional and
global security threats. Indeed, in recent decades the
Security Council has been preoccupied with extremely
complex issues, such as intra-State conflicts, failed
States, the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, terrorism and transnational organized
2

crime. Within this new strategic environment, security
and peace can no longer be maintained by military
means alone. Historical, social, cultural, political,
demographic and economic factors are increasingly
entering into play and inform our actions and reactions.
In particular, addressing the complex linkages among
the notions of democracy, development and security
has become a core necessity for sustainable peace.
That, in turn, compels us to adopt a more
comprehensive and cooperative approach to peace and
security.

The Security Council, which has been entrusted
by the United Nations Charter with primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security, should lead by example in this direction. That
is precisely why we wanted to have this summit, in
order to undertake a broad review of the international
security environment and to display a renewed
commitment to dealing with the evolving challenges.
Now, two decades after the cold war and 10 years into
the twenty-first century, is the best time to do that.

Therefore, I am confident that our meeting today
will help us take stock of our actions so far, provide
firm guidance for our future endeavours and lay out a
bold vision for peace and collective security. I hope the
meeting will also provide fresh additional vigour for
the Security Council and enable it to forge ahead in the
maintenance of global peace and security.

At the end of this meeting, I hope we will be able
to give three key messages to the international
community. The first message is about the need for a
comprehensive approach to peace and security. The
operational tools at the Council's disposal - namely,
preventive diplomacy, peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding - must be used in a coherent and
strategic framework.

The second message should emphasize the need
to constantly adapt our responses and actions in the
face of evolving circumstances.

And the third and final message should underline
the need for new and stronger partnerships among all
major stakeholders - particularly the Security Council,
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council,
the Peacebuilding Commission, regional organizations
and international financial institutions - in meeting
contemporary security challenges. Let me stop here and
start our deliberations.
10-54839
I now invite the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to take the floor.

