Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert: Iraq has not left the headlines in recent months, as domestic, regional and international events have continued to take their toll on the country. While we will explore these events today, I choose to begin with hope: the hope of a people that remains united in its determination for a more just and prosperous future; the hope of a sovereign nation that refuses to become a battleground for conflicts that are not its own; and the hope that Iraq may very well find itself at the most opportune moment for genuine and lasting political reform in a generation. But for this to materialize, political leaders and communities will have to step up to the plate by placing the country's interests above all else and building domestic strength. Within this context, it is important not to sugar-coat the current harsh reality. The many brave Iraqis who continue to pay an unimaginable price for their voices to be heard deserve recognition of the intolerable abuses they have been subjected to: killings, abductions, violence, intimidation and threats. These abhorrent human rights violations are ongoing and fly in the face of all that is decent. They have no place ina democracy, any democracy. Yes, of course, we recognize the challenges of operating within a fluid, puzzling security context with multiple actors. However, as I have stated many times, the ultimate responsibility for the people's safety and security undeniably rests with the State. It is therefore imperative to put an end to these abuses. Moreover, it is imperative that perpetrators be brought to justice. Impunity ends where accountability begins. Let me emphasize that justice and accountability are a matter of burning importance to the many Iraqis who have lost their loved ones or seen them injured for no other reason than having expressed their frustration with poor economic, social and political prospects. Justice and accountability should also be a pressing matter for the State of Iraq. The rule of law must be strengthened if public trust is to take root. As I have stated time and again, Iraq's problems did not occur overnight, nor will they be solved in an instant. Yet times of crisis also present opportunities. I sincerely hope that the political leaders of Iraq will recognize that they are now at a crossroads where they must choose either to stand idle or to place themselves at the service of their countrymen and women; but I have to say that the critical window of opportunity is closing fast. The participation of Iraqi women in the ongoing public protests is unprecedented and marks a new page in the history of women's grass-roots mobilization in Iraq. Political leaders should heed that call. Turning to the streets, the security picture is undeniably complex and most challenging to manage. We witness ambiguously identified armed entities with unclear loyalties. We see groups or individuals using the cover of peaceful protesters and/or security forces to muddy the issues, thereby misleading the public, harming the country's interests, confusing the scene and causing casualties. All of this is part of Iraq's tough reality. As Secretary-General Guterres recently stated, the large number of armed groups operating outside State control is preventing the country from functioning as anormal State. However, it bears repeating that this is not something political leaders should hide behind. On the contrary. They must dismantle or formally integrate those armed entities under full State control without delay. In other words, this is no excuse for political and governmental inaction. After five months of protests and the many people injured or killed, it should be clear that peaceful protesters, backed by a silent majority, will not budge on their aspirations. That should be the first and last concern of the political class. Let me be clear: delivering on the demands of the people will require a collective effort. lagain emphasize that no Prime Minister can go it alone. Every single political actor and leader is fully responsible for restoring the critical confidence of the public in their Government and its institutions. In late November, the Prime Minister announced his resignation, which was soon approved by Parliament and the President. The designation of a new Prime Minister and subsequent attempts to form a new Government ultimately failed due to distrust and disunity. That led to a complicated situation in which the Prime Minister- designate was not able to obtain sufficiently broad support to form his Government within 30 days. Within the past three days, we saw the withdrawal of the candidacy of the Prime Minister- designate - accepted by the President - and the announcement by the previous and current caretaker Prime Minister that he was stepping back from most of his duties, while calling on Parliament to seek early elections in December 2020. Under the Constitution, the President now has another 15 days to nominate a new Prime Minister- designate, whose Government and programme would also be subject to parliamentary endorsement. While political consultations are ongoing, the question remains whether political parties will find a new consensus-candidate within those time limits. Clearly, all of that prolongs uncertainty and causes significant challenges, thereby further eroding public trust. One way or another, the road ahead remains fraught with difficulties. I already mentioned the pressing need for accountability and justice. Another top priority is corruption, which is perhaps the greatest source of dysfunction in Iraq and, sadly, a core feature of Iraq's current political economy. It is built into everyday transactions. A related feature of Iraq's political economy is its reliance on patronage and clientelism. That has resulted in a ballooning, inefficient public service that functions more as an instrument of political favour than as a servant of the people. A cynic would describe this payroll corruption as the perfect electoral mobilization strategy, where, perversely, low turnout benefits those pursuing their own narrow, partisan and/ or transactional objectives. It is important to tackle the system as precisely that - a system rather than just a series of individuals or occurrences. Each bribe or favour serves to reinforce the existing structure. As a result, full systemic reform will be necessary. No one understands that better than the Iraqi women and men whose opportunities for a more prosperous life continue to be undermined by a system that ignores them. Iraq is by no means a poor country but, as I said, private and partisan interests conspire to divert resources away from critical investment in the way forward. Iraq's massive oil wealth has financed a crude rentier system that sees enormous revenues converted to salaries in unproductive sectors. While external factors such as regional tensions and oil price fluctuations will certainly continue to weigh on the national economy, there are internal factors that Iraq can control - reducing bureaucracy, increasing the ease of doing business and strengthening the rule of law and anti-corruption mechanisms. Those measures can all incentivize the domestic private sector while attracting foreign investment. Those steps are necessary to build a healthy environment that is conducive to broad-based, fairly distributed growth and employment generation. Iraq must also build, repair and upgrade critical infrastructure and broaden its revenue base to reduce its dependency on hydrocarbons. The good news is that agriculture is already showing promise as a candidate for investment. An agricultural revival, in the birthplace of agriculture, will not only improve employment and social cohesion but also strengthen Iraqi food security. In that context, I would also like to highlight the creative resilience of the Iraqi people because, if one looks beyond the statistics and legal structures, we observe - on the streets - plenty of commercial activity. One can only imagine what this spirit of innovation and entrepreneurship could achieve if freed from the burdens of red tape and bribes. An important aspect of corruption is illicit financial flows. They help explain why Iraqis continue to await roads, hospitals, schools and legal employment opportunities, and also contribute to further destabilization by providing channels for the financing of organized crime and violent extremism. With regard to violent extremism, we cannot ignore the continued threat of terrorism. Although the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) has been defeated territorially, in the past two months it has continued its attempts to increase its military operations in north-eastern Diyala, northern Baghdad and areas of western Iraq. It goes without saying that ISIL must not be allowed to regroup and recruit. While constructive negotiations between Iraq's Government and its allies have been ongoing since the voting on the parliamentary resolution on the presence of foreign troops, Iraq's allies continue to assist the Government and its institutions in the fight against ISIL. It is obvious that a strong State with a monopoly on the use of force is best equipped to face those multiple security threats. Of course, an equally powerful tool against violent extremism is fairness and justice. I would now like to touch upon the need for free, fair and credible elections. While the electoral reset is a top priority for many, broad, fundamental systemic reform and a strong Independent High Electoral Commission will prove crucial. In other words, the newly appointed Electoral Commission will need to demonstrate greater resolve in adhering to the principles of transparency, accountability, independence and professionalism as it rebuilds the Commission's institutional capacities and kick-start technical electoral preparations.Moreover, in order to firm up the electoral calendar, there is an immediate need to complete the electoral legal framework. Parliament must act on pending, urgent elements of the electoral law, in particular constituency demarcation and seat apportionment, which will, hopefully, bring voters closer to the candidates and make future elected representatives accountable to their constituents. Turning to Baghdad-Erbil relations, notwithstanding an encouraging preliminary deal between the Kurdish Regional Government and the federal Government on oil-revenue sharing, we continue to await a final, long- term and sustainable agreement on this file, as well as on security cooperation and Sinjar. I think we can all agree that the volatile domestic and regional climate took an extraordinary toll on Iraq in the past months. To point out the obvious, the state-to-state violence we saw play out across Iraq earlier this year was received as a clear and substantial threat to the country. The modus operandi and rules of engagement have shifted, and the risk of rogue action by armed groups with unclear reporting lines is a constant concern. Beyond the immediate security threat, that also takes critical political attention away from urgent unfinished domestic business. However, as I have stated before, regional security developments should not eclipse domestic priorities and rightful demands for reform. The question is whether Iraq will flourish as a venue for peace and understanding or suffer as the arena of external battles. I will now turn to the issue of missing Kuwaitis, third-country nationals and Kuwaiti property, including the national archives. Hopes were renewed in January when new human remains were discovered and exhumed from a third grave in Samawah. Despite a very challenging operational context, the Iraqi Ministry of Defence has demonstrated commendable focus on that important file, leading the excavation efforts with assistance from the International Committee of the Red Cross. I truly hope that the DNA identification of the newly discovered human remains and of those that are still being analysed in Kuwait will prove positive and bring closure to the families and relatives of those who went missing nearly 30 years ago. The contribution of the Tripartite Commission members through the provision and analysis of satellite imagery, supported by witness information, proved crucial in locating the Samawah sites. I would like to urge all members of the Commission to continue their steadfast support to the efforts under way for other potential burial sites. It was my intention to conclude with words of hope, but the ongoing political indecisiveness and dissension, leading to a further paralysis in decision-making, unfortunately do not give cause for immediate optimism. The country and its people continue to be pushed into the unknown. Also, the repeated pattern of parliamentary sessions failing to reach quorum is exactly the opposite of what the country needs, especially during a period of acute political crisis. The fundamental mandate of an elected representative is to be present, to be counted and to vote. As I said last time (see S/PV.8676), out of the ongoing political crisis, a fairer, stronger and inherently more resilient Iraq can emerge. But again, for that to materialize, political leaders will have to act fast, placing the country's interest above all else. Iraq must and can find strength in diversity, recognizing a cohesive society as more than the sum of its parts. Putting out one fire after the other is no strategy. Iraq must move from constant crisis management to sustainable and stable politics, building resilience through deep and broad systemic reform. As we all know, strength at home is a prerequisite for strength abroad.
