Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I wish to start by
congratulating you, Madame President, and your
delegation, on behalf of Brazil for convening this open
debate on the important subject of the Great Lakes
region, which is now a major stage for initiatives not
only in the field of peace and security but also on
issues inextricably linked to that field, such as
democracy, human rights and development.

With regard to the positive side of the question, I
should mention the completion in 2005 of the Peer
Review Mechanism of the New Partnership for
Africa's Development (NEPAD) in Rwanda, the
successful conduct of the constitutional referendum in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the end of
conflict and the holding of fair and transparent
elections in Burundi, the beginning of the return of
refugees who had been in Tanzania for decades, and
the likelihood of some economic recovery in the
subregion. It is also worth mentioning the
establishment of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region and its first Summit in 2004,
which set the ground for much-needed dialogue and
mutual understanding.

However, the overall situation in the region
remains very complex. Along with the encouraging
aspects I just highlighted, there continues to be an
outrageous number of casualties caused by war-related
diseases, reports of gross violations of human rights,
including acts of sexual violence against women, and,
in the political arena, the entanglement of warlords
with the economic interests of local and foreign
groups.

The Security Council and the international
community as a whole have been providing crucial
support for peacekeeping missions and humanitarian
efforts in the region. Likewise, the African Union,
regional organizations and African leaders have been
committed to the promotion of peace and stability in an
area often presented as the heart of Africa. But the
challenges continue to be tremendous.

Peacekeeping efforts in the region have exacted a
very heavy toll. The incidents that took place this
month, victimizing Guatemalan troops of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) - eight of them
lethally - are a stark reminder of the sacrifices being
made by peacekeepers and by troop-contributing
countries in the quest to promote peace. They also
point out the disproportionate burden borne by
developing countries in United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

It is necessary to continue to support strategies
for peace and development in the Great Lakes region.
In that connection, an important principle to be
observed is that of African ownership in solving
pending crises and problems in that region. This goes
beyond entrusting regional and subregional African
security mechanisms with responsibility over military
operations and providing financial backing and
capacity-building support, as it must also allow for the
increased involvement of African collective and
national structures in the decision-making processes
regarding the solution of the crises.

The United Nations structure itself, in particular
the composition of the Security Council, shows the
need for such adjustments, including an increased
African membership. Without a balanced and fair
composition at the decision-making level, there is little
hope of correcting the practices that have led to the
current almost paradoxical situation. Despite the fact
that African issues occupy the greater part of the
agenda of the Security Council, it is not uncommon to
see reports in the press about the indifference of the
international community to the situation in that
continent.

Open meetings such as this one should also
become common practice before the adoption of major
decisions, as a means to promote greater involvement
of the United Nations membership and to enhance not
only transparency, but also the quality of the decisions
reached by the Council.

It is in this spirit that my delegation expresses
hope for the new Peacebuilding Commission. With
increased participation and a multidisciplinary focus by
design, the Commission should be able to devise new
strategies to avoid the recurrence of conflict, ensure the
consolidation of peace and promote efforts leading to
sustainable development.

In keeping with the regional approach, the
Peacebuilding Commission could consider taking on
the challenge of addressing the complex situation of
the Great Lakes region, in close cooperation with the
International Conference. The Conference seems to
have made progress in proposing legal frameworks and
confidence-building measures. Its technical committees
are working on the major issues relating to the
promotion of peace, security and development in the
whole region, such as the illegal exploitation of
mineral resources, land issues and border controls.

Finally, my delegation believes that ownership,
inclusiveness and legitimacy are all essential elements
clearly identified in the International Conference and
that the process must be fully supported.

