Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Representative Yamamoto and Under-Secretary-
General Fedotov for their informative briefings. We
highly appreciate the commitment and steadfastness of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime in working in such a complex environment.

Despite the measures taken by the Afghan
Government and the international community, the
security situation in Afghanistan remains fragile. As
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/1056)
indicates, this year has seen an increase in the number
of armed attacks by various terrorist groups. One area
of particular concern for the Central Asian States is the
increasing level of terrorist activities by the Afghan
faction of the Islamic State in the northern provinces
of the country. The increase in drug production in the
country in 2017 is alarming as well, because it has a
negative effect on the entire region, besides fuelling the
operations of terrorist groups.
Kazakhstan welcomes the adoption of the Afghan
national peace and reconciliation strategy presented by
Afghanistan's High Peace Council, as well as the steps
taken by the Government to implement the national
action plan on women and peace and security. We
welcome the remarks made in that regard by Ms. Frogh.
Our delegation also welcomes the intensified efforts
of the Afghan Government and its regional and
international partners to achieve a political settlement
and durable peace in the country. Those efforts include
the Kabul process and the Quadrilateral Coordination
Group, which is made up of Afghanistan, Pakistan, the
United States of America and China, on the Afghan
peace and reconciliation process. Of equal significance
is the work of the International Contact Group, the
Moscow consultations and other initiatives. We
should also acknowledge the steps taken by regional
organizations, such as the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Conference on Interaction
and Confidence-building Measures in Asia, the Central
Asian Regional Information and Coordination Centre,
the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, and the Resolute
Support Mission in Afghanistan.

As we have maintained, the nexus between security
and development is clear. In that regard, Kazakhstan
remains an ardent supporter of a regional approach and
integration. My country actively invests in developing
regional transport infrastructure and provides
humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan. Approximately
56 railcars of humanitarian goods are to be delivered
at the end of this month. We are confident that close
economic cooperation among the countries of the
region will facilitate the integration of Afghan citizens
into the reconciliation process, thereby reducing their
involvement in organized crime and opium production.
All of that will have a positive impact on the situation
in the country and in the region as a whole.

Expanding cooperation between Afghanistan
and the Central Asian States would also significantly
strengthen the country's potential, thereby contributing
to economic growth, increasing trade and creating
more opportunities. The economic integration of
Afghanistan is therefore the key to the prosperity and
security of the region. In that regard, we commend the
seventh Regional Economic Cooperation Conference
on Afghanistan, held in Ashgabat in November,
during which the measures to promote the peaceful
development of Afghanistan and strengthen a mutually
beneficial economic partnership in the region were
reviewed. The conference in Samarkand was also quite
constructive in that regard.

We welcome the signing ofthe Lapis Lazuli Corridor
Agreement by Afghanistan, Turkmenistan, Azerbaijan,
Georgia and Turkey. The new route will connect
Afghanistan with Europe and create trade, transit and
investment opportunities. We also commend the work
on the extension of the Kazakhstan-Turkmenistan-Iran
railway to Afghanistan; the railroad project of China,
Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Afghanistan and Iran; as well
as the establishment of a tripartite agro-industrial
consortium involving Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and
Afghanistan. We support China's One Belt One Road
initiative, which will bring not only economic growth
and prosperity to our region, but also more security.

I would like to end on the positive note: the close
partnership that exists between UNAMA and the
Afghan Government, which is absolutely necessary for
ensuring sustainable peace and stability. Let me once
again reiterate our full support for the Government and
the people of Afghanistan in achieving lasting peace
and reconciliation, and offering solidarity with their
aspirations for progress and prosperity.

