Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I want to more formally
welcome my brother the Permanent Representative of
Cote d'Ivoire.

We are at a very critical juncture in the peace
process in South Sudan. The High-Level Revitalization
Forum has made notable progress and for the first
time in a long while there is some hope for a possible
breakthrough. The parties have already reached an
agreement on security arrangements and the reports
from Khartoum are indicating that they are closer
than they have ever been to reaching an agreement on
governance issues.

The decision we are going to make today in
connection with sanctions would have very serious
implications for the peace process. That is why the
region and, I might add, the continent are asking for
the situation to be handled with prudence and patience.
Why? It should be handled with prudence and patience
because without them whatever human rights violations
there are today, they could be even worse. Averting the
worst is our objective.

For the Security Council to take such action without
synchronizing its position with the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and the African
Union (AU) will not only be unhelpful, but it will
seriously undermine the peace process and does not
reflect well on the cooperation and partnership between
the United Nations and regional organizations, which
all of us strive to see strengthened.

While in no way opposed to punitive measures, it
is the View of the AU and IGAD that now is not the
appropriate time for taking such measures. The IGAD
Council of Ministers has made it clear that pursuing
such a course of action at this stage would not behelpful
at all. That is a matter of judgement, taking into
account the complexities of the situation. The same
view is also reflected by the AU Peace and Security
Council. Lending deaf ears to the opinion of the two
organizations that have invested so much in the peace
process and would be the most affected by its failure
runs roughshod over the principles that underpin the
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. The cause of peace and the protection
of civilians, which we so much want to see advance,
would have less chance of succeeding if, in the light
of the position being taken by IGAD and the AU, the
Security Council ended up being an outlier and in sharp
disagreement with the two regional organizations. That
is why we call upon each member ofthe Council to heed
the calls of the region and cast their vote in a manner
that would enhance the unity of purpose among the
three organizations. After all, it is that unity ofpurpose
which will break or make the peace process.

Resorting to immediate sanctions at this point
in time would amount to not taking into account the
progress that has been made so far. Under those
circumstances, it would not be surprising if, were
draft resolution S/2018/69l to be adopted, it ended up
confusing the parties for they would find it difficult
to reconcile the action of the Council with the reality
of the peace process. The parties would be absolutely
justified in expecting encouragement from the Council
for the progress made no matter how far they might still
have to go to achieve a breakthrough. But what they
might see is the opposite in what, for them and for those
who follow the South Sudanese peace process closely,
is a paradox. One does not get punished for having
made progress.

We have heard the argument being made that
nothing has changed in the peace process, in that the
parties are simply going through the motions, but what
we have seen lately is quite different. The Council
should indeed be appreciative of what the Presidents
of Uganda and the Sudan did in engaging in a well-
calibrated joint effort to nudge the parties towards
peace, which culminated in a possible scenario whereby
President Salva Kiir and Mr. Machar might be in the
Government together - the former returning to his
position and the latter as the First Vice President. If
that is not progress, then what is? That is why we find it
difficult to vote in favour of the draft resolution before
us (S/2018/69l) and why, in our View, other Council
members should not as well. That is the advice both
IGAD and the AU are giving to the Council.

We wish to thank in advance all Council members
who are respectful of the views of regional organizations
and act accordingly. There should be no confusion.
There is a solution that does not reflect the spirit and
principle that should underpin the cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union. What is
equally troubling is that this proposed course of action
does not meet the consensus of Council members. A
divided Council in this issue, we all know, will not be
helpful to the peace process because it will send the
wrong message to the parties, the result of which will
be a loss of the Council's credibility and therefore its
leverage. That is what we have been trying to avoid, but
to no avail.

Before concluding, I must express appreciation to
our colleagues, representatives of the three African
States members of the Council, for all the efforts we
made together to support the position of the AU on this
critical matter.

