Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries (NAM) in this important
meeting of the Council.

Let me start by conveying the sympathy and
condolences of the members of the Movement to the
Palestinian people and their leadership on the tragic
loss of life and devastation that they have suffered
in the recent period as a result of the indiscriminate,
brutal shelling and aerial strikes, followed by a
massive ground invasion of the Gaza Strip, by the
Israeli occupying forces. The attacks and invasion
clearly constitute deliberate reprisals and collective
punishment against an entire civilian population, in
grave breach of international law.
The latest Israeli military aggression against
the Palestinian civilian population in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, has
caused high civilian casualties, particularly in the
Gaza Strip, where more than 600 Palestinians - most
of them women, children and elderly persons - have
been killed and thousands have been injured, hundreds
of them critically, by the Israeli occupying forces.

It is particularly tragic that women and children
constitute the majority of the victims of the
indiscriminate, lethal military strikes. In that regard,
according to estimates by United Nations bodies and
independent agencies present on the ground, more than
three quarters of the victims have been civilians. The
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) has determined
that more than one quarter of the fatalities have been
children.

Moreover, the indiscriminate Israeli bombardment,
coupled with the ground invasion, against densely
populated civilian areas has caused widespread
destruction and damage to civilian property and
vital civilian infrastructure and has devastated and
disrupted all aspects of life in Gaza, which is already
long-suffering under the illegitimate, suffocating
Israeli blockade. The massive Israeli military offensive,
which is unjustifiable under any pretext, and the
constant violence, provocation and incitement against
the Palestinian people, have caused widespread trauma,
fear and distress among the entire civilian population
and must be condemned.

In the light of the dire humanitarian situation,
especially in the Gaza Strip, the Non-Aligned
Movement believes that there is an urgent need to help
the Palestinian people, including through the provision
of emergency humanitarian assistance to meet the
needs of Palestinian civilians.

NAM. therefore calls on the international community
to provide emergency assistance to alleviate the great
suffering caused by the regrettable deterioration and
destabilization of the situation on the ground. In that
regard, NAM. calls for urgent additional support to
UNRWA for the provision of the necessary food and
other humanitarian aid to the Palestine refugees and
other displaced civilians in Gaza.
Despite efforts by regional and international actors,
including the Council's 12 July call for a ceasefire and
by NAM, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and the League of Arab States, Israel, the occupying
Power, has defiantly persisted in its military aggression
and ground invasion against the Palestinian civilian
population under its occupation, in grave contravention
of international law, particularly the Fourth Geneva
Convention.

The intransigence on the part of the occupying
Power is the continuation its practice of blatantly
ignoring the demands of the international community
to end its occupation and to stop its illegal policies
and practices that, over the past six decades, have
destabilized regional and international peace and
security and claimed the lives, land, dignity and welfare
of millions of Palestinian people.

The atrocities committed by Israel during the past
weeks add to a long list of grave breaches perpetrated
by that regime over the past six decades. That
includes, but is not limited to, occupation, aggression,
collective punishment, extrajudicial execution, the
use of excessive, indiscriminate and brutal force, the
confiscation and colonization of Palestinian land
through massive settlements, the Wall and the transfer
of hundreds of thousands of settlers, the arbitrary
detention and imprisonment of thousands of Palestinian
civilians, now numbering more than 6,000, the use of
torture and other internationally prohibited abuses
against civilians, the destruction of homes and the
forced displacement of civilians.

This ongoing tragedy and injustice is mostly due
to the culture of impunity under which the occupying
Power has systematically and willfully perpetrated
its violations over the years - impunity undoubtedly
fostered by the repeated failure of the international
community, particularly the Security Council, to hold
it accountable for its crimes and compel its compliance
with the law.

In the two statements issued by the Non-Aligned
Movement during the recent crisis, we stressed the
urgent need for the Council to uphold its duties under
the Charter of the United Nations and to act decisively
in order to uphold international law and to ensure
accountability for its violation.

The very fragile situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, demands the urgent
attention and action of the Security Council to stop the
current invasion of Gaza, to bring a halt to the repeated
Israeli military aggression against the Palestinian
civilian population, to end the inhumane blockade of the
Gaza Strip and to ensure full respect for international
humanitarian law and the protection of the Palestinian
civilian population. The Security Council must assume
a more active role in the crisis - to prevent the further
destabilization of the situation, to stop a relapse into
such deadly and destructive cycles of violence and to
contribute to the efforts to achieve just and lasting
peace and security.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the
unwavering support and solidarity of the members of
the Non-Aligned Movement for the Palestinian people
and their relentless efforts to achieve their inalienable
rights and legitimate national aspirations for freedom,
justice, dignity and peace.

Allow me to say a few words in my national capacity
in response to the Israeli representative, who today has
once again leveled a baseless accusation against my
country. It is ironic that while his regime is at this very
moment inflicting brutal, indiscriminate and collective
punishment on an entire defenceless civilian population
and has an unparalleled and perverse record of using
violence as a means to further its aims, he levels
accusations against my Government.

That representative's remarks against my
Government are absurd and are nothing more than a
smokescreen to disguise the crimes that his regime has
been committing for decades and to divert attention
from the bloodbath that it is currently creating in the
Gaza Strip. Throughout its history, that regime has
never stopped using violence and terrorism to terrify
the inhabitants of the land that it occupies and the
peoples of the region with a view to keeping their land
under occupation. Terrorizing civilians has always
been its preferred way to oppress peoples thoughout its
existence.

As occupation lies at the heart of the Palestinian
question, the Palestinian people, like every other
people under foreign occupation, has no choice but to
resist its occupiers. That resistance has continued for
decades and will continue relentlessly as long as the
occupation persists. In that regard, the Israeli attempts
and propaganda are undoubtedly doomed to failure.

