The Republic of Korea welcomes this open debate on climate and security, as it provides another opportunity to discuss climate risks to international peace and security. We would like to highlight the following three points for further discussion on this important topic at the Security Council. First, the Republic of Korea believes that climate change is not only a threat multiplier, but also an existential threat to international peace and security. Its security risks are increasing each and every year, and, as such, we need to be better prepared for the cascading effects of climate change to achieve global peace. We are witnessing extreme weather events all around the world, many on an unprecedented scale. This includes extreme droughts and floods, scorching heatwaves, out-of-control wildfires and dangerous superstorms and hurricanes - in many cases, depriving people of their livelihoods and, in an increasing number of cases, becoming one of the main drivers of regional instability. We therefore believe that we cannot secure international peace and security without addressing the effects of climate change alongside other interlinked security risks, and we need more concrete actions to that end. For instance, Korea is committed to the Peace Forest Initiative, launched in 2019 at the fourteenth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, which promotes peace and trust through collaboration on rehabilitation and restoration of degraded land and forests in fragile and conflict-affected regions. Such efforts can facilitate exchanges and trigger economic collaboration, ultimately contributing to the alleviation of political tension. Secondly, the Republic of Korea commends the leadership shown by the Security Council, as the main organ of the United Nations responsible for international peace and security, thus far on the issue of climate and security. We believe that the role of the Security Council in this regard should be strengthened. The Council needs to enhance its readiness to assess and respond to climate-related security risks, turning discussions into more tangible results. In this respect, the Republic of Korea welcomes the establishment of the Climate Security Mechanism and its initiatives, including the publication ofa toolbox. The toolbox, which is an up-to-date compilation of expertise and case studies, will provide good guidance not only to United Nations staff but to all Member States in planning how to tackle this complex issue. We believe that this toolbox should be continuously updated with input from Member States so as to sustainably serve as a useful policy guideline moving forward. We also support the submission by the Secretary-General of a comprehensive report to the Security Council regarding climate-related security risks, and the holding by the Security Council of meetings on this issue on a regular basis. We think that this will help boost awareness and actions among the Member States. As tangible results, we welcome Security Council's resolutions and presidential statements on Lake Chad (resolution 2349 (2017)), West Africa and the Sahel (S/PRST/2018/3 and S/PRST/2019/7), Somalia (resolution 2408 (2018)), Mali (resolution 2423 (2018)), Darfur (resolution 2429 (2018)) and Africa (resolution 2457 (2019)), all of which include elements of climate-related security risks. In addition, we need a United Nations system-wide approach to climate-related security risks and, as such, better coordination among United Nations bodies. We believe that the recently adopted Economic and Social Council resolution 2020/2, on international support to the Sahel region, is a good example, which can provide inspiration in this regard. It sets out closer cooperation between relevant United Nations bodies and Member States leading to more concrete actions. The Republic of Korea actively engaged in hammering out that resolution, and we will continue to play a constructive role for follow-up to and implementation of that resolution. Thirdly, we need an appropriate strategy to cope with the devastating effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on climate-related security risks. The pandemic is causing damage to our societies and economies at an unprecedented scale and threatens to thwart our efforts to address climate change. In order to build back better from COVID-19, our recovery plan needs to place at its core the consideration for climate change and a long-term low-carbon development strategy. As an ambitious and concrete plan to ensure a greener recovery, the Korean Government has announced a recovery package called the Korean New Deal, which consists of three pillars - a Digital New Deal and a Green New Deal, along with reinforcing social-safety nets. The Korean Green New Deal in particular pursues the goal of a low-carbon and sustainable economy by investing in green sectors and creating green new jobs. That will ultimately put the Korean economy in line with the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development as we work towards the net-zero carbon emissions target, which we believe is essential in reducing climate-related security risks worldwide. The COVID-19 pandemic has laid bare the fact that coordinated actions by the entire international community are necessary to ensure international security and prosperity. To prevent climate crises from further spiralling into threats to peace and security, international cooperation and support for United Nations system-wide action is crucial. The Republic of Korea will continue to actively participate in international cooperation and support efforts to that end.
