Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to welcome the initiative of the
Mexican presidency in bringing to the Security Council
and to this open debate the issue of mediation and the
procedures for the peaceful settlement of disputes. We
recall that in September 2008, the Security Council, at
the initiative of Burkina Faso and of representatives of
the members of the Economic Community of West
African States, also held a debate on the issue (see S/PV.5979), and in the presidential statement that
summed up that debate (S/PRST/2008/36) requested
the Secretary-General to submit a report on mediation
and ways to enhance it. We take this opportunity to
note with interest the report submitted by the
Secretary-General in document S/2009/ 189.

The subject in question is very important. The
peaceful settlement of disputes involves a range of
instruments to achieve a rational and negotiated
solution to situations that may threaten international
peace and security. Using those means is vitally
important owing to the preventive nature of these
processes. If we recall the well-known observation that
the prevention of conflicts is less burdensome that
imposing and keeping the peace, we can clearly
understand the appropriateness of adopting those
methods as widely as possible.

Mediation is a strongly developed mechanism in
the area of preventive diplomacy. Preventive
diplomacy itself requires great flexibility with regard
to the various processes that can be involved in dispute
settlement in the pre-conflict phase. In that connection,
mediation and peaceful dispute settlement procedures
involve not only the principal United Nations organs,
in particular the Security Council, but also the full
weight and mandated role of the General Assembly and
the International Court of Justice, as defined in the
Charter.

The history of mediation in the United Nations
should be studied on the basis of actual practice. The
aspects discussed by the Secretary-General in his
report enable us to focus on the current scope of
practice and to consider the proposals and
recommendations that he intends to implement in 2009.
Among these, we highlight the strengthening and
professionalization of United Nations mediators; the
importance of intervening as soon as possible;
reflections and proposals on integrating mediation into
field operations; gender policy, in particular within the
framework of the Mediation Support Unit; and
partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations and other civil society actors in this
endeavour.

In that connection, and with regard to the
Secretary-General's proposals, Uruguay has the
following understanding. In principle, we recognize the
important work done by the Secretary-General and the
Department of Political Affairs, which was
strengthened by last year's reform and the progress
made following the establishment and structuring of
the Mediation Support Unit. We understand that, in the
specific case of the Secretary-General's structural and
administrative recommendations, they could be
implemented by the General Assembly through the
Fifth Committee.

While the report was submitted to the Security
Council, it would have been useful for the Council,
after having considered the document's implications
and deciding what course this discussion would take, to
pass on its content to the General Assembly,
highlighting those aspects on which the Assembly

could collaborate with the Council, in accordance with
the provisions of Article 11 of the Charter. Another
point of particular interest would be considering the
report's implications and the subsequent debate on the
implementation of mediation-related measures under
Chapter VIII of the Charter and regional agreements,
pursuant to Article 52 of the Charter.

We understand the importance of the reference to
regional bodies and to the participation of other
non-State actors in certain mediation processes. In that
connection, we believe that similar attention should be
accorded to all regions. For example, we can cite the
specific case of the Organization of American States
(OAS), which has the broadest experience in this area.
The inter-American system was already developing
concrete practices in the area of peaceful dispute
settlement towards the end of the nineteenth century.
Current instances of regional mediation have enabled
us to settle potential conflicts in the region in a timely
manner, while enabling the United Nations to devote
its efforts to mediation in other regions. However, that
does not mean that cooperation is not necessary in our
region; rather, it should preserve the inter-American
system in order to maintain the early-warning system
in the region. The efforts of the OAS and other
subregional arrangements will require increasingly
sophisticated levels of cooperation with the United
Nations.

Another aspect related to the concepts of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding through preventive
diplomacy is the need to promote national and local
capacities in conflict prevention and resolution.
Mediation, facilitation and dialogue, as fundamental
components of the social fabric at the national or local
level, make it possible to create an environment
favourable to reconstruction and peacemaking in the
event ofpossible conflict.

Among the other aspects that need to be
strengthened, according to the Secretary-General, is
gender policy (5/2009/189, para. 62 (f)). The report
indicates that only seven women have been appointed
mediators in the history of the Organization. When
women are listed in the various mediator posts, there is
also clearly a deficit in terms of equitable geographical
distribution - a principle often violated in the
bureaucratic history of the United Nations. We demand
not only gender equity, but also geographic equity with
regard to the appointment of mediators.
5
Finally, we must consider the financing of this
important activity of the Organization, supporting the
Secretary-General's proposals for a list of mediators
that will allow us to take timely advantage of the
experience accumulated in various regions and to
maintain a competent and effective Mediation Support
Unit in the Secretariat.

The Security Council, for its part, should attach
the greatest importance to preventive activity, clearly
supporting the Secretary-General's proposals and
continuing to study, as a priority, the peaceful
settlement of disputes as the best alternative for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

