Mr. Feltman: I thank you, Madam, for the
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

One year ago, on 22 December 2014, the Security
Council extended its debate on the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea beyond nuclear concerns to include
human rights. It is fitting that we meet today, Human
Rights Day, commemorating the day on which, in
1948, the General Assembly adopted the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.

On 19 November, the Third Committee adopted,
by a recorded vote of 112 votes in favour, the draft
resolution on the situation of human rights in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The General
Assembly is due to formally adopt the draft resolution
later this month. As is well known, the commission of
inquiry concluded that

"the gravity, scale and nature of these violations
reveal a State that does not have any parallel in the
contemporary world" (A/HRC/25/63, para. 80).

Efforts to engage the Government of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to improve the human rights
situation in the country must go hand in hand with
efforts to hold perpetrators of crimes accountable.

In keeping with its obligations under international
law, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea has a
responsibility to protect its population from the most
serious international crimes. And the international
community has a collective responsibility to protect
the population of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea and to consider the wider implications of the
reported grave human rights situation for the stability
of the region.
The international community has yet to find and
agree on an effective way to address the serious human
rights concerns raised by the report of the commission
of inquiry, and how to bring about positive and lasting
change for the North Korean people. Particular
challenges have been posed on how to balance calls for
accountability and focus on security matters, and the
need for engagement and dialogue.

Despite different perspectives on this matter,
discussion of human rights concerns by Member
States, including in the Council, allows for a more
comprehensive assessment and action when addressing
security and stability concerns in the Korean peninsula.
History has shown that serious violations of human
rights often serve as warning signs of instability and
conflict, especially in the absence of accountability for
such violations.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea has
on multiple occasions made clear its objection to the
General Assembly resolution on the human rights
situation in the country. Unlike in 2014, however, the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea has refrained
from raising the possibility of conducting a fourth
nuclear test in its statements rejecting the resolution.

We are concerned by the report that the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea conducted a
further submarine-launched ballistic missile test on
28 November. The Security Council has repeatedly
demanded, through relevant resolutions, that further
launches using ballistic missiles be ceased and
obligations be met for verifiable denuclearization.
Although each challenge has different contexts, the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action with Iran shows
that diplomacy can work to address non-proliferation
challenges. There is strong international consensus on
the need to work for peace, stability and denuclearization
on the Korean peninsula. To achieve this goal, dialogue
is the way forward. Meaningful dialogue must be
revitalized and conducted in a sincere manner.

Over the past two years, the consistent efforts of the
humanitarian community to engage and the commitment
on the part of the Government to improving its disaster-
management capacity have resulted in concrete progress
in improving overall relations between the United
Nations and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
The Government's increasing openness to carrying
out joint assessments with United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations has facilitated
access and data collection, ensuring that assistance
reaches those in need. Continued engagement is key to
maintaining this momentum.

The engagement between the authorities of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the
United Nations in the preparation of the 2016 needs
and priorities document is welcome. The document
will provide an overview of the urgent humanitarian
priorities in the country and will call on Member States
to support the activities of the humanitarian community
in this regard.

International assistance plays a critical role in
safeguarding the lives of millions in the country.
Humanitarian funding to the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea has, however, steadily declined
during the past decade, from $183 million in 2003 to
less than $50 million in 2014. Lack oftimely, predictable
and sufficient funding is crippling humanitarian
agencies' ability to respond effectively to the affected
communities. The United Nations urges Member States
to increase humanitarian assistance to those in need in
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

The new 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda
(General Assembly resolution 70/1) is a promise by
leaders to all people everywhere. As we move to
implement the 2030 Agenda and achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals, the principle of leaving no one
behind is a challenge that every nation must address.
The United Nations country team is in discussion with
the Government on a new strategic framework, starting
in 2017, that would cover both humanitarian assistance
and development support for the coming five years.

This year marks the seventieth anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations, as well as the division
of the Korean peninsula. Inter-Korean relations have
remained deadlocked for far too long. The United
Nations therefore warmly welcomes the holding of
family reunions between the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea from
20 to 26 October at Mount Kumgang. Humanitarian
measures such as the reunions of separated families
should be regularized and not subject to political and
security considerations.

The Secretary-General is encouraged by the positive
trends related to inter-Korean relations, particularly
the August agreement, and plans for inter-Korean
talks on 11 December. He hopes that the recent
momentum will pave the way for greater inter-Korean
dialogue, people-to-people contact, reconciliation and
cooperation. He further hopes that more dialogue and
exchanges will contribute to the promotion of human
rights, and peace and stability on the Korean peninsula.

For the second time, Foreign Minister Ri Su Yong
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea attended
the General Assembly debate in September 2015 (see A/70/PV.24) and met with the Secretary-General,
confirming the commitment ofhis country to sustaining
and continuing the dialogue with the United Nations.
The Secretary-General has often stated his willingness
to play a constructive role if there was an opportunity,
including through a visit to the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, in an effort to promote inter-Korean
peace and reconciliation.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea has
extended invitations to the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, for the first time in history, and the
European Union Special Representative for Human
Rights to visit. While the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea continues not to recognize the mandate of the
Special Rapporteur or the Seoul Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the invitations are
positive signals that the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea may become more substantively engaged with
the United Nations human rights system.

It is worth noting that several members of the
Council have previously made it known that they stand
ready to adjust their positions in response to concrete
steps that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
takes to improve human rights in the country. The
international community's attention to the human
rights situation in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, including the discussion today, is an opportunity
for that country's authorities and the international
community to take concrete steps to improve human
rights and the living conditions of the people of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. I urge both
the Government of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea and concerned Member States to begin taking
these steps. The United Nations is committed to helping
towards that end.

