Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom warmly welcomes the signing of the final peace
Agreement between the Guatemalan Government and the
Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG)
in Guatemala City on 29 December 1996. The Agreement
signals the end of 36 years of conflict and marks the
culmination of a long and complex process of negotiation.
We pay tribute to both parties, who have demonstrated
that when the political will exists, even the most
intractable conflicts can be resolved. We also commend
the role of the United Nations mediation team, who have
worked tirelessly in pursuit of this achievement.

The foundations for a lasting peace in Guatemala
have been laid. A period of reconciliation and
reconstruction is now necessary to insure a lasting peace
for that country. Implementation of the Agreement will
not be easy. It is essential that, at this crucial juncture, the
international community and this Council, in particular,
should demonstrate the commitment to support the
process of reconciliation in Guatemala.

The United Kingdom, along with - as I understand
it - all other members of the Council, agree with the
Secretary-General that a rapid deployment of United
Nations military observers is necessary in order to verify
the ceasefire. The observer group has a clear mandate and
exit strategy, as well as the consent of the parties.
Authorization of such a deployment is clearly the
responsibility of this Council. That is why, as a sponsor
of the draft resolution before us, the United Kingdom will
vote in favour of its adoption, and we strongly hope that
it will in fact be adopted, on the objective grounds that
the proposed deployment is necessary and desirable. We
should all measure up to our Security Council
responsibilities over this.

We look to both parties to the Agreement fully to
implement their commitments, and to give the United
Nations full cooperation in the verification of the
ceasefire and demobilization of combatants.

The United Kingdom has long been a firm supporter
of the peace process in Central America. We have
participated actively in the San J ose dialogue between the
European Union and Central American States. We will
continue to work to ensure an effective European Union
contribution to the consolidation of democracy in
Guatemala. Together with other members of the Security
Council, we pledge our full support to the long-suffering
people of Guatemala. They have put their past behind
them; let us do everything possible to ensure that they
now enjoy a peaceful and prosperous future.

 

