Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the renewal of resolution 2165 (2014)
today for a further 12 months. Resolution 2393 (2017)
will allow us to continue to deliver urgently needed
humanitarian aid across conflict lines and borders to
reach the people of Syria. We thank the co-penholders
for their work, and we regret that the adoption was not
unanimous, especially since the penholders ensured,
over many weeks, that they listened to concerns of all
members of the Security Council and took on board
proposals from many of us, including Russia.

The renewal of resolution 2165 (2014) gives the
people of Syria a small ray of hope. The delivery of
cross-border aid provides a lifeline for millions of
Syrians who would be impossible to reach in a sustained
manner from within Syria. However, we must take
stock. It is three years since resolution 2165 (2014) was
adopted. Despite the intention to ease the suffering of
the Syrian people, the situation for them has worsened:
13 million people are still in need of humanitarian
assistance, which is 2 million more than when we
adopted 2165 (2014). On top of that, an additional
2.3 million people have fled Syria, countless others
have been killed and, in some areas, malnutrition has
increased fivefold during this year alone.

Yes, the renewal of the resolution will ensure that
aid will continue to reach some of the millions who
depend upon it. But, despite the resolution, the vast
majority of the 420,000 people in 10 besieged areas
will be denied access to aid because of blockages
imposed by the regime - 94 per cent of those people
are in eastern Ghouta, a so-called de-escalation zone.
Such zones are meant to ensure a cessation of hostilities
and an increase in the amount of humanitarian aid. In
reality there is little or no actual de-escalation taking
place in eastern Ghouta.

The regime has used the de-escalation designation
to cut off access to life-saving medical and food aid.
The regime is starving the people of eastern Ghouta to
death, in contravention of international humanitarian
law. The situation has now reached a critical point:
more than 10 per cent of all children under the age of 5
suffer from acute malnutrition, which is the highest rate
recorded since the conflict began. Medical facilities are
overwhelmed. Five hundred and seventy-two people
urgently need medical evacuation, including 65 who are
under the age of five. Eighteen children are at imminent
risk of death.
Therefore, once again I urge Russia to use all its
influence over the regime to ensure the unimpeded
delivery of humanitarian assistance and to ensure that
those in urgent medical need can be evacuated. It is just
a 30-minute journey from eastern Ghouta to Damascus
to receive treatment. It really is a matter of life and
death. We call on Russia to use its influence over the
regime so that one more person does not die waiting
for treatment - 15 is already too many - and so that
another child does not die for want of a 30-minute
journey - six is already too many. Those who require
treatment must be allowed to leave now. The people
of eastern Ghouta have suffered enough. Karim is a
two-month-old baby. His mother was killed by regime
artillery bombardment. He lost his eye and had his skull
broken in the same attack. We must stand in solidarity
with Karim. The siege must be lifted immediately.

Ultimately, the suffering of the Syrian people
will only end when the conflict ends. There must be
a political settlement. We must all unite to support
Staffan de Mistura. The Geneva talks represent the
only sustainable path to peace, and all international
efforts must support that process. We commend the
opposition, which has maintained their commitment
to direct negotiations without preconditions and have
engaged constructively in the talks. The opposition's
efforts presented a perfect opportunity for real progress
to be made in the last round of talks with respect to
the substance of a political transition. Those hopes
were dashed by the regime. They showed their utter
contempt for the talks. They arrived late. They took a
long weekend in Damascus. They refused to engage in
direct negotiations with the opposition.

The Al-Assad regime has made aid a weapon of
war. It is restricting humanitarian access to the besieged
populations. Blocking aid convoys from the United
Nations and other impartial humanitarian organizations
after approving them is abominable, and it must stop.
The renewal of the resolution today is a clear signal to
the regime that the international community is united in

its determination to ensure that aid must not be used as
a weapon. Aid must be delivered at speed, unhindered,
to those who need it.

