Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): At the outset, my
delegation would like to extend its sincere congratulations
to you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for the
month of September. We have every confidence in your
ability to bring the deliberations of the Council on the
issues before us to a successful conclusion. Allow me to
express our gratitude to your predecessor, Ambassador
Martin Andjaba, Permanent Representative of Namibia,
for having successfully stewarded the activities of the
Council last month.

Although my delegation, like those of many other
Member States, is of the View that today's meeting of the
Security Council would have been more productive had
it been convened after the return of its mission from
Indonesia, our present participation demonstrates yet again
the Government of Indonesia's firm commitment to and
support for the efforts of the United Nations on this issue.
Be that as it may, our deliberations are being held to
consider the situation in East Timor following the holding
of the popular consultation and subsequent developments.
Allow me to emphasize that Indonesia was most gratified
that the whole process - beginning with the various
periods, as called for by the 5 May Agreements, of
socialization, registration and campaigning, as well as the

 

popular consultation itself - took place in an atmosphere
of calm and tranquillity.

Indeed, this safe and peaceful environment made
possible a massive voter turnout of 98.6 per cent, as
announced by the Secretary-General at the meeting of the
Council on 3 September 1999. This remarkable figure,
which went beyond expectations, was, by international
standards, widely recognized as a successful undertaking. It
was only through the strong determination and unstinting
efforts of the Government of Indonesia that the popular
consultation was conducted in a free and fair manner,
allowing East Timorese to vote without any hindrance or
intimidation. In this context, it is clear that Indonesia has
been and will continue to be supportive of the efforts of the
United Nations and will not renege on its commitments in
carrying out its mandate in accordance with the 5 May
1999 Agreements.

And let me also emphasize that Indonesia has accepted
the results and will honour them. It is most relevant to
recall that Indonesia's bold initiatives began the whole
process that led to the popular consultation. This stands as
testimony to the undeniable fact that Indonesia is fully
committed to implementing the next phase of the 5 May
1999 Agreements.
Indonesia fully shares the Views of other Member
States that have expressed deep concern regarding certain
incidents of violence that have taken place recently. I wish
to reiterate that we are deeply committed to seeing that the
whole process envisaged in the 5 May 1999 Agreements be
conducted in a peaceful and orderly manner, because this
is in the interest not only of Indonesia but also of the
international community and, more importantly, of the East
Timorese themselves. Thus we deeply regret the occurrence
of such incidents and the destruction of property. But it
should be clearly understood that these incidents are but the
symptoms of a much deeper problem.

In the period before the popular consultation, as well
as following, some East Timorese expressed their
disappointment, anxiety and even misgivings about the lack
of impartiality and objectivity manifested by some United
Nations personnel in undertaking their duties in East Timor.
The Indonesian Task Force for the Popular Consultation
also issued numerous periodic briefs illustrating the various
instances of partiality on the part of the United Nations
Mission in East Timor (UNAMET), but invariably these
complaints did not receive the prompt attention and
follow-up that they justly deserved. Neither did the inaction
on the part of the electoral assistance commission help to
bring about an environment of calm and tranquillity on
the ground. This led to a perception of abandonment by
UNAMET, a perception that found expression in protests
and, tragically, even in violence. Therefore, accusations
solely directed against the Indonesian police and security
forces are misguided.

Often it is such circumstances of confusion and
frustration that encourage contradictory accounts of the
situation on the ground. For instance, my delegation
deeply regrets the shots that were fired outside the
UNAMET compound last week. The reports conveyed to
us from various sources differ from what we have heard
in some statements made before the Council today. We
must stress that this incident took place outside the United
Nations compound and was definitely not aimed at United
Nations personnel.

Indonesia condemns the resort to violence, not only
in this instance but under all circumstances. Therefore, I
would like to reiterate most strongly that it has never
been the policy of the Indonesian Government to condone
any form of violence or intimidation in East Timor.

What is important to emphasize at the present time
is Indonesia's sincere efforts to restore law and order and
its immediate actions in this regard. It was in response to
this evolving and most complex situation that the
Indonesian Government, on 7 September 1999, was
compelled to declare a state of military emergency in East
Timor in order to deal effectively with those elements
instigating the violence. In this regard, the state of
military emergency provides a legal framework through
which necessary measures can be taken to restore law and
order in East Timor. This has included the Indonesian
Armed Forces taking direct charge of various essential
services and infrastructures in order to expedite the
restoration of conditions of normalcy.

As regards the latest developments, I would like to
inform the Council that the situation is presently being
brought under control. Despite some random instances of
shooting and burnings, no other incidents of violence have
been reported since the military emergency was
announced. Consequently, the capital of Dili and the
surrounding areas are returning to normal. Yet we are
aware of reports that various sources are circulating a
greatly exaggerated account of the prevailing conditions
in East Timor. This account is simply not the case, and
the Indonesian Government is doing its utmost to bring
the situation under control.

 

However, this requires self-restraint on all sides. This
is not a time for condemnation or accusation but rather a
period for making collective endeavours to improve the
current conditions in the territory. Neither should there be
an imposed time frame for restoring law and order. Rather,
my delegation believes that the results of the state of
military emergency should be given time to materialize.
Over the past few days since its imposition the overall
conditions have recorded significant improvement.
Electricity and communications to UNAMET headquarters
have been restored, food supplies were safely delivered by
the Indonesian military forces, and the evacuation of
UNAMET local staff over the last two days has been safely
and successfully accomplished with the assistance of the
military personnel.

Equally important to note is the prompt action taken
by the Indonesian authorities to restructure the chain of
command of the security forces - a restructuring that
involved the rotation of troops, thereby placing the security
of East Timor on a more solid foundation. It is hoped that
this swift action will lead to further progress on the ground,
facilitating the implementation of the next phase of the 5
May Agreement. Such action further reflects that Indonesia
will leave no stone unturned to live up to its obligations for
providing security. At this critical moment, it is crucial to
support and encourage the efforts undertaken by the
Indonesian Government to mitigate the situation.

My Government is also focusing its attention on the
humanitarian situation by rendering the necessary aid and
assistance to those internally displaced persons that are in
need of such assistance, providing an uninterrupted supply
of logistics and fuel to East Timor. We heartily welcome
and appreciate the pledges to provide humanitarian
assistance made by countries, and we, for our part, will
endeavour to increase our coordination with international
humanitarian organizations such as the United Nations
Development Programme, the World Food Programme, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the United Nations Children's Fund and the
International Committee of the Red Cross so as to take
concerted action to deal with internally displaced persons
not only in East Timor but also in West Timor. In this
regard, Indonesia would like to assure the Council that
adequate measures will be taken for the safety and security
of personnel involved in facilitating the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. Likewise, the sending of
humanitarian relief to East Timor and West Timor is a
welcome development.

Against this backdrop my Government, while fully
understanding the willingness of a number of countries to
provide security assistance to Indonesia, does not foresee
the need for the introduction of a multinational or
peacekeeping force at this stage. Such an operation may
well exacerbate the situation and be counterproductive,
however well-intentioned it may be. It has to be
recognized that the complexities of the East Timor
question can lead to no easy and quick answers. The roots
of the conflict in East Timor go back even well beyond
the civil war of 1975, as a consequence of the long and
tragic legacy left by Portuguese colonialism which lasted
four and a half centuries. Therefore, the cause of the East
Timor situation should not be oversimplified by being
identified as rivalries of competing factions.

Furthermore, a peacekeeping mission under the
present circumstances could hardly be effective when
there is no peace to keep; rather, it would evolve into a
peace-enforcing mission. Recent experience has
demonstrated that such missions are bound to fail, even
with the best of intentions and resources. In this regard,
it is pertinent to note the statement made yesterday by
General Wiranto, the Minister of Defense and Security, as
mentioned by a number of delegations previously, and I
quote:

"It is very clear to say that we do not reject the
United Nations peacekeeping force, but it is not
really the appropriate time for them to come into our
territory at this moment. We have considered the
presence of the United Nations peacekeeping force
as an option, soon after the situation on the ground
allows them to do so. Furthermore, we are always
open for further discussion on the matter."
In my delegation's view, it is essential to continue
the implementation of the various phases of the 5 May
1999 Agreement. Therefore, it is the preference of the
Government of Indonesia that the dispatch of a
peacekeeping force to East Timor be carried out in phase
III, when the Indonesian People's Consultative Assembly
officially rescinds Decree no. IV of 1978 that integrated
East Timor into Indonesia. For it was through this Decree
that the aspirations of the East Timorese people to
integrate East Timor into Indonesia were realized and
formally accepted by the Indonesian people.
Consequently, another decision by the People's
Consultative Assembly is constitutionally required if
Decree no. IV/ 1978 is to be rescinded.

 

It is against this backdrop that Indonesia welcomes the
on-going Visit of the Security Council mission to Indonesia,
including East Timor, to discuss various forms of assistance
that could be rendered to Indonesia in overcoming the
current situation in East T imor. We consider this visit by
the Security Council delegation, accompanied by General
Wiranto, as of significant importance for its members to be
able to gain a first-hand insight into the prevailing realities.
The Indonesian Government was also pleased to avail itself
of the opportunity to apprise members of the Council of the
current obstacles and challenges on the ground, as well as
the concrete steps taken to address the situation.

These concrete steps must be given time to achieve the
desired objectives. The Council should take full cognizance
of the positive pattern of Indonesia's actions in the time
leading up to the popular consultation as reflective of my
Government's sincere commitment to give substance to the
letter and spirit of this historic Agreement. Such a
commitment is concrete testimony that Indonesia will, to
the best of its ability, fulfil its obligations. Hence, Indonesia
looks forward to further implementing the 5 May
Agreement. Towards this objective, my delegation will
continue to extend its cooperation with the United Nations
Secretary-General. And once again, Indonesia expresses its
gratitude to the Secretariat, UNAMET and all other United
Nations agencies that have tirelessly exerted their efforts in
carrying out the task, as mandated by the Council.

Finally, in light of the aforementioned, my delegation
deems it imperative that Indonesia be given the opportunity
to resolve the situation through the imposition of its most
recent measures. It is only reasonable and rational that
Indonesia be enabled and supported to carry out its sole
responsibilities. I am therefore pleased to note, Mr.
President, that you intend to keep this meeting of the
Council open until the return of the Security Council
mission to New York so that we can be apprised of its
Views before taking any hasty decision.

