Mr. Serrano: I thank you, Sir, for inviting the
European Union to intervene in this debate. The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Iceland and
Montenegro; the countries of the Stabilisation and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia; as well as
11-33901
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Armenia align
themselves with this declaration.

I wish at the outset to thank the Chairs of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) for their
briefings. At the beginning of this month, the Security
Council welcomed the news that Osama Bin Laden
would never again be able to perpetrate acts of
terrorism. It also reaffirmed that any measure taken to
combat terrorism must comply with international law,
in particular international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law. This development could be an
opportunity to re-examine the relationship between
Al-Qaida and the Taliban, taking into account the
evolving nature of terrorist threats and the current
political situation in Afghanistan.

Action by the United Nations against the scourge
of terrorism must be firmly rooted in the rule of law.
The European Union therefore welcomes the important
improvements to the procedures of the 1267
Committee in the course of recent years. In particular,
the establishment under resolution 1904 (2009) of the
Office of the Ombudsperson was a significant
enhancement of due process at the United Nations
level, which from a legal perspective provides persons
and entities seeking to be removed from the
consolidated list with a remedy that should be utilized
to its fullest extent.

We welcome the Security Council's
encouragement of individuals seeking de-listing to
pursue their case through the Ombudsperson. In
addition, the Security Council should also encourage
States and relevant international organizations to refer
individuals and entities seeking de-listing to the Office
of the Ombudsperson. This would be important in
respect of proceedings before domestic and regional
courts and international human rights bodies pertaining
to the implementation of the 1267 sanctions regime,
and in the light of legal concerns raised from within the
United Nations system.

We note that the Security Council will respond to
the observations contained in the first activity report of
the Ombudsperson in the context of the renewal of her
mandate in June. This could be an opportunity to
further clarify elements of the implementation of the
Ombudsperson process. The renewal, further
clarification and enhanced transparency of the
Ombudsperson process are also important in the
context of recurrent judicial challenges that have arisen
worldwide. In this regard, access by the Ombudsperson
to information - including, where relevant, to
classified information - is necessary. This will require
appropriate arrangements to be put in place. The
Security Council should encourage all Member States
to agree on such arrangements with the Ombudsperson.
Furthermore, the Committee should consider
publishing the observations contained in the case
reports of the Ombudsperson in order to make the
information available to the petitioner.

Regarding the consolidated list, the Security
Council should seriously consider the options proposed
by the Monitoring Team in its most recent report,
including those pertaining to time limits for listings.
This would be in line with the preventive nature of the
measures decided by the Security Council. We also
note that the Committee's guidelines already provide
for the referral of decisions to the Security Council in
case of a lack of consensus within the Committee.

As regards the 1373 Committee, the European
Union welcomes the prolongation and refinement of
the mandate of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate through resolution 1963 (2010), adopted in
December last year. In particular, we appreciate the
resolution's focus on countering incitement of terrorist
acts motivated by extremism, as well as on ensuring
respect for human rights and the rule of law. Both
aspects are crucial to combating international terrorism
in an effective and legitimate manner.

In this regard, the European Union is becoming a
key supporter of capacity-building measures in third
countries, inter alia in the areas of law enforcement,
judicial cooperation and counter-radicalization
measures. On this occasion, the European Union
expresses its appreciation to the Committee for the
constructive dialogue with international, regional and
subregional organizations on the prevention of
terrorism that took place at the special meeting in April
in Strasbourg. We would also hope to continue and
enhance the dialogue between the Committee and the
European Union on all aspects of the global fight
against international terrorism, in line with the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

Regarding the 1540 Committee, the European
Union welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution
1977 (2011) on 20 April. It is our conviction that the

mandate extension for 10 years will contribute to
persistently curbing the risk of proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery to non-State actors - one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security in our time.
The mandate contained therein provides the Committee
with an effective basis for its future work.

The European Union has been active in ensuring
the full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), both
internally and externally. I can inform the Council in
this context that the European Union is currently
finalizing, in consultation with the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs, a new European Union
Council decision in support of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).

Last but not least, I wish to reiterate the
importance the European Union attaches to close
cooperation between the three Committees and
between their groups of experts, including joint
outreach activities, exchange of information and joint
meetings, their co-location as requested by resolution
1904 (2009), and their collaboration within the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force.

