In an era where humankind is threatened by inter-State conflicts, intra-State frictions, asymmetrical threats posed by non-State actors, natural disasters, health- related issues and a variety of other challenges, Sri Lanka appreciates Germany's efforts to initiate discussion on the timely subject of peace operations and human rights. My delegation wishes Germany every success as President of the Security Council for the month of July and is confident that it will be a productive tenure. Sri Lanka takes this opportunity to honour the thousands of men and women who for decades have helped countries navigate the difficult path from conflict to peace by providing security and peacebuilding support under the Blue Helmet. Sri Lanka is proud to have a long association with United Nations peacekeeping operations, having served as a member of the 1956 Advisory Committee that led to the establishment of the first classical peacekeeping mission - United Nations Emergency Force I, deployed during the Suez crisis. It later deployed United Nations peacekeepers to the United Nations Operation in the Congo in 1960. With consistent effort, a wealth of experience and expertise gathered across diverse scenarios, United Nations peace operations have become a vital, credible, dependable and versatile global instrument to ensure human security in conflict situations. The significance of the current peace operations are such that, considering the magnitudes of violence and their frequency of manifestation, it would be hard to visualize the destiny of human lives in some conflict zones without the assistance of the United Nations. Human rights remain an important element of United Nations peace operations. Several peacekeeping operations, for example, the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, have integrated human rights components, as do special political missions such as the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti, to identify a few. This is crucial across a wide spectrum of missions and strengthens the missions' credibility. Sri Lanka remains fully committed to United Nations peacekeeping and upholding human rights and, in that context, has taken many measures to ensure that all Sri Lankan peacekeepers are suitably trained and fully equipped with theoretical knowledge and for the practical application of all necessary functions of peacekeeping, including the promotion and protection of human rights. To that end, a comprehensive package of education and training on relevant subjects are included in the predeployment training courses and continuity is maintained during the deployment by way of in-mission training, conducted in consultation with the United Nations authorities. In addition, human rights have been included as part of the training of security forces and police in Sri Lanka. At the leading degree-awarding tertiary institution established for military personnel, the Kotelawala Defence University, where many military cadets pursue degree programmes, human rights is taught as an important component of the academic programme. The Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka and the International Committee of the Red Cross also conduct a number of training programmes for the military and the police on human rights and international humanitarian law. It is observed that peace operations are becoming progressively complex in nature, with diverse sociopolitical challenges that have an increased impact on civilians as a result of the direct and indirect actions of parties to conflicts. Sri Lanka has endorsed the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians. Violations of human rights in most conflict-affected communities disproportionately affect women and children. In situations of heightened violence and insecurity, as one of the most vulnerable segments of the population, they may experience such violations from within the family itself, in addition to existing discrimination in society. As such, it is vital to be sensitive to issues of gender when looking at human rights. In a number of missions, women protection advisers are responsible for monitoring, analysing and reporting on conflict-related sexual violence. While assuring Sri Lanka's continuous commitment to enhancing the participation of women in peacekeeping operations, it is emphasized that focusing on the education and capacity-building of women should be considered a priority task to achieve meaningful gender parity as a long-term solution to this issue. The coronavirus disease pandemic has significantly impacted the human rights situation, particularly in territories affected by conflict. Travel-related restrictions and the limitations enforced on human interactions have generated negative effects across the spectrum, ranging from difficulties in delivering humanitarian assistance to the provision of protection for vulnerable communities. The diversion of resources from funds allocated to United Nations field missions for humanitarian assistance to the pandemic mitigation effort would weaken the capacities of peacekeeping missions for protecting civilians. It is pertinent to mention that the credibility of institutions that promote the adherence to and protection of human rights can be significantly undermined when they are unduly politicized. There have been instances where unproven allegations of human rights violations were used as instruments to unduly pressurize and manipulate contributions to peacekeeping by Governments for undue political gains. Sri Lanka firmly believes that the United Nations, as the largest global body committed to ensuring the rights of every human being, should always remain impartial, while fully respecting the principle of sovereign equality in its all interactions with Member States. The ever-changing dynamics of current armed conflicts and their rapid evolution makes the protection of human rights of vulnerable communities a recurring task that is becoming increasingly challenging. In that context, United Nations peacekeeping operations should remain a collective endeavour in ensuring the protection of vulnerable communities, and it is essential that there be engagement and interaction with various stakeholders, including civil society and the wider population. This is also vital to building trust with local communities where United Nations peacekeeping missions operate. Protecting civilians and upholding human rights are vital to the success of United Nations peacekeeping operations, shape how a population will remember the peacekeepers and reflect the manner in which the United Nations will be evaluated. Having engaged in a humanitarian struggle with a terrorist organization that used human shields, suicide bombers and child soldiers, Sri Lanka's armed forces and police have been sharing expertise in handling the difficult and complex terrains of the humanitarian engagement field in difficult areas of the world. While acknowledging and commending the effort by the Secretariat and the Department of Peace Operations for their dedicated effort in promoting the human rights of communities undergoing hardships in conflict-affected territories, Sri Lanka reiterates its full commitment to this noble cause to protect and promote human rights and the protection of civilians.
