Mr. Prendergast: The simultaneous holding of
three elections in Iraq on 30 January 2005 - for the
Transitional National Assembly, 18 governorate
councils and the Kurdistan National Assembly - was
a momentous event for Iraqis and for the international
community. Although only a first step, it marks a
significant development in Iraq's transition to
democratic government, as outlined in Security
Council resolution 1546 (2004).

Despite attempts at violent disruption, Iraqis
turned out in large numbers to exercise their right to
vote. On election day, the Secretary-General paid
tribute to the courage of the Iraqi people and
congratulated the Independent Electoral Commission
of Iraq as well as the thousands of Iraqi election
workers and monitors, on having carried out their
elections within such a limited time frame and under
such challenging circumstances. The successful
conduct of the elections has rightly been met with
positive responses, both inside and outside Iraq,
including from the Council.

The elections met recognized standards in terms
of election organization, regulations and procedures.
The assessments of Iraqi and international observers
indicate overall satisfaction with the conduct of the
polls. The number of serious irregularities and
complaints conveyed to the Independent Electoral
Commission has been relatively small, and all
complaints are being investigated and addressed by the
Commission.

The results announced on 13 February confirm an
overall turnout of more than 8 million voters for the
elections to the Transitional National Assembly. We
shall have to await the final certification of results by
the Commission in order to have the final allocation of
seats and thus know the breadth of the spectrum of
political representation. The electoral system -
proportional representation with a single national
constituency - was chosen precisely with the aim of
facilitating a wide range of representation. But it is
clear that, for whatever reason, turnout was low in
areas with a high percentage of Sunni Arabs.

We are pleased that the Iraqis were able to hold
elections despite all the difficulties. The elections were
an important staging post, successfully reached, in the
long and difficult process of political transition. We are
proud of the role played by the United Nations,
pursuant to our mandate based on resolution 1546
(2004). Under the overall responsibility of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ashraf
Qazi, and the able direction of Mr. Carlos Valenzuela,
and with the support of the Electoral Assistance
Division, headed by Ms. Carina Perelli, the United
Nations electoral assistance team was able to work
effectively with the members of the Independent
Electoral Commission to ensure that all the necessary
preparations were put in place within a very tight time
frame.

The electoral assistance team, which, in addition
to United Nations personnel, included experts from the
European Union, the United Kingdom, Chile and the
International Foundation for Election Systems,
provided technical, logistical, financial and
administrative assistance to the Commission in a
number of key areas.

It is clear from the overall level of participation
that the majority of the Iraqi people are committed to
the political transition process that the country is
undergoing. But regional variations were significant.
As I have already noted, the turnout among Arab
Sunnis was markedly lower than for other
communities. This is something that needs to be
addressed if there is to be more complete participation
in the constitution-making process and the referendum.
In accordance with its mandate, the United Nations
stands ready to assist with this effort. The security
situation remains fragile and challenging, as
demonstrated by the resumption of daily attacks
against Iraqis and foreigners alike. However, we hope
that the elections will mark a watershed and that
success in making the political transition more
inclusive will have a positive effect on the security
situation.

From our experience in Afghanistan and
elsewhere, we have learned that the challenge in any
political transition ultimately lies in achieving a
sustainable process that leads to an outcome - in this
case, a constitution and a legitimately elected
parliament and Government - in which all Iraqis feel
that they have a stake. This implies a realization by
Iraqis that failure to engage in national dialogue and
reconciliation could bring strife far more damaging
than the compromises either side would have to make
under an agreed peace.

The key to forging such a national understanding
is the making of the new constitution. Iraq's most
immediate challenge is to form a transitional
Government that is broadly representative of Iraqi
society and to find ways to bring together all Iraqi
constituencies in a national effort to define the future
of their country. The prospect of a referendum just
eight months from now should serve as an important
incentive for an inclusive, participatory and transparent
constitutional process, given that a two-thirds vote for
rejection in three governorates would block the
adoption of the new constitution.

Our impression is that Iraqis understand the great
responsibility that comes with the drafting of a new
constitution. They know that it will affect their lives
and those of their children for a long time to come.
Some difficult questions are bound to arise, pertaining
to the future character of the State and to the
relationship among Iraq's diverse communities. These
issues concern Iraqis as a people and Iraq as a nation,
so it will be important that the new Iraqi leadership
signal clearly that each of the country's communities
will have the chance to participate in shaping the future
of their country. Similarly, all Iraqi constituencies
ought to see that they have an interest in articulating a
clear and reasonable agenda that contributes
constructively to Iraq's constitutional debate.

Already, prominent political leaders in Iraq have
signalled their sensitivity to the fact that certain
constituencies, particularly among Arab Sunnis and
other Arab nationalists, are likely to find themselves
under-represented in the Transitional Assembly due to
the low turnout in some regions. Those leaders have
indicated their determination to assuage any fears of
political alienation, including by raising the possibility
of inviting representatives of groups that did not, or
could not, take part in the elections to participate both
in the transitional Government and in the constitution-
drafting process. Conversely, some political elements
that had urged a boycott or postponement of elections
now appear to be insisting that their views must be
included in any dialogue and that they have the right to
participate fully in the drafting of a permanent
constitution.

Meanwhile, Iraqis will expect their Transitional
Assembly and Government to deliver on matters of
immediate concern to them. As a matter of priority,
Iraqis need to be able to go about their lives without
fear of terrorism, violence and insecurity of all types.
The better and the faster that Iraqi security forces can
be trained, the sooner they will be able to assume their
responsibilities and fully take charge of the country's
security. Equally important, the transitional authorities
will need to find ways to improve the daily living
conditions of Iraqis by stepping up reconstruction,
development and humanitarian activities.

The United Nations has a mandate to assist in all
those areas. We are already actively engaged in doing
so, and we intend to intensify our engagement as
circumstances permit. We know that Iraqis have high
expectations of the United Nations.

In the weeks and months ahead, the new
transitional institutions of Iraq will need the active
support and engagement of the international
community. The United Nations has accompanied the
Iraqi people and authorities in their political transition
thus far. We are determined to continue to do so. It
must be, and must be seen to be, an Iraqi-owned and
Iraqi-led process. But, in terms of what we can offer,
the United Nations has considerable experience in
supporting and facilitating transitional processes under
difficult conditions.

Iraq has the human and material resources to take
charge of its own destiny. Where the international
community and the United Nations can, in our View,
best contribute to that process is in helping to create
enabling conditions for all Iraqis to share and succeed
in the political and economic reconstruction of their
country. It is important that the various international
actors work in a complementary manner with the Iraqis
and with one another.

There is a general expectation both inside and
outside Iraq that the United Nations will play a
proactive role in supporting the constitution-making
process, and we look forward to working closely with
the elected members of the Transitional National
Assembly and with other representatives of Iraqi
society. In conformity with resolution 1546 (2004), the
United Nations is ready to offer any needed technical
assistance and public information support, as well as
political facilitation.

All of us are aware that developments in Iraq
have potentially important implications outside the
country. The constitutional debate will be closely
watched, especially by Iraq's neighbours. Some of the
issues to be negotiated among Iraqis in this process
touch upon the security interests of neighbouring
countries. It is therefore essential that, just as we work
to normalize the situation inside Iraq, every effort
should be made to normalize Iraq's relations with the
region and with the international community at large. It
is especially important that Iraq's sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity be respected. A
sovereign Iraq naturally aspires to regain its rightful
place in the community of nations. The Secretary-
General, for his part, intends to continue to foster
greater regional and international convergence in
support of Iraq's political transition and the United
Nations role.

No one could fail to have been moved by the way
that Iraqis went to the polls on 30 January, with
courage, determination and confidence in the future of
their country. The elections mark an important staging
post achieved. The next key steps are the building of a
constitution, the referendum due in October and then
the holding of a general election. Iraqis look to their
leaders to deliver on the promise of a peaceful,
democratic and prosperous Iraq with which all Iraqis
can identify. The challenges ahead are real; but so too
are the opportunities. In fulfilment of its mandate, and
circumstances permitting, the United Nations will
spare no effort to meet the expectations of the Iraqi
people through this critical period of their history.

