Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): The
United States has asked for this emergency meeting in
5
View of dramatic and dangerous developments over the
past 24 hours in and around Georgia.

First, there has been an intensification of Russian
military activity in the South Ossetian region. This
includes an influx of many thousands of troops beyond
the several hundred Russian peacekeepers present
when this crisis began. Military operations against
Georgian forces in the conflict zone have escalated
dramatically.

Secondly, the conflict has expanded. A Russian-
backed military offensive has been launched in the
Abkhazia region of Georgia. This was preceded by a
demand from the Abkhaz for the peacekeeping
presence of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia (UNOMIG) to be withdrawn from the Kodori
Valley, which has since been bombed. This is a direct
challenge to the mission mandated by the Security
Council. Let there be no confusion about the
significance of this point. Some Abkhaz officials have
stated their intention to drive Georgia militarily out of
the Upper Kodori Valley. Moreover, Russia has been
attacking villages and cities elsewhere in Georgia,
including threatening the Zugdidi region and launching
air attacks against Tbilisi airport. Russian military
attacks have also destroyed critical Georgian
infrastructure, including seaports, airports and other
facilities.

Thirdly, the result of this escalation against a
sovereign State that has not posed a direct threat to
Russia has increased the number of casualties and the
humanitarian suffering of the people of Georgia,
including in South Ossetia and Abkhazia.

Fourthly, against this backdrop of heightened
Violence, the Russian forces are actually impeding the
withdrawal of Georgian forces from South Ossetia.
This is an unconscionable effort to continue the
conflict and prevent the Georgians from taking
concrete steps to de-escalate the situation.

Fifthly, we continue to face the intransigent
rejection by Russia of efforts to stop the violence.
Georgia has offered a ceasefire and a restoration of the
status quo of 6 August, but Russia rejects this
reasonable position.

Finally, Russia continues to resist efforts by the
international community to mediate this conflict, which
is now clearly and unquestionably one between Russia
and Georgia.

In view of this deteriorating situation, we need to
ask ourselves what the Council can do to stop the
violence, to stop the aggression and to return to the
status quo of 6 August.

First, we have to draw the appropriate
conclusions about what this conflict is and what it is
not. Russia has claimed that these military operations
were intended to protect its peacekeepers and the
civilian population in South Ossetia. Yet its reaction
goes far beyond any reasonable measure required to do
so. Indeed, its escalation of the conflict has been the
immediate cause of increased loss of innocent life and
humanitarian suffering. Since Russia is impeding
Georgian forces from withdrawing, rejecting a
ceasefire and continuing to carry out military attacks
against civilian centres, its claims of a humanitarian
purpose are clearly not credible. Similarly, its
expansion of the conflict to another separatist area in
Georgia and attacks on the areas around Georgia's
capital, Tbilisi, suggest other motives and objectives.

Secondly, we must condemn Russia's military
assault on the sovereign State of Georgia and the
violation of that country's sovereignty and territorial
integrity, including the targeting of civilians and the
campaign of terror against the Georgian population.
Similarly, we need to condemn the destruction of
Georgian infrastructure.

Thirdly, the Council must do what it can to
ensure adherence to the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and take actions to address this threat
to international peace and security. That means respect
for Article 2, paragraph 4, which calls for all States
Members of the United Nations to refrain from the
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or
political independence of any State.

Therefore, we believe that the Council needs to
take urgent action calling for an immediate ceasefire
and the withdrawal of all forces to the status quo of
6August. This applies particularly to Russian combat
forces that have been brought in over the past week.
We cannot remain indifferent to this point. We have
begun consulting with others in the Security Council
and expect that a draft resolution calling for an
immediate ceasefire will be introduced shortly.

Fourthly, I urge the Russian Federation to
carefully consider the implications of this aggression
against the sovereign and democratic State of Georgia.
Russia's relations with the United States and others in
the international community will be affected by its
continued assault on Georgia and its refusal to
contribute to a peaceful solution of this crisis.

