Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate and for your
concept note (S/2011/726, annex), both of which are
valuable in their own right and demonstrate Portugal's
continued commitment to greater openness and
transparency in the work of the Security Council under
your presidency. My delegation wishes to associate
itself with the statement made by the representative of
the Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Malaysia firmly believes that the reform of the
Security Council is important to ensuring that the
Council reflects today's global realities and becomes a
more effective and competent body in addressing
various challenges and threats to international peace
and security. In that regard, we are of the view that the
principles of transparency, more frequent interaction
with non-members, consistency and efficiency should
be applied to the entire spectrum of the Security
Council's work, including in the implementation of its
resolutions.

My delegation notes with much appreciation the
ongoing implementation of several measures contained
in document S/2010/507 to enhance the efficiency and
transparency of the Council's work. We hope to
participate in more interactions like today's meeting,
which we believe will provide the necessary impetus
for their implementation.

Allow me to first share my delegation's views on
transparency of the work of the Security Council, in
particular on sanctions. Malaysia welcomes the further
improvement of the procedures and working methods
of the Security Council with regard to the sanctions
framework. However, while we maintain the highest
respect for the primacy of Council resolutions, the
rules of natural justice dictate that resolutions issued
under Chapter VII powers should be mindful of the
inherent right of individuals and entities to notice, to
be heard and to be represented. As such, while

assistance should always be rendered to third-party
States that have been inadvertently affected by the
imposition of sanctions, the rights of individuals
affected thereby should also be safeguarded, in
accordance with principles of international law.

In that regard, Malaysia wishes to express its
deep concern about the process of listing entities and
individuals pursuant to various Security Council
resolutions. Our deep concern stems from the refusal
thus far on the part of certain sanctions committees,
and by extension the Security Council, to share
pertinent information on sanctions actions affecting
Malaysia.

My delegation also notes that some progress has
been made in the transparency of some of the
procedures of certain sanctions regimes with the
incorporation of mechanisms that automatically de list
petitioners unless an express decision to retain them is
taken by the respective sanctions committee.
Nevertheless, we advocate that more should be done to
inject more transparency and fairness into the listing
and de-listing processes in order to ensure that both
processes are in compliance with the basic tenets of
natural justice and the rule of law.

In the rejection of requests for de-listing of
individuals, it is incumbent upon the respective
committees to inform the Member States or individuals
concerned of the reason why a de-listing request has
been rejected. It is not enough for the committee to
merely "make every effort" to provide reasons for
objecting to a de-listing request, especially in view of
the fact that significantly greater effort has been
exerted to establish the sanctions regimes and, further,
to place individuals and entities under them.

It would be detrimental to the Security Council's
interests if requests for de-listing were rejected under
the guise of security, when the true motives for
rejection are political. The sanctions committees are,
after all, political bodies, as opposed to independent
and impartial judicial bodies. If, however, the sanctions
committees decide that transparency in decision-
making is not possible for security reasons, then I fear
that the process will very much be subject to abuse by
members of the Security Council.

I would also like to briefly touch upon the issue
of encouraging greater interaction between the Security
Council and non-members and other United Nations
bodies. My delegation believes that the briefings given
to the Council by the Special Representatives, heads of
United Nations missions, Chairpersons of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the country-specific
configurations and of the Secretariat are inherently
useful, because they provide an account of what is
actually happening on the ground. As such, we would
encourage greater transparency in briefings made to the
Council and for non-members of the Council to be
allowed to attend briefings without the right to speak
or interact. That would not only generate greater
interest in many issues among the entire membership,
but would also afford non-members of the Council the
chance to understand subjects and the viewpoints of
the Council and minimize the political speculation that
can lead to misunderstanding on the part of
non-members of the Council.

Finally, Mr. President, I would like to commend
you for an exemplary stewardship of the Council for
the month of November, which in itself demonstrates
reform of the Council's working methods. We have
observed, Sir, your briefings to members of the press,
your constant communications on the work of the
Council with non-members, and your deference to the
work of the General Assembly.

My delegation also appreciates the opportunity to
participate in two open debates this month. This month,
we have seen an increase in the transparency and
interaction of the Council, and we hope that this trend
will continue in the months and years to come.

