The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Sawaneh for his moving and very inspiring briefing.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Chad, Chile, China, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, Republic
of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

The President (spoke in French): There were
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2143 (2014).

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Luxembourg.

I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, the Executive Director of UNICEF and
Mr. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh for their briefings and
testimony.

What makes the suffering of a child revolting,
Albert Camus wrote, is the fact that the suffering is not
justified. The suffering is all the more revolting and the
lessjustified when it does not result from the misfortunes
of human life but from the hatred of humankind. Each
of us instinctively feels that every child maimed or
wounded by war wounds our own innocence and shakes
our faith in humankind. That is why the international
community now unanimously shares the conviction
that children deserve to be protected from the impact of
conflict. Yet instances of violations against children are
unfortunately far too numerous and revolting.

When the Security Council turned its attention to
the issue of children in armed conflict 15 years ago,
all attention was focused on what was then commonly
called "child soldiers", an ambiguous and simplistic
term. Today, the campaign launched by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, in cooperation with UNICEF
and other United Nations partners, reminds us, by the
simplicity of its title - "Children, not soldiers" - that
children are not meant to be soldiers, even if an assault
rifle is placed in their hands. I very much hope that the
campaign, which was officially launched yesterday at
United Nations Headquarters, will be supported by all
Member States. Only a true collective commitment will
make Governments' recruitment of children and their
use on the battlefield become part of history.

But Governments are not the only ones recruiting
children to bolster their armed forces. The vast majority
of the parties listed in the annexes of the reports of the
Secretary-General are non-State armed groups, like the
rebels who abducted Alhaji Babah Sawaneh and forced
him to fight in Sierra Leone. It is therefore important
that the international community does not lose sight of
the abuses committed by such armed groups against
children and tackles them with equal determination.

Recruitment is not the only danger to which children
are exposed. Violations and abuses committed against
children in armed conflict can take many forms. But
whether they become victims of bombings or crossfire,
are subjected to sexual violence or are recruited to serve
in the ranks of armed forces or groups as combatants,
or are held as sex slaves, each fate tells the story of a
life shattered.

In the Syrian refugee camps in Turkey, I met the
haggard look of orphans - it was a blank stare, hinting
at all of the horrors they had seen. The Syrian conflict
has forced close to 2.5 million people, half of whom
are children, to seek refuge in neighbouring countries.
More than 10,000 children have died; more than 10,000
lives have been crushed by the Syrian conflict without
any chance of flourishing. And how many hundreds of
thousands more children will be affected, until the end of
their days, by wounds to their hearts and bodies, as well
as their souls, that were inflicted by the conflict - the
wounds of those who witnessed unspeakable atrocities,
were tortured by Government forces or were forced to
fight in armed groups.

Given the urgency of the humanitarian situation,
one is tempted to diminish the importance of children's
rights such as the right to education or the right to
health. That would be a mistake. Thousands of schools
are closed, as they are being used for military purposes.
With nearly 3,000 schools damaged and school
attendance in a downward spiral, an entire generation of
Syrians risks illiteracy, seriously jeopardizing chances
of the country's socioeconomic recovery.

Hospitals and other health facilities have been
targeted and the medical staff threatened and decimated.
Currently, it is estimated that 60 per cent of all public
hospitals have been affected by the conflict, with almost
40 per cent of them out of service. Childhood diseases
that were thought to be eradicated, like poliomyelitis,
have reappeared and pose a danger to public health.

Attacks against schools and hospitals, as well as

the denial of humanitarian access, are among the six
grave violations subject to systematic monitoring by
the Security Council through its Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, which Luxembourg
is honoured to chair. All violations against children
deserve to be condemned with the same conviction.

The perpetrators of atrocities against children must
answer for their actions. There can be no impunity for
those responsible for war crimes and crimes against
humanity. The International Criminal Court plays an
important role in that respect, as shown in the cases
of Thomas Lubanga, Germain Katanga and Bosco
Ntaganda.

I cited the Syrian example but other situations
also deserve our full attention. Violence in the Central
African Republic has reached unprecedented levels of
cruelty and brutality in recent months. Children have
paid a very heavy price. Some have been decapitated,
intentionally mutilated or wounded in crossfire. The
number of children recruited has almost doubled since
the upsurge in violence of 2013, thus obliterating the
earlier progress made in demobilizing and reintegrating
children.

It is estimated that 6,000 children are currently
serving as soldiers in the Central African Republic.
The Lord's Resistance Army, the most notable armed
group in terms of child recruitment and barbaric war
tactics, remains active in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, South Sudan and the Central African
Republic. And its leader, Joseph Kony, remains free.

Strengthened efforts are necessary to fully
implement the children and armed conflict agenda. We
must build upon the shared conviction that children
should not be recruited as soldiers, or killed or
maimed, or sexually abused or abducted. Their right
to humanitarian assistance, education and health care
must guaranteed, as our goal will never be truly realized
until we have ended all violence against children. All
efforts must aim to ensure that their rights are fully
respected, in times of war as in times of peace.

Resolution 2143 (2014), just adopted, reflects our
shared determination to put an end to the violations and
abuses committed against children in armed conflict.
I thank the members of the Council for supporting
our initiative as well as the many Member States that
demonstrated their commitment by becoming sponsors
of the resolution.

Children embody the hope and future of any society.
Destroying children destroys such hope. Protecting
children will therefore protect the future.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.


