Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
High Representative Mogherini for joining us today
and for her useful and comprehensive briefing.

The United States deeply appreciates the
contributions of the European Union (EU) to promoting
peace, security and human rights in Europe and across
the globe. The EU's engagement and cooperation with
the Security Council in particular brings an important
degree of influence and resources to help deal with
the challenges we collectively face. The United States
considers the European Union to be one of our most
valuable partners in our effort to ensure global security
and prosperity. We recognize that Europe's security
and success are inextricably linked to our own.

Five years after Russia's brazen intervention in
eastern Ukraine, Moscow's aggression continues to
threaten the region's peace and security. We greatly
appreciate the EU's critical role in holding Russia
accountable for its violations of international law. We
join the European Union and other partners in affirming
that our Ukraine-related sanctions against Russia will
remain in place until Russia fully implements its Minsk
commitments. Likewise, our Crimea-focused sanctions
will remain in place until Russia returns full control of
the peninsula to Ukraine.

Beyond Europe, the EU has played a key role in
other areas of concerns to the Council, including efforts
to end the crisis in Venezuela. We are pleased that 24 EU
member States have already recognized Juan Guaido as
the interim President of Venezuela, and we urge other
EU member States tojoin in formal recognition as well.

We also appreciate the EU's close partnership in
Syria. As the Global Coalition to Defeat the Islamic
State of Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) works to eliminate
the threat posed by ISIS there and across the globe, we
look forward to working together to restore security
and support good governance and economic growth
in areas liberated from ISIS. Similar efforts are under
way in Iraq, where the EU has dedicated approximately
$30 million to humanitarian aid and an additional
$20 million to development assistance. We welcome
that important funding to help stabilize areas formerly
under the control of ISIS.

In Libya, the EU's support of United Nations-led
mediation efforts to help the country establish a stable
and unified Government is also critical. We greatly
appreciate the EU's dedication of approximately
$70 million there to civil society, governance, health,
economic, youth and education initiatives.

On its own continent, we commend the European
Union for counter-terrorism successes, including
sanctions implemented in January against the Iranian
intelligence service and Ir3anian officials planning
terrorist and assassination plots in the heart of Europe.
The EU's actions send a strong signal to the number one
State sponsor of terrorism - Iran - that Europe will
not stand idly by while the regime threatens its citizens.

Further, we commend the EU for its support of
efforts to apply maximum diplomatic and economic
pressure on the North Korean regime to bring about a
final, fully verified denuclearization of the peninsula.
The second Trump-Kim summit serves as a reminder
to us all that sustained pressure is the only way to
achieve a secure and economically prosperous future
for North Korea.

In Africa, the EU has played a key role in conflict
prevention, security assistance and peacebuilding
through its support to United Nations missions
and through the EU training and capacity-building
missions. We commend those activities and greatly
appreciate the EU's partnership with the United Nations
and the United States, especially in Mali, the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Central
African region. We express particular appreciation
for the EU's financial contributions of stipends to the
African Union's forces in Somalia, which have been
key to significant progress on both the security and
political fronts there, and we encourage the Somali
security forces to take ownership of their security. We
support the EU's view of a conditions-based drawdown
of AMISOM. troops.

In closing, the United States affirms unequivocally
the EU's importance as a crucial partner to the United
States, the United Nations and particularly the Security
Council in the maintenance of peace and security
around the world.

