Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): My delegation
would like to congratulate you, Sir, your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of July.

The current Israeli invasion of Gaza is a collective
indictment of the international community, the United
Nations in general and the Security Council in
particular. History will indeedjudge the United Nations
and members of the Security Council harshly for the
failure to carry out their historic responsibilities of
maintaining international peace and security.

For its part, South Africa has condemned violence
from all parties to the current conflict. We continue
to call for the immediate cessation of hostilities, the
firing of rockets and Israel's disproportionate military
actions. There cannot, however, be any justification for
flagrant violations of international law, international
humanitarian law and human rights law.

The Security Council cannot be caught using
double standards, such as calling for accountability for
violations of international law taking place somewhere,
including calls to refer situations to the International
Criminal Court, while not doing so when the same acts
are committed by Israel. The most glaring weakness
of the Organization in its almost 70 years of existence
continues to be the manner in which it deals with the
Israeli-Palestinian question.
The past few days since the conflict started and the
subsequent Israeli ground invasion of Gaza began have
neither seen nor resulted in any meaningful action on
the part of the Council, which is the principal organ of
the United Nations responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

We have heard condemnations from speakers before
us and some members of the Council, but the biggest
question posed to us, and particularly to the Council, by
the people, children, women and the elderly of Palestine
is: What are you doing about our plight, the indignity
we continue to suffer at the hands of the occupiers and
the killing of our children, mothers and grandparents?

The Israelis know from experience over the years
that they will suffer no consequences of their actions
carried out in violation of all known provisions of
international law. Who is the most powerful party to
the conflict and who should bear the greatest degree
of responsibility and accountability? The reality is that
the whole crisis is meant to divert attention from the
real issues faced daily by the Palestinian people in their
struggle for self-determination and freedom.

We should all be reminded that at the core of the
Israeli-Palestinian question is the perpetual occupation
by Israel and the Palestinian struggle for self-
determination, equality, freedom and justice. The root
cause of the conflict has to be addressed, namely, the
two-State solution that consists of the creation of the
State of Palestine on the basis of the pre-l967 borders,
existing side by side with the State of Israel.

We also call for the immediate admission of the
State of Palestine as a full Member of the United
Nations with all rights and privileges. The continued
lack of action on the part of the Security Council on
the Palestinian application for full membership is not
justified and serves only to give undue advantage to the
Israelis at the expense of the Palestinians.

There must be an immediate ceasefire now, to
stop all of the carnage that is currently taking place
as we debate the matter. The parties should return to
negotiations, as there can be no military solution to the
conflict.
South Africa has welcomed the formation of a
national unity Government by the Palestinians. The
South African Government has announced 10 million
rand in humanitarian aid to Gaza to address the current
plight of the Palestinians caused by the military ground
operation.

The people and Government of South Africa will
continue to identify with the Palestinian cause and to
contribute to efforts towards a durable and sustainable
political solution to the crisis.

We continue to be inspired by the words of our
former late President Mandela, who said, "We know
too well that our freedom is incomplete without the
freedom of the Palestinians."

The South African Government has today
announced its intention to dispatch a team to Israel
and Palestine to convey our growing concern about
the escalation of violence there. President Zuma will
also invite President Abbas on a working visit to South
Africa.

In conclusion, we call on the Council to shoulder
its responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations and to adopt a draft resolution that will send an
unequivocal and strong message that the indiscriminate
and arbitrary killing of civilians on both sides has to
stop and that there will be accountability for the gross
violations of international law in all its aspects.

The Security Council cannot afford the luxury of
permanent paralysis and inaction regarding this matter.
The status quo is not sustainable and will forever
remain an indelible mark on the aims and objectives of
the Organization.

