The United Kingdom believes firmly in the importance of national and international engagement on security sector reform (SSR), as reflected in our national statement during the Security Council open debate of 3 December. We welcome the intent of the penholder to update resolution 2151 (2014) to reflect progress in the development of normative and operational frameworks on SSR, which now includes emphasis on wider efforts to reinforce the rule of law to support sustaining peace. While we are sufficiently content to vote in favour of resolution 2553 (2020), due to the importance of its subject matter, we wish to highlight the following concerns that have led us to qualify our support. First, the process of penholding ahead of this resolution's tabling fell far short of the expectations and standards of Council practice. The compressed timeline, lack of rigour and inadequate time for proper negotiations are now, unfortunately, reflected in the product, which in places lacks clarity and does little to take forward the normative and operational framework of security sector reform. Secondly, we know from many years of seeing and supporting SSR around the world that, to be successful and sustainable, it must be inclusive and participatory. International support must also be coherent and support inclusion and accountability. It is unfortunate that the current text does not sufficiently reflect this. We would like to make clear that the United Kingdom will continue to interpret the content of this resolution as meaning that international security sector reform efforts should be delivered in full accordance with the principles of women's empowerment and gender equality set out in resolution 1325 (2000) and all other relevant resolutions on women and peace and security. International security sector reform efforts should be delivered in accordance with the principles of inclusion set out in resolution 2282 (2016), on peacebuilding and sustaining peace. National ownership and leadership of security sector reforms should not preclude legitimate external monitoring of the implementation of those reforms. United Nations missions, where and as mandated, can play an important role in helping to improve the coordination and delivery of SSR by working in partnership with country teams. The United Nations system should continue to prioritize earlier joint planning between missions and country teams to ensure greater coherence and sustainability of SSR activity so that, with funding from the donor community - including, where appropriate, the Peacebuilding Fund - delivery continues during and after a mission's presence, without interruption.
