Mr. Hau Do Suan (Myanmar): Myanmar has made
significant progress in its efforts to end and prevent
violations and abuses against children since the signing
of the joint action plan in June 2012. Since then, more
than 877 former underage soldiers have been released
and reintegrated into communities. The country task
force on monitoring and reporting has verified that
cases of new recruitment have dramatically decreased.
The Tatmadaw further released 67 children in 2017 and
no new recruitments have been reported in 2018.

The Government has also taken various steps to
prevent child recruitment and abuse by armed forces.
A nationwide public awareness campaign to end and
prevent the recruitment and use of children by the
Tatmadaw has been in place since 2013. Moreover, army
officers and members of the military have received
training on the joint action Plan and the prevention of
underage recruitment.

The Government of Myanmar has taken important

steps to sign or ratify international legal instruments to
protect children. In particular, the 1993 National Child
Law has been revised in conformity with prevailing
international norms and is soon to be adopted by
Parliament. The new Law has devoted a whole chapter
solely to children and armed conflict. Furthermore,
Myanmar has signed the Principles and Guidelines
on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed
Groups in February 2017. Myanmar is now in the process
of ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child.

With regard to accountability, a total of 67
military officers and 191 other ranks have so far
been prosecuted for violating recruitment procedures.
No human rights violations will be tolerated. For the
alleged violations mentioned in the Secretary-General's
annual report (S/2018/465), I would like to reiterate that
legal action will be taken where there is clear evidence.
The Government recently announced its decision to
form an independent commission of inquiry with an
international member. The commission will investigate
all human rights violations following the August 2017
Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army terrorist attacks of
30 security outposts.

Myanmar has been working closely with the
country task force on monitoring and reporting. In
May, the Government invited Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Gamba to Myanmar. I would like
to express our sincere appreciation to Ms. Gamba for
her spirit of constructive engagement and cooperation.
We are now working closely with her Office for the
early completion of the implementation of the joint
action plan. In that regard, I wish to inform the Council
that with a view to raising greater awareness and to
accelerating the implementation of the joint action plan,
the Government of Myanmar has invited the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
conduct a training workshop for security personnel in
Myanmar on the six grave violations.

Myanmar believes that sustainable peace is the
only way to alleviate the plight of children in armed
conflicts. Peace is essential to sustainable development
and lasting democracy and human rights. Bearing that in
mind, the Government held the 21st-Century Panglong
Union Peace Conference in pursuit of a lasting peace
and a democratic federal union. The Government is
also prioritizing the inclusion of child protection issues
in the discussion of the forthcoming session of the
Peace Conference.

Myanmar remains committed to the protection and
promotion of the rights of children. We will work hand
in hand with the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and other international partners
to end violations against children and build a better
future for them.

