Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): Senegal
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2385 (2017),
renewing the sanctions regime for Somalia and Eritrea,
which is an indication of our collective willingness to
continue to closely monitor the political and security
situations in the two countries.
The ongoing concerns that are reflected in the text
also constitute, in our view, a demonstration of the
common acknowledgement of the challenges faced in
Somalia and Eritrea. Indeed, in Somalia the presence
and nefarious actions of Al-Shabaab, which continues
to occupy parts of the territory and perpetrate attacks,
including recently, makes the security situation in the
country more difficult at a time when Somali leaders
are attempting to restore and strengthen the rule of law.

In this context, my delegation extends its support
for the political agreement of 16 April between the
Federal Somalian Government and the federal states on
a national security mechanism aimed at integrating the
regional and federal forces, as well as the Security Pact
adopted at the London Conference.

We also stress the importance afforded by this
resolution for a comprehensive approach that takes
into account the importance of stepping up efforts to
eliminate the sources of financing for Al-Shabaab. We
support the provisions in the resolution to prevent illegal
exploitation of natural resources in Somalia. Senegal
hopes that the implementation of this resolution will
help to promote to peaceful reconstruction of Somalia.

With regard to Eritrea, the resolution rightly
acknowledges the recent efforts of the Government
to rebuild the links with the international community.
This cooperation is of critical importance and in the
future could enable the Council to better assess the
measures to be implemented by that country. I would
like to recall that the Monitoring Group has not found
evidence of Eritrean support for Al-Shabaab.

With respect to the border dispute with Djibouti,
we welcome the calm and restraint of both parties and
we request that they look into any possible way to
arrive at a peaceful solution.

We are confident about the effectiveness of regional
processes. We are convinced that only full cooperation
of States in the region within the framework of regional
mechanisms established for that purpose can ensure
a coordinated and, therefore, sustainable response to
the problems regarding Al-Shabaab and other terrorist
groups plaguing the region.

