We congratulate France on their successful presidency of the Security Council this month and convey our appreciation for convening this open video teleconference. We also thank the briefers for sharing their perspectives. The Security Council's children and armed conflict agenda has evolved considerably over the last two decades. This year also marks the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict. While a sound normative framework is already in place, the protection of children in armed conflicts continues to present a wide array of operational challenges. A lot more remains to be done in keeping with the changing nature of armed conflicts and the varied nature of the vulnerabilities that children face in such situations. We wish to highlight following points in that regard. First, cherry-picking situations beyond the mandate of the Council for inclusion in the Secretary-General's annual reports on children and armed conflict politicizes and instrumentalizes the child protection agenda. It also diverts attention from situations that pose a threat to international peace and security. There is also a need for greater transparency and honest engagement between the Member States and United Nations mandate holders in order to provide accurate, objective and reliable information to the Security Council on the grave violations committed against children in situations of armed conflict. The relevant Security Council resolutions require, in no ambiguous terms, that such monitoring and reporting activities be undertaken in cooperation with, and with the participation of, the host Government. That requirement has to be followed in letter and in spirit. Unfortunately, in the case of the paragraphs of the Secretary-General's latest annual report (S/2020/525) pertaining to India, none of the above was adhered to, thereby contravening the mandate given to the Secretary-General with regard to preparing the report. The information claimed to have been verified by the United Nations cannot be based on hearsay, and due diligence must be done in a transparent manner. Any derogation from that only undermines the credibility of the report. Secondly, abuse, exploitation, sexual violence and other grave violations against children by terrorists need greater focus and understanding. Terrorist networks are increasingly interlinked with other non-State actors, such as organized crime syndicates, spreading their tentacles across borders. In some situations, the unholy nexus between State machineries and non-State actors further adds to the complexities that lead to widespread violence and deprivation, which afflict children in multiple ways. Thirdly, children remain particularly vulnerable to indoctrination through violent extremist ideologies designed to foment terrorism. Their social, emotional and cognitive developments are often interrupted by radicalization and the experience of violence in armed conflicts, impacting them for life. Nowhere is that truer than in our region. Terror emanating from Pakistan has jeopardized the future of millions of children in its neighbouring countries and beyond. Pakistan has the dubious distinction of running a system of "schooling" young children in violent extremist ideologies and recruiting them for terrorist activities. A thriving transnational narco-terror network run by Pakistan threatens the future of millions of children across regions. Educational institutions for girls continue to be targeted, and children belonging to religious and ethnic minorities in Pakistan remain particularly vulnerable to egregious violations and deprivation of rights. Yet the delegation of Pakistan relentlessly pursues an agenda of peddling fake narratives about India at every United Nations forum, turning a blind eye to its own follies. These are smoke screens for its design of perpetuating terror in the region. We call for an end to impunity for all actors inciting and perpetrating grave violations against children at home and abroad. There must be greater accountability and sincere efforts to bring the perpetrators to justice by the Governments from whose territory such entities operate. The United Nations must also reckon with the full complexity of such situations in order to better situate the child protection issues in context. Fourthly, we need a more inclusive approach to providing protection to child victims of armed conflict. The children who face relocation and reintegration require special attention. Children who grow up in conflict and post-conflict situations often need a fresh start. Engagement with Governments to strengthen legal and operational tools for child protection is important. The tools have to be complemented by community awareness and family resilience, so that parents cannot be coerced into sacrificing their children or their children's future. From our experience of United Nations peacekeeping over the past six decades, we also recognize the importance of having sufficient resources and the requisite number of child protection advisers in the field to make a difference. The importance of good quality education and skill development to mitigate those negative consequences cannot be overemphasized. The use of digital tools to provide education, vocational training and psychosocial support opens up new opportunities for children in fragile situations. Protecting schools, especially girls' schools, and health-care facilities and personnel must be accorded priority in order to give all children the opportunities they deserve. Fifthly, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has deepened the vulnerability of children in armed conflicts by increasing their risk of exposure to violence and exploitation. United Nations agencies, peacekeeping missions and other partners have made commendable efforts in mitigating the impacts of COVID-19 and in facilitating humanitarian assistance. The rights and needs of children must continue to receive priority when responding to the pandemic in armed conflicts. In conclusion, we reiterate India's support to United Nations endeavours to protect children in armed conflicts.
