Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Ambassador Quinlan for his briefing. Since
assuming his role as Chairman of the Committee, he
has guided its work in an orderly manner, for which
China would like to register its appreciation.

China attaches great importance to the work of
the Committee. We are ready to work with all parties
in a spirit of pragmatism and stability to conduct
balanced and effective work. The relevant Security
Council resolutions on the nuclear issue should be
comprehensively implemented. However, sanctions
are not the ultimate purpose of those resolutions. The
Committee and Panel of Experts should serve the
purpose of settling the issue via diplomatic means. The
Committee recently came up with allegations regarding
certain cases and we hope that it will, based on the
principles of caution and objectivity, fully consult with
the relevant countries and resolve those problems on
the basis of solid evidence.

The Iranian issue has a bearing on the authority
of the regime of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons and on peace and stability in the
Middle East. Dialogue and negotiations are the only
way to resolve the issue. China has consistently opposed
the use or threat of use of force. China does not agree
that excessive pressure should be put on Iran, or that
new sanctions should be introduced. Some countries,
which have imposed unilateral sanctions and wilfully
expanded their scope, are undermining the legitimate
interests and rights of other countries. China is opposed
to such an approach.

Positive results were achieved previously as a result
of the Almaty dialogue on the Iranian nuclear issue,
which marked a first step towards launching substantive
negotiations conducive to finding a solution to the
Iranian nuclear issue through dialogue and negotiation.
China has long striven to keep the issue on the right
track. China hopes that all parties will strengthen trust
and create conditions condusive to a comprehensive,
long-term and appropriate solution to Iran's nuclear
issue. We also encourage Iran to cooperate with the
International Atomic Energy Agency. China is ready to
continue to work with all parties in a constructive effort
to find a peaceful solution to the Iranian nuclear issue
through diplomatic means.

