Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation extends a
warm welcome to Ambassador Wolfgang Petritsch, the
High Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina. We thank him for
his latest report and additional briefing to the Council. We
continue to support and fully appreciate his determined
efforts to ensure the full implementation of the Peace
Agreement in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

There has indeed been progress in the peace
implementation process, although it continues to be at a
slow pace. We agree with Mr. Petritsch's assertion that
the Dayton implementation process is working in spite of
the slow pace.
We congratulate Bosnia and Herzegovina for the
successful holding of its second municipal elections on 8
April without significant incident or disruption. We are
gratified to note the relatively high voter turnout,
particularly in Republika Srpska, despite calls by the Serb

 

Radicals party for a boycott of the elections. This is not an
insignificant development and is a telling blow to the
extremists. This trend should be further encouraged so that
the extremists can be further marginalized, if not
completely isolated.

The writing on the wall is clear to the so-called
nationalist groups. The people are increasingly abandoning
the politics of narrow sectarianism for those of moderation.
We agree that this maturing of the political process in
Bosnia and Herzegovina may have wide-ranging
implications for the entire Balkan region, in particular
Kosovo.

Clearly much more remains to be done before peace
and stability will endure in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
success of the peace process depends as much on the
continued strong support of the international community as
on the commitments of the Bosnian leadership and people.
The continued cooperation of the people at every level is
crucial for the full implementation of the Peace Agreement
and the realization of the goal of a unified multi-ethnic
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

It is in this context that we support the strategic
concept of ownership as laid out by the High
Representative. However, we continue to be concerned at
the obstructionist policies and activities of certain extremist
groups and individuals who are determined to undermine
efforts to fully implement the Dayton Peace Agreement.
Strong and specific measures may be necessary to counter
such obstructionist activities.

A number of major challenges remain to be overcome.
In addition to the strengthening and consolidation of
common State institutions, the return of refugees and
displaced persons - in particular the return of
minorities - reconciliation among various ethnic groups
and the overall promotion and protection of human rights,
as well as economic reform, are among the main
outstanding problems that have to be urgently and
comprehensively addressed to facilitate the establishment of
viable statehood for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

All of these require the continuing active involvement
of the international community and the constructive support
and cooperation of the leadership and people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Ultimately, of course, the main responsibility
for the achievement of peace and national reconciliation lies
with the Bosnian leaders and the people themselves. We are
of the view that the strategy being pursued is the correct
one. The measures being taken in respect of the three areas
outlined by the High Representative this morning with
respect to economic reform, accelerated refugee return
and the consolidation of institutions are commendable and
should be sustained. Clearly, a fully functioning modern
economy is imperative for a viable Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The same is true in respect to the
consolidation of its institutions.

The international community accords high priority to
the return of refugees and displaced persons in all parts
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The safe return, particularly
of minorities, is one of the important ingredients for
lasting peace in that country. We note that minority
returns took place in much greater numbers in 1999,
compared to previous years. But the rate of these returns
is still below expectations. We note the problems of
administrative integration following return, and we hope
that the implementation of the action plan of the
reconstruction and return task force and the property law
implementation plan, together with the improvements in
other administrative matters, will address these issues,
thereby encouraging more returns.

The New York Declaration, adopted by the Bosnian
Presidency last November, was a landmark document that
provides a road map for further progress in the peace
implementation process. We note the High
Representative's continuing disappointment regarding the
implementation of the Declaration. We regret the fact that
despite the recognized importance of the State Border
Service, the law for this Service was not passed by the
Parliament and had to be imposed by the High
Representative. We strongly urge that the other measures
embodied in the New York Declaration be implemented
fully and without delay.

Finally, I would like to reiterate the special
importance my delegation attaches to the work of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is a crucial and integral
part of the overall reconciliation process in this country.
We note the close cooperation of the Stabilization Force
and the High Representative with the Tribunal and the
increase in the number of recent arrests of indicted war
criminals by the Stabilization Force. We are encouraged
by the continuing efforts to apprehend other indictees who
are still at large. We welcome the arrest of Momcilo
Krajisnik and hope that the arrests of other indictees will
follow soon. We encourage the Office of the High
Representative to continue to work closely with the
Tribunal and to assist it in carrying out its mandate fully,

 

with the sustained strong support of the international
community.

