Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): Like my colleagues, we are glad to see
you, Mr. President, presiding at this meeting and we are
grateful to the delegation of Canada for taking this
initiative. I should also like to thank Mr. Sommaruga,
Ms. Bellamy and Mr. Otunnu for their participation in our
meeting and for their briefings.

From these briefings and from the statements of my
colleagues, it is clear that the task of providing for strict
compliance with international humanitarian law is one of
the most important tasks today, primarily in connection
with a great number of conflicts of very different natures.

 

I will not dwell in detail on those factors which already
have been cited here.

Today's briefing, which is being held here at an open
meeting, reaffirms that members of the Security Council are
convinced of the need to strengthen international
humanitarian law, to ensure its application and to make use
of the potential of the Security Council for those purposes.

It is clear that the Security Council is obliged to take
measures to support the activities of international
humanitarian organizations, inter alia, in questions of
ensuring the protection of the civilian population during the
course of armed conflicts, and also for the purpose of
protecting the personnel of those humanitarian organizations
who are more and more themselves becoming the objects
of aggressive actions.

At the same time we are convinced that such support
from the Security Council must be implemented in strict
compliance with the United Nations Charter and must, first
and foremost, take the form of political support. Only when
all political and diplomatic methods have been exhausted
can consideration be given to the question of using force to
protect the civilian population and the personnel of the
humanitarian organizations, and then only on the sound
basis of the Charter.

Incidentally, when the Security Council takes decisions
to use force for the protection of the civilian population,
there is a need to give careful thought to how effective it
will be and whether it may not have negative consequences.
Experience, in particular the experience of Somalia, has
demonstrated that sometimes the decision to use force, if
not fully thought through and calculated in terms of its
consequences, may lead to a situation in which such
unsuccessful humanitarian interference only exacerbates the
conflict and, inter alia, aggravates the situation for the
civilian population - the very population which we wanted
to protect. This concerns the use of force on the basis of
decisions of the Security Council itself, as provided for by
the Charter.

It is no secret that recently attempts have been made
to use humanitarian concerns to justify unilateral use of
force - that is, by bypassing the Security Council and
without obtaining its authorization. It is clear that this runs
counter to the Charter and that such an approach is
unacceptable and can only destroy the present system of
international relations, which is based on the principles of
the Charter. The destruction of that international system is
thus is too high a price to pay to resolve humanitarian
problems, regardless of how important those problems
may be, because the consequences will be devastating and
global.

International humanitarian law must be complied
with. It is my feeling that no one will contest the need to
comply with the Charter, and we cannot allow opposing
the need to implement international humanitarian law with
the need to implement the Charter.

It has already been stated by previous speakers that
the problem of the protection of the civilian population in
armed conflicts is complex and far-ranging in nature and
therefore requires a complex approach on the part of the
international community. Many examples which have
been cited today, for example by Ms. Bellamy, who
spoke of the need to protect the rights of children in
armed conflicts, including the minimum age for
involvement in armed forces. These and other questions
are also considered by the Security Council, as are those
addressed by Mr. Olara Otunnu, namely the need, for
example, to draw up a code for conducting business.
Without question, that too is extremely important, but it
falls outside the competence of the Security Council.

I would therefore like to support the statement made
by Mr. Eldon regarding the need for the report of the
Secretary-General to be as broad as possible in nature,
drawing from a wealth of sources and containing
recommendations which would be addressed not only to
the Security Council but also to all the other participants
in efforts to ensure compliance with international
humanitarian law. And perhaps this report should become
a catalyst for that comprehensive approach of which we
are speaking and assist in moving this thesis into the
language of practical activity.

Naturally, we cannot forget either the General
Assembly or the Economic and Social Council, because
they too have a mandate in the area of humanitarian
questions. Nor can we forget the regional organizations
which in one way or another also deal with humanitarian
questions, nor the non-governmental organizations. I want
to mention separately the International Committee of the
Red Cross, a universally respected organization whose
work we actively support.

