The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Lebanon and the Syrian Arab
Republic, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Assaf
(Lebanon) and Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) took seats at the Council table.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Detlev Mehlis,
Commissioner of the United Nations International
Independent Investigation Commission.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Mehlis to take a seat at the Council
table.

I welcome the presence among us this afternoon
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to photocopies of a letter dated
12 December 2005 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting the report of the United Nations
International Independent Investigation Commission
prepared pursuant to resolutions 1595 (2005) and 1636
(2005). The letter and its enclosure will be issued as a
document of the Security Council under the symbol
S/2005/775.

I now welcome Mr. Detlev Mehlis, Commissioner
of the United Nations International Independent
Investigation Commission, to whom I give the floor.


