Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, we congratulate Poland on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of August.
We also thank Poland's Minister for Foreign Affairs
for convening this important meeting on children and
armed conflict, which is a priority for Peru. We also
thank you, Sir, and other colleagues for their kind
words on Peru's presidency for the month of July.

We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Virginia Gamba, Ms. Henrietta Fore of UNICEF,
Ms. Mariatu Kamara and Mr. Majok Peter Awan for
their briefings.

Peru is fully committed to the agenda ofchildren and
armed conflict. Children are one of the most vulnerable
segments of the population due to their helplessness
and dependence. In situations of armed conflict,
humanitarian crises and forced displacement, that
vulnerability increases exponentially, to the detriment
of their right to grow and develop in an environment
of sustainable peace. Special mention should be made
of the situation of girls in such scenarios. Sexual
exploitation, gender-based violence and trafficking in
persons are illicit acts that increase their vulnerability
and undermine their physical safety, empowerment and
attainment of gender equality.

With regard to the Secretary-General's report
(S/2019/509), Peru is concerned about the serious
violations of children's rights and brings them to the
attention of State actors who, through their action or
inaction, have contributed to the spread of those crimes.
Peru condemns all forms of violence against children,
including physical and psychological violence. It is
incumbent on the Council and on the States Members
of the United Nations to recommit to implementing
urgent and effective measures to halt and reverse this
trend. It is undoubtedly a question of emphasizing not
only preventive and rehabilitative measures, but also
corrective measures that involve sanctions that serve as
an example in order to ensure the well-being of children.

Peru endorses the Secretary-General's appeal to
the actors involved to take all necessary actions to
prevent the serious violations described in his report.
In that regard, it highlights the need to establish
synergies among the various United Nations agencies,
Member States and civil society organizations, taking
into consideration the most relevant international
instruments that form part of the global institutional
framework to address this problem.

In that regard, Peru highlights the contribution
made by the Safe Schools Declaration, the Principles
and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed
Forces or Armed Groups and the Vancouver Principles
on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers, which provide guidelines for
protecting children against their recruitment and use by
armed forces or armed groups, allowing their release
and achieving their effective social reintegration.

In that connection, Peru believes that the
rehabilitation of children affected by armed conflict is
of paramount importance, as it not only restores their
dignity and hope, but also empowers them as active
promoters of peace. We therefore stress the importance
of promoting psychological, educational and
professional training programmes that will contribute
their full rehabilitation and social inclusion.

Within the framework of peace operations, it is
also indispensable to establish special and priority
mechanisms for the protection of children in conflict,
as well as to offer adequate training on this topic to
troop-contributing countries.

In conclusion, I wish to offer Peru's full support for
the work of the Special Representative and commend
the priority that the Secretary-General attaches to
this issue as a vital element of the establishment of
sustainable peace. In the light of the complex situation
that has been set out today and in the context of its firm
commitment to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, Peru will continue to
work constructively on behalf of children in armed
conflict with a View to ensure their well-being and
guarantee their exercises of their fundamental rights.

