The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States of
America.

We welcome today's decision to extend for one year
the United Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti
(MIPONUH). By affirming our commitment, the United
Nations, through MIPONUH's effective training and
mentoring, will continue to help Haitians construct a
responsive and credible police force.

We remain concerned with the present political
impasse in Haiti, as noted in the present MIPONUH
resolution. We will continue to urge the Haitians to
resolve their differences in the interest of the country's
immediate and long-term future. Despite the political
obstacles, notable progress has been made towards the
professionalization of the Haitian National Police.

Our work, however, is not complete. Senior and
mid-level managers require further training. By
withdrawing MIPONUH prematurely, before an adequate
transition mechanism is readied, and at a time when
Haitian democracy is fragile, we would have jeopardized
the very real achievements made by the Haitian National
Police. An early withdrawal would also have undermined
the international community's efforts to sustain Haiti's
still young democracy.

We must use the time given in this mandate
constructively. In the months ahead, we need to develop
a Viable transition mechanism outside the peacekeeping

 

framework to continue support for the professionalization
of the Haitian National Police.

My Government commends all those who have
contributed and continue to contribute to MIPONUH,
particularly the Representative of the Secretary-General,
Julian Harston of the United Kingdom. We acknowledge
his valuable contributions and believe that they have been
essential to the success of the mission. My Government
remains committed to MIPONUH's success and will
continue to support this important mission.

In April 1995, the United Nations played a crucial role
in restoring a constitutional government to the people of
Haiti. Today's Security Council vote, extending for one
year the mandate of MIPONUH, reaffirms our commitment
to helping the Haitian people build a foundation for
permanent peace and development.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The Security Council has concluded its voting
procedure.

I now give the floor to the representative of Haiti.

