Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We begin our statement by condemning
in the strongest terms the recent attacks perpetrated,
first, on 5 April against a camp of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) in Aguelhok, in north-east Mali,
which claimed the life of two Chadian Blue Helmets,
and in which 10 were wounded, and, secondly, the
6 April attack on Gao, which resulted in the death of a
Nigerian peacekeeping staff member. The Republic of
Equatorial Guinea expresses its sincerest condolences
to the families of the fallen soldiers, to the Governments
of Chad and the Niger and MINUSMA, and wishes the
wounded a speedy recovery.

We welcome the presence of Mr. Mahamat
Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, and His Excellency Mr. Tieman Hubert Coulibaly,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Mali, for the detailed briefing that he
will deliver as he always does. We are also grateful to
Ambassador Olof Skoog, in his capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2374 (2017), concerning Mali, for his
succinct briefing.

Equatorial Guinea accords great importance to
issues concerning Africa and the situation in Mali, a
brotherly country to which we attach great interest.
Equatorial Guinea is fully committed to achieving the
stability and peace of the country. We express our full
support for the Government's efforts to achieve peace,
and, in that regard, we welcome its efforts to implement
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
We call on all stakeholders to join those efforts. The
international community must also monitor the process.
Mali continues to face major challenges. Terrorist
activity remains latent and a real threat to the work that
has been undertaken, as it will be nearly impossible to
stabilize the political and security situation if terrorist
groups are not eradicated. There is therefore a need
to strengthen the Malian Government in its efforts
in that struggle. It is important that the Government
consolidate its presence in all regions of the country.
In that process, it will require technical support
that must be provided with the full acquiescence of
the Government.

Terrorist activity in Mali extends beyond its borders
and represents a serious threat to the entire region, for
which reason it is important that cooperation in that
struggle remain sensitive to that aspect, thereby placing
emphasis on the importance of regional cooperation,
including regional and subregional institutions, such as
the Economic Community of West African States and
the African Union. The decision ofthe Heads of State of
the Group of Five for the Sahel to create joint counter-
terrorism forces for regional security is a welcome step
in this direction.

A few months before the presidential elections
scheduled for July 2018, it is important that significant
progress be made on the ground in the short term. The
Republic of Equatorial Guinea therefore encourages the
Government of Mali and all the signatory movements
to the Bamako Agreement to redouble their efforts to
ensure the diligent implementation of all the provisions
of the Agreement, in particular by means of the timeline
of priority measures adopted at the twenty-third session
of the Agreement Monitoring Committee and to find a
consensus in the framework of the organization of the
forthcoming presidential elections. This Agreement,
which is a result of the Algiers process, remains the
only inclusive and consensual framework capable of
restoring peace and stability in Mali.

The Government of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea fully subscribes to the communique of
23 March 2018 of the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union, welcoming with full satisfaction the
operationalization of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel, which we thank for its determination and
sacrifices devoted to the promotion of peace, security
and stability in the Sahel. We reaffirm the importance
of the Nouakchott process in promoting peace and
security in Mali and the Sahelo-Sahara region and of
intensifying its efforts to bring together stabilization
and development efforts in the Sahel.
Referring to the report of the Secretary-General of
29 March 2018 (S/2018/273), it is necessary to strengthen
support for the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, and in
particular the capacity of the Malian defence and
security forces in terms of training and equipment,
so that they are in a better position to deal with the
asymmetric attacks they are suffering and with a view
to having better management at the national level, in
support of regional and international efforts to fight
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, and
transnational organized crime.

Finally, we call on the international community to
join efforts to support the Government of Mali in the
framework of the humanitarian response plan 2018,
launched in Bamako, which aims to provide, inter alia,
basic assistance and protection in sectors such as food
security, nutrition, water and sanitation.

