Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I
welcome the Secretary-General to the Council and
thank him for his introductory remarks, as well as for
his important contribution to the discussions that
preceded the adoption of this resolution.

Bulgaria has just voted in favour of resolution
1511 (2003). My delegation is extremely gratified at its
unanimous adoption because it believes that, first, the
resolution sends a strong political message to the Iraqi
people to tell them that the time when they will regain
full control over their own destiny is now within reach.
The interim Governing Council is now officially
recognized as an interlocutor with the international
community in Iraq. Bulgaria welcomes this.

Secondly, the resolution sends the message to the
international community, which is encouraged to give
the Iraqis its full support in the reconstruction of their
country. For its part, Bulgaria will continue to help
Iraq - a country with which we have close, friendly
ties - particularly through the participation of a
Bulgarian contingent in the newly created
multinational force.

Throughout the discussions on the text of the
resolution, my delegation insisted that it take into
account the wish of the Secretary-General to have
maximum flexibility in carrying out the United Nations
mandate in Iraq, depending on the situation on the
ground - especially the security situation - so as not
to subject United Nations staff to unnecessary risk. I
wish to thank the sponsors of the resolution for
accepting this proposal from the Bulgarian delegation.

The positive political message in the resolution
we have just adopted was considerably broadened in
the way it was adopted - that is, unanimously.
Ultimately, the positions of the majority of the Council
members turned out to be not so different as we might
have believed at first. We welcome the fact that a last
effort was made to allow for that unanimity to emerge.

There can be no doubt that this will not be the last
Council resolution on Iraq. Others will follow on the
path set out in resolution 1511 (2003) in order to foster
the emergency of a sovereign, united, stable and
democratic Iraq.

