Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I thank Togo for
organizing this open debate today. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his remarks.

Transnational organized crime is an issue of
increasing concern to all of us. It is a multifaceted
phenomenon, fed by a number of factors. Yet, it is not
always a threat to international peace and security.

This debate is relevant, for it gives Member
States an opportunity to reflect on what the Security
Council's involvement should be in those cases in
which transnational organized crime indeed constitutes
a threat to international peace and security.

Brazil is of the view that, if and when organized
crime amounts to a threat to international peace and
security, Security Council actions must be focused on
fostering greater coordination of existing initiatives on
the ground, as well as on strengthening national
institutions and the rule of law, in particular in
peacebuilding contexts.

It is therefore essential to recognize the primacy
and importance of the efforts already made by the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), the World Bank, the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa, among others, and to enhance
coordination among those efforts.

The United Nations, in its turn, should cooperate
and coordinate closely with regional and subregional
organizations, such as the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and Economic
Community of Central African States, and with other
relevant actors, such as INTERPOL.

The transnational crime networks that operate in
West Africa and the Sahel take advantage of the frail
2

socio-economic realities of the countries of the region
to lay roots and prosper. That is why it is important to
avoid addressing the issue merely from a security
angle. An effective and long-lasting solution will
require attention to social and economic factors, such
as poverty and lack of employment, especially for
youth.

In the fight against transnational organized crime,
priorities should be determined by the affected
countries themselves. International cooperation must
be mindful of issues related to national sovereignty and
ownership, as well as regional leadership. We
encourage regional and subregional organizations and
national authorities to engage in a coordinated response
against organized crime that takes into account the
specificities and the aspirations and concerns of the
countries of the region. We also underline the need for
international assistance to favour instruments that
promote capacity-building and the strengthening of
national institutions.

The problem of illicit drug and arms trafficking
in West Africa and the Sahel is mostly an imported one.
It is important to recognize that those regions have
become transit points for drug trafficking and a
destination for weapons that are not manufactured
there.

In devising ways to combat transnational
organized crime, the Council should adopt an
integrated and balanced approach that also looks at the
consumption side that fuels drug trafficking and at the
need for better arms-control regulations at the national,
regional and international levels.

The relationship between transnational crime and
terrorism must be seen with caution. There is no
unequivocal information to confirm a direct link
between the operations of transnational trafficking
networks and the financing of terrorist activities.
Moreover, as those phenomena obey a different logic,
they must be fought on a case-specific basis and
through different means.

As Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, Brazil is well aware of
the negative impacts that transnational organized crime
may have on peace and stability in West Africa. The
configuration has been working, with the support of
UNODC, to help Guinea-Bissau fight those crimes in
an effective and timely manner. Guinea-Bissau
participates in the West Africa Coast Initiative, which
12-23696
aims at strengthening national and international
coordination in the fight against transnational
organized crime in the countries on its agenda.

Brazil is also engaged in a trilateral cooperation
initiative with Guinea-Bissau and UNODC to help to
establish a training centre for the security forces of
Guinea-Bissau.

