Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (interpretation from Arabic): I
should like to express my pleasure at seeing you, Sir,
presiding over the Security Council, and to congratulate you
and your friendly country, China - a country with which
the Sudan has long enjoyed close relations.

I am grateful to be able to participate in the debate on
an issue of concern to a neighbouring country, a sister
African State with which my country shares a long border
along which tribes interact and where active trade takes
place, thereby strengthening the common bonds between
our two peoples. I am speaking about our sister State, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Chapter I of the Charter of the United Nations, which
defines the purposes and principles of the United Nations,
states that the most important purpose of the United Nations
is to maintain international peace and security, and to that
end it should take effective collective measures for the
prevention and elimination of threats to the peace and for
the suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches of
the peace.

As I cite those principles, I recall the steps taken by
the Democratic Republic of the Congo when it provided
timely notice to the Security Council regarding the
aggression of a neighbouring State about a year ago. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo requested the Council to
meet its obligations to maintain international peace and
security by, first, condemning that aggression; secondly,
demanding that the forces of aggression withdraw from
the territories of the Congo; and, thirdly, requesting the
forces of aggression to respect the sovereignty of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Unfortunately, the
Council has remained idle since then. As the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
said on a previous occasion, all requests by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to the Council in this
regard remain dead letters in the records of the Council.
After a long silence, the Council reacted by issuing vague
statements.

For our part, we should like to add that the position
of the Council with regard to the dispute in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is yet another
testimony to the policy of double standards that has come
to characterize the work of the Council and to the
selectivity that has become an unmistakable feature of the
Council's reaction to similar cases. Sometimes this
Council deplores and condemns, and even proceeds to
consider the application of the provisions of Chapter VII
of the Charter, while on other occasions, in response to
similar cases, we find that it completely closes its eyes.

It has become clear that the title of the agenda item,
"The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo", has been carefully selected. That title was chosen
in order to avoid any disputes. However, the facts remain
the facts. Aggression is aggression; that is an indisputable
fact. Such aggression is a violation of the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations; that is also a fact. The
Security Council is thus expected to fulfil its obligations
and responsibilities in order to maintain peace and
security by putting an end to that aggression and ensuring
the withdrawal of invading forces that have violated the
sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
under thin pretexts and with excuses that are totally
inadmissible under international law.

The Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has made enormous efforts to restore peace and
security in the Great Lakes region, and those efforts
deserve to be commended. I should like to provide
several examples of such efforts. In May 1998, the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
organized a conference in this regard, which was
boycotted by the invaders. President Kabila also issued a
declaration announcing that he would organize a national
dialogue in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to

 

include the entire political spectrum, including the
opposition and rebel forces.
In keeping with those endeavours, my delegation calls
on the Security Council to make sincere efforts to reach a
peaceful resolution of the conflict that would ensure
stability and restore the sovereignty of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, deter the invaders and curtail their
territorial ambitions, as well as the ambitions of the great
Powers, whose strategies those invaders are serving by

proxy.

The delegation of the Sudan supports all regional
initiatives aimed at achieving a peaceful resolution of the
conflict in our sister country of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, including the efforts undertaken by President
Chiluba of Zambia in this regard in the context of the
Southern African Development Community. We welcome
the participation of the friends of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in these endeavours, which reflects their
sincere desire to put and end to the conflict.

In expressing these sentiments, I am mindful of the
fact that my country is directly affected by the events in the
region. Such events are having an adverse impact on the
southern borders of the Sudan, which was already
experiencing instability, foreign intervention and sabotage.

In conclusion, I should like to say that the Security
Council must fulfil its responsibilities and pay adequate
attention to this matter, and should not turn its back on the
events unfolding in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
It should treat the matter sincerely and seriously, not
disregard it, as happens so often in cases involving
complaints of African countries.

