Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for the report submitted on his behalf to the Council
(S/2017/907). I would also like to thank the Under
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations for his
report. I further thank the Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Ms. Bintou Keita, and
express our great appreciation for the briefing she has
just delivered. We welcome her as a messenger for
peace to New York, as she was a messenger for peace in
Darfur before assuming her new position here.

It is probably appropriate to mention the fact that
the 2011 Doha agreement is an international agreement
concluded under the auspices of the United Nations,
the African Union and the League of Arab States.
However, up until June, the agreement - in our
view and in general - has been partially flouted by
the Council. Nevertheless, through our rather limited
national resources, we have continued to implement
the agreement with the support of a few countries,
particularly the State of Qatar. Today, and as in all similar
instances when a peace agreement is achieved - for
example, as was the case in Colombia recently - we
believe that the United Nations should take a collective
stand for peace and leverage all of its weight to advance
the peacebuilding stage in Darfur, specifically in terms
of the need for humanitarian assistance.

In that regard, we believe that resolution 2363
(2017) is appropriate. It calls for the onset of the
gradual drawdown and reconfiguration of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), paving the way for the situation in Darfur
to advance to a new stage of peacebuilding and the
consolidation of stability, security and peace in all
states of Darfur, except for a pocket of land that is rather
limited in terms of surface area, located in Jebel Marra.
Jebel Marra, as the Council is aware, is a region of
Central Darfur state, which is one of the five states that
constitute greater Darfur. The resolution further echoes
the ongoing calls of the Sudanese Government since
2015 with respect to the need to take into account and
adapt to the major changes that Darfur has experienced
and that have transformed the dynamics of the conflict.

Today the fighting has stopped between the
Government and armed groups, which have become
active outside the country. Furthermore, the steady
implementation of the provisions of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur and of significant
measures adopted to resolve the conflict has enabled
the Sudanese Government and its partners to pursue
projects that address the root causes of the conflict
and, at the same time, to tackle phenomena arising
from this conflict, such as displacement and the
circulation of weapons, through development projects
and the delivery of services. We are fully aware of the
challenges plaguing this phase, and we urge the Council
to continue its collaboration in order to enable us to
tackle these challenges together. We would also point
to the important measures adopted by the Sudanese
Government, including the arms collection campaign.

IfI may, I should like to clarify a few points.

First, the Government of the Sudan, in dealing
with the phenomena arising from the conflict, has
announced a campaign to collect arms voluntarily
from the hands of citizens, under the supervision of
the First Vice-President of the Republic and the Prime
Minister, who have conducted the campaign with the
relevant parties at the state and federal levels. The
campaign is beginning to bear fruit. The first stage
has been concluded to the letter of the announced plan.
All reports point to the fact that it has enjoyed deal
success. The second stage will be launched shortly to
implement the law on weapons and munitions so as to
limit their possession to the regular armed forces and
those with permits from the competent authorities. All
those who breach this law will be stripped of their arms
and brought to justice.

Before the Council, we hereby announce that the
Government of the Sudan is determined to continue
implementing this plan and its provisions in order to
ensure that the law prevails over those who violate
it, regardless of any other consideration. UNAMID
plays an important role in assisting the Government
in the arms collection campaign and in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. This constitutes
a fundamental priority in the current stage and an
important aspect of the UNAMID mandate.

With regard to the unverified, albeit insignificant,
information echoed in the report, we would like to draw
the Council's attention to a point raised in the past by
the former Under-Secretary General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Herve' Ladsous, to the effect that it
is high time for the United Nations to rely on its own
information rather than on information from other
sources. The same remarks were echoed by the former
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki Moon, and are currently
underscored by Secretary-General Guterres.

We commend the measures adopted by UNAMID to
date within the framework of the implementation of the
recommendations of resolution 2363 (2017). Pursuant
to that resolution, UNAMID has closed 11 sites as a
first step, and we trust that this action will continue in
order to implement the second stage of its drawdown
and reconfiguration plan, which was adopted by the
Council in June in order to pave the way for the further
drawdown of UNAMID forces and their ultimate
withdrawal from the Sudan as soon as possible.

I would like to reaffirm the Government's long-
standing position in favour of enabling UNAMID to
fully implement its mandate. Previous reports and the
current report have attested to this cooperation in all
areas, particularly with regard to the customs clearance
of containers and the issuance of Visas and access and
movement permits for the Mission and the humanitarian
partners, as well the response to UNAMID's request to
open a temporary operational base in the G010 region,
for which the procedures are being conducted in a
proper manner.
Fifteen years have passed since some outlaws
from the remnants of armed groups took up arms
and persistently refused throughout all these years to
take part in any national, regional or United Nations
initiatives for peace. Today, as we approach 2018,
the only thing left for them to do is spread false and
misleading information. We are confident that the
Secretariat will not attribute much importance to such
allegations and that it will fully verify any information
prior to endorsing it, as required by the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions.

Council members may rest assured that the
Government of the Sudan is doing everything it can
to achieve lasting peace and stability in Darfur. In
several areas, the Government is striving to deal with
the phenomena that have arisen from the conflict.
For example, the Sudanese Government has set up
development plans and programmes that would lift
Darfur from the cycle of poverty into productivity and
self-sufficiency.

The nature of the conflict in Darfur has shifted and
there have been no clashes with armed groups for almost
two years. We are entering a new phase in which the
State will be able to enjoy absolute sovereignty through
its different manifestations. Therefore, logically and
politically, it is necessary to revisit the sanctions that
were imposed 12 years ago when resolution 1591
(2005) was adopted in 2005. There is no doubt that
this step would constitute a recognition of the reality
of the current situation, as we have previously stated.
We are awaiting a positive response and are certainly
open to ideas and proposals from the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.

The humanitarian situation remains a key priority
for the Government of the Sudan. In spite of an increase
in the number ofdisplaced persons voluntarily returning
to their villages, the continuing presence of refugee
camps in Darfur is no longer justified following the
restoration of peace, stability and security, especially
given that the peace partners in Darfur have made
considerable efforts to prepare and equip Villages,
thereby ensuring better conditions for people to
voluntarily return by providing basic services. Local
and international efforts must continue in order to
encourage displaced persons to return voluntarily, and
we have developed a plan to address the situation based
on three options that could produce effective solutions
to this phenomenon.

In conclusion, we commend the tireless efforts
being made to conclude the peace process. We once
again welcome this step towards peace, which is
synonymous with development and will certainly help
us to end the conflict. My country's delegation would
like to thank UNAMID for its efforts in all areas, as
well as the peacekeepers for their sacrifices over the
years. We also thank the troop- and police-contributing
countries and stand ready to cooperate with all regional
and international partners until all UNAMID personnel
are withdrawn from the Sudan, following the full and
successful completion of their mandate.

The meeting rose at11.35 a.m.
