The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.

In my national capacity, I reiterate our deepest
sympathy to the families of the victims of the
reprehensible terrorist attack on the mosques in
Christchurch and the people of New Zealand.
France stands in solidarity with New Zealand at this
challenging time.

At our meeting on 11 March (see S/PV.8481),
France recalled at this pivotal time in Afghanistan's
history the importance it attaches to unity among
international partners and in the Council in support of
Afghanistan. We reiterated that, now more than ever,
we must remain united in support of Afghanistan's
path to peace, stability, democracy and economic and
social development.

Germany and Indonesia have made commendable
efforts to achieve a substantive and satisfactory renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). However, we
deplore the fact that differences among some members
of the Security Council on issues that are not directly
related to the Mission's mandate, or even to the
Council's responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations, have led us to adopt a resolution for a
six-month technical renewal. For France, that is not the
signal we should be sending to UNAMA and it should
in no way set a precedent.

We hope that this time will be used to overcome
bilateral disputes and refocus on the core mandate of
UNAMA, in particular on issues such as, first, support
for peace efforts; secondly, preparations for presidential
elections; thirdly, the coordination of development
aid and humanitarian assistance; and, fourthly, the
promotion of human rights, in particular women's
rights. We would like negotiations to resume as soon as
possible and be conducted in a transparent and inclusive
manner. The United Nations plays an essential role in
supporting Afghanistan in its transformation decade.
UNAMA, like the many United Nations agencies
present in Afghanistan, conducts remarkable work on a
daily basis in difficult conditions and deserves the full
commitment of the Council.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative ofAfghanistan.

