Mr. Feltman: Since the Secretary-General briefed
the Council last month (see S/PV.7096), we have seen
new and significant developments in relation to the
Syrian crisis, with the holding of the much-anticipated
second Geneva Conference on Syria and the Security
Council's welcome adoption of resolution 2139 (2014),
regarding the humanitarian situation. The Secretary-
General is committed to making every effort to help
advance both of those important initiatives.

On the Middle East peace process, we are nearing
a defining moment. United States Secretary of State
Kerry's months-long work to address Israeli and
Palestinian aspirations and concerns in a fair and
balanced manner has opened a credible political horizon
for achieving a two-State solution. Any meaningful
political initiative must continue to strive towards a
comprehensive settlement, and it must address all final
status issues in line with the principles outlined in
the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles - including land for peace - the road map
and previous agreements between the parties.

International engagement, which is critical, remains
strong. On 1 February in Munich, Quartet principals
were briefed on progress in the negotiations. Secretary
of State Kerry is continuing his consultations with the
leaders over the United States framework proposal,
which is meant to serve as a basis for continued
negotiations, meeting with President Abbas in Paris on
19 February. We count on the continued support extended
to those efforts by regional stakeholders, underlining
the importance of the Arab Peace Initiative, which is
the most viable way for attaining regional peace and
yielding socioeconomic and security benefits for all

peoples in the Middle East. As the Secretary-General
told the Council last month, if the leaders are prepared
to take the bold decisions required, he will also push
ahead on the positive agenda of peace dividends for
both sides.

Ultimately, any genuine intention to pursue
peace requires strong leadership. Now is the time for
domestic constituencies to put their agendas behind the
peace agenda and for the leaders to reach out to their
respective publics to raise awareness of the benefits of
peace. For Palestinians, a negotiated peace settlement
holds the promise of allowing it to become a fully
recognized Member State of equal standing. For Israel,
only a negotiated two-State solution will bring it the
security and recognition it deserves in the region and
beyond.

The situation on the ground remains fragile. In the
West Bank, Israeli security forces carried out a total
of 424 search and arrest operations. A total of 519
Palestinians were arrested, and 218 Palestinians were
injured, including during demonstrations against the
barrier. Two Israeli soldiers were also injured.

Clashes increased in and around Palestinian
refugee camps, most notably in early February in the
Al-Arroub and Al-Jalazoun camps, following the killing
on 29 January of one Palestinian from the Al-Jalazoun
camp near Ramallah and the Ofra settlement after
allegedly opening fire at Israeli security forces. More
than 30 Palestinian protesters were injured by Israeli
live ammunition and rubber-coated metal bullets, while
two Israeli soldiers were injured by stone- and Molotov
cocktail-throwing.

Israeli security forces reported having foiled
several terrorist attacks on Israel allegedly planned
by individuals in the West Bank. That included the
arrest of an alleged Al-Qaida cell on 22 January and
the uncovering of several arms caches. Palestinian
security forces, working to maintain order and security,
safely defused some unexploded ordnance between
22 January and 3 February and arrested Hizb ut-Tahrir
Islamic militants on 8 and 9 February.

Attacks by settlers on Palestinian property
included damage to more than 3,000 trees and saplings
and some 80 vehicles. On 6 February, three settlers
were reportedly charged for setting fire to two vehicles
and spray painting stars of David in the Palestinian
village of Farata in November. During another attack,
on 18 February, the tires of some 30 cars were slashed
and anti-Arab graffiti was painted in the Sharafat
neighbourhood of occupied East Jerusalem. The Israeli
police reported the arrest in four operations of more
than 10 settlers reportedly involved in attacks on
Palestinians or their property. Palestinian stone- and
Molotov-cocktail-throwing attacks - on the rise in
recent months - resulted in three settlers injured.

The reporting period registered increased funding
and incentives by the Israeli Government for existing
settlements. Continued settlement activity, including in
occupied East Jerusalem, is illegal and erodes hope for
the two-State solution by undermining ongoing Israeli-
Palestinian peace talks.

We are deeply concerned by the ongoing demolition
of Palestinian residential and livelihood structures
in Area C, particularly in the Jordan Valley and East
Jerusalem. A total of 107 structures were demolished,
leading to the displacement of 175 Palestinians. Those
demolitions must stop and Palestinians must be given
access to a fair and inclusive planning regime. We are
also increasingly worried by reports of impeded access
for the humanitarian community in the delivery of
emergency shelter and other assistance. This month,
the International Committee of the Red Cross decided
to suspend its distribution oftents to people affected by
house demolitions in the Jordan Valley, after noting a
pattern of obstructions and confiscations of those items
by Israeli authorities since the beginning of 2013.

We have reiterated our position on the continued
practice of administrative detention by Israel, including
of elected Palestinian Legislative Council members,
and the six prisoners on hunger strike since January.
Administrative detainees must be either charged or
released. We are concerned about today's report that
a Palestinian prisoner died after he was transferred
from an Israeli jail to the hospital. We will continue to
follow the situation of Palestinian prisoners in Israeli
detention closely.

Visits by Israeli groups, including senior officials,
to the Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif resulted in
clashes between Palestinians and the Israeli police
accompanying those groups. Incitement or provocations
from any quarter must cease and the sanctity of holy
sites of all faiths must be respected.

Turning to Gaza, there are troubling signs that the
ceasefire understanding of November 2012 is eroding
in both of its main requirements: the end of hostilities
and the opening of the crossing for people and goods. In
the past two months, we have seen more rockets being
fired at Israel, border incidents and Israeli operations
causing death or injury to civi1ians.

We condemn the increased rocket fire. This
reporting period saw the firing of 44 rockets and
mortars, of which 15 landed in Israel. Israel conducted
six incursions and seven air strikes into Gaza,
resulting in the death of two militants and injuries to
10 Palestinians. Israeli forces also reported dismantling
an improvised explosive device on the border fence
on 18 February. Palestinian activities and protests
multiplied in the vicinity of the border fence and were
met by increased Israeli live fire, resulting in two
Palestinians shot dead and 16 injured. We are deeply
concerned about that rise in violence and we call on all
parties to act in accordance with international law.

Due to the ongoing closure of Gaza, the
humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate. The
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) urgently needs
an additional $30 million to sustain critical emergency
operations in Gaza, without which food aid will be cut
back. We call on all donors, including those who have
traditionally supported the Agency, to contribute to
UNRWA's emergency appeals.

The recent Israeli decision to allow the entry of
1,000 tons of cement and other construction materials
for flood relief is positive. However, contrary to
expectations, work on United Nations projects is
still not back at the level originally agreed by the
Israeli authorities, and more than 20 projects remain
stalled since November 2013 due to lack of Israeli
approval. We continue to call for the Israeli approval
of all United Nations projects, and the resumption of
already approved projects. We also call for a lifting of
restrictions on exports and transfers of goods to the
West Bank and Israel, and for permitting the import of
construction materials for the private sector. We hope
that the Rafah crossing with Egypt will soon resume
normal operations.

Meanwhile, efforts to bridge the Palestinian divide
continued. Fatah and Hamas delegations met in Gaza
to discuss the implementation of existing reconciliation
agreements, including the formation of a national
consensus Government headed by President Abbas,
and the organization of general elections. Ultimately,
only the reunification of Gaza and the West Bank,
under the legitimate Palestinian Authority, based on the
commitments of the Palestine Liberation Organization,
can pave the way for a durable solution for Gaza as part
of political progress towards peace. Gaza, too, must
reap the peace dividends of a negotiated two-State
solution.

Allow me now to turn to the Syrian conflict, whose
toll of death and destruction in Syria and in the region
continues to mount tragically, pointing urgently to the
need for a political solution. After many months of
effort, the Secretary-General convened in Montreux,
on 22 January, the second Geneva Conference on Syria.
More than 40 countries and international organizations
participated and underlined their commitment to
supporting a political solution to the Syrian conflict.
They urged the Syrian sides to negotiate and reach an
agreement on the full implementation of the Geneva
communique (S/20l2/523, annex), as indeed the Council
did in its resolution 2118 (2013). As the Council noted
in that resolution, the communique sets out a number
of key steps, beginning with the establishment of a
transitional governing body exercising full executive
powers, formed by mutual consent.

The first round of intra-Syrian talks began on
23 January and continued for eight days. They included
several direct sessions, as well as bilateral meetings
with Joint Special Representative Brahimi and his
team. The second round of talks took place from 10 to
15 February. Joint Special Representative Brahimi will
brief the Council in the coming weeks, so I will
therefore not go into specifics. The progress thus far
has been limited, confirming the deep rift between the
two sides. Yet it is no small feat that those long-awaited
negotiations have finally begun, and both sides remain
committed to sitting at the table. That is something on
which we must try to build.

We are grateful to the Governments of the Russian
Federation and the United States, and all in the region
and globally, for showing vision and helping to
organize that important process. We will continue to
need the help of many of the countries who attended
the Montreux Conference, as well as some who were
not there.

The Council held extensive discussions on the
escalating humanitarian toll that the conflict continues
to exert on the Syrian people. The Secretary-General
wholeheartedly welcomed the Council's adoption of
resolution 2139 (2014). We all hope that the resolution
will allow all humanitarian actors on the ground to
significantly increase their reach to all those in need.

The ongoing hostilities in Syria also continue
to impact the vulnerable community of Palestine
refugees. The situation is deteriorating in Yarmouk,
near Damascus, where 16,000 Palestine refugees
remain trapped. While some assistance has reached
those in need since 18 January, UNRWA continues
to experience sporadic access. We call on all parties
to grant UNRWA uninterrupted access to the civilian
population of Yarmouk and other civilian areas.

On 10 and 18 February, explosions took place near
UNRWA schools in Muzeirib, killing 18 people. We
deplore those indiscriminate attacks and remind the
warring parties of their obligations under international
law to protect all civilians.

The situation in the Golan continues to be of deep
concern. Heavy clashes between the Syrian armed
forces and armed members of the opposition and shelling
continued in the area of limitation in proximity to the
area of separation. On 18 and 19 February, artillery and
mortar fire rounds from the Bravo side landed across
the ceasefire line. There was no response from the
Alpha side. We are also looking into the reports of an
air strike yesterday in the border area between Lebanon
and Syria, and we urge all parties to avoid escalation.
Those developments have the potential to escalate and
to jeopardize the ceasefire between Israel and Syria,
as well as to heighten tensions between Lebanon and
Israel.

In Lebanon, the formation of a Government of
national interest was a major positive development
against a backdrop of continued tensions stemming
from a spate of deadly terrorist attacks, as well as
incidents of shelling and shooting from across the
Syrian border into Lebanon.

On 21 January, a suicide bombing in the Haret
Hraik suburb of Beirut was claimed by a Lebanese
branch of J abhat Al-Nusra. On 1 February, another
Jabhat Al-Nusra suicide bomber detonated a car bomb
in Hermel. On 3 February, a suicide attack took place
in Choueifat, in south Beirut. On 19 February, a double
suicide bombing in the Beirut suburb of Bir Al-Hassan,
which targeted the Iranian Cultural Centre, was claimed
by the Abdallah Azzam Brigades.

Shelling from Syria targeted Lebanese populated
areas in the Bekaa Valley and killed two people in the
Akkar region. There were at least two airstrikes by
Syrian aircraft in violation of Lebanese sovereignty.
In Tripoli, continued fighting between the Alawite
and Sunni communities caused at least five fatalities,
including one Lebanese soldier. The Lebanese Armed
Forces have had a number of successes in capturing
militants wanted in connection with the recent
bombings in Beirut and Hermel, and acted to contain
the movement of armed men and weapons between
Lebanon and Syria.

The Secretary-General congratulated President
Sleiman and Prime Minister Salam following the
formation, on 15 February, of the Government of
national interest under Prime Minister Tamam Salam.
The Secretary-General noted that the inclusion of
most political parties in the Cabinet was important to
address the serious security threats and humanitarian
challenges facing the country, and in order to organize
the presidential elections on time next month. Members
of the new Cabinet are working on agreeing a ministerial
statement outlining the Government's agenda.

The situation in the area of operations of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and along the
Blue Line remained calm, despite almost daily Israeli
air violations of Lebanese airspace. Pursuant to the
recommendations of the International Support Group
for Lebanon, on 20 February the Lebanese Armed
Forces and the United Nations launched a coordination
mechanism for international assistance to the army.
We welcome France's offer to host a meeting of the
International Support Group in Paris on 5 March to
support the political process in Lebanon and its State
institutions.

In conclusion, allow me to return to the Israeli-
Palestinian peace talks. It is the United Nations sincere
desire to see 2014 as the year that bears witness to a
comprehensive settlement realizing the vision of two
States for two peoples: Israel and Palestine, living
side-by-side in peace, security and mutual recognition
of each other's legitimate rights, including self-
determination, with each State ensuring equal civil
rights for all its citizens. The Middle East region suffers
from multiple crises and faultlines that require urgent
attention, not least the conflict in Syria and its impact
on neighbouring States. But the efforts deployed over
the past seven months towards achieving a solution of
the Palestinian-Israeli issue, in the form of a negotiated
two-State solution, have come closer than at any point
in recent time to making a real and much-needed
contribution to regional stability. It is therefore in our
collective interests, as well as that of both the Israelis
and the Palestinians, to invest in the success of that
process and ensure that it is credible and just for both
parties.

