I shall now make a statement in my national capacity. At the outset, I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and Assistant Secretary-General Coninsx for their briefings. Let me also express my gratitude to the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities, the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and the other United Nations-related entities for the report before us (S/2020/774). In February, I had the pleasure of accompanying Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, Assistant Secretary-General Coninsx and the Coordinator of the Monitoring Team on the first ever joint high-level visit to Jakarta. I believe that visit underlined Indonesia's comprehensive and balanced approach to the fight against terrorism, including the strategies in the Global Prosecution, Rehabilitation and Reintegration Initiative. The importance of developing a prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration (PRR) strategy has also been highlighted in the Secretary-General's report. Indonesia is of the view that a PRR strategy is instrumental to counter-terrorism efforts as an integral part of a comprehensive and tailored approach to addressing the threat posed by terrorists. Providing clear guidance for Member States to develop and implement comprehensive PRR strategies should therefore be one of the imminent priorities for the Council. That also applies to the continuing humanitarian and security challenges posed by foreign terrorist fighters and their accompanying family members. We also note that the issues of relocation and returning foreign terrorist fighters and their accompanying family members present significant challenges for Member States. In that regard, we believe that an effective comprehensive PRR strategy is appropriate. We must therefore set our differences aside and show our unity once again in our collective efforts to fight the scourge of terrorism. My delegation takes note of various salient points in the report, particularly concerning how the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has impacted counter-terrorism efforts and amplified threats through media propaganda. With that in mind, allow me to make three brief points. The first point relates to the terrorism that continues to threaten other parts of the globe, carried out by affiliates of ISIL. The report clearly demonstrates that ISIL affiliates are still active in many parts of the world, even as the world now faces the COVID-19 pandemic. We know that this threat remains and works through media propaganda, which may inspire attacks once normal public mobility and assembly resume. That leads me to my second point. Indonesia believes that we should always invest in soft measures towards countering terrorist narratives and steering people away from the violent extremism that is conducive to terrorism. We need to promote and facilitate the spread of messages of peace, moderation and tolerance as the best approach to confronting terrorist propaganda. We must provide messages that reject negativity and amplify positivity and hope. My third and last point is that, despite the pandemic, our fight against terror should neither cease nor waver. The pandemic should in no way hinder our fight against terrorism, as that is the hope of the terrorists. Let us not permit the pandemic to create more terrorists or let their affiliates regroup or consolidate. We need to stay attuned to how the threat of ISIL continues to evolve during and after the pandemic in order to adjust our response. Resolution 2532 (2020), adopted last month, anticipated those concerns, as it called for the immediate cessation of hostilities during the pandemic, except in the fight against terrorist groups. To that end, Indonesia would like to reaffirm our commitment to working together with all countries and the United Nations to strengthen our counter-terrorism cooperation.
