Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): I would like, first of
all, to congratulate you, Sir, in your capacity as
President of the Security Council for the month of
June. Let me also express our sincere compliments to
your predecessor, Ambassador Munir Akram of
Pakistan, for his excellent leadership of the Council
during the month of May.

I wish to take this opportunity to express our
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for organizing this
public debate. My delegation expresses its gratitude to
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno, and to
the Director-General of the United Nations Office at
Vienna and Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Antonio Maria Costa,
for their comprehensive, substantive and timely reports
on the issue. I reiterate the full readiness of my
Government to extend to them all possible support and
assistance in their complicated work.

The normalization of the situation in Afghanistan
and Afghanistan's reintegration into the community of
nations as a united, sovereign, stable, predictable and
peaceful State living in harmony with its neighbours
are essential prerequisites for regional stability and
security. Ukraine welcomes the progress made since
the Bonn Agreement and the commitment of the
Afghan Transitional Administration to set clear
priorities for the recovery and reconstruction of the
country and to prepare for holding general elections in
mid-2004. We also pledge our support for President
Karzai's efforts aimed at promoting national
reconciliation, establishing new army and law
enforcement structures and rehabilitating the national
economy.

At the same time, we remain deeply concerned
over the difficulties still confronting the country,
particularly in the field of internal security. Positive
developments such as the public consultations in the
constitution-making process, the latest decision by the
National Security Council to remit all customs receipts
to the central Government, progress towards the
national census and judicial and administrative reforms
could be undermined by the lack of security and by the
continued unwillingness of local chiefs to disarm and
to submit to the central Government.

Ukraine is seriously concerned by the escalation
of subversive and terrorist activities and strongly
condemns all acts of violence and intimidation directed
against United Nations and humanitarian personnel. I
extend our sincere sympathy for those killed in the
attacks and express our condolences to the bereaved
families.

The Afghan Transitional Administration, with the
support of the United Nations, should take urgent
measures to improve the security situation, which
remains the only condition for allowing the
re-establishment of the rule of law, ensuring the
protection of human rights, promoting reconstruction
efforts and facilitating the success of the complex
political processes. In that regard, in our view, special
priority should also be given to another important part
of security sector reform: the implementation of the
process of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) announced by President Karzai,
which is expected to begin in the coming weeks. We
commend the leading role of the United Nations, Japan,
the United States, the United Kingdom and Canada in
providing necessary contributions for the development
and implementation of the DDR programmes.

One of the most alarming factors creating
insecurity and dangerous challenges to the institution-
building efforts and to the rule of law in Afghanistan is
the narcotics threat. Moreover, organized crime and
illicit trafficking in and abuse of drugs and
psychotropic substances are becoming the most serious
threats to economic prosperity and political stability in
many countries of the world. The link between narcotic
drug trafficking and other serious phenomena such as
terrorism, money-laundering and smuggling should not
be ignored.

It is evident that no individual State can address
those challenges alone. They can be addressed only
through concerted, coordinated and effective action by
the international community as a whole. The further
strengthening of the role of the United Nations, as a
powerful instrument in developing international
cooperation to combat narcotic drug threats, is
extremely important and necessary.

Ukraine supports full implementation of the
Afghan national drug strategy and the Paris Pact
proposed by the United Nations during the conference
on drug routes from Afghanistan held at the initiative
of the French. Undoubtedly, the success of the Afghan
Administration in combating drugs is dependent on the
success of the peace process as a whole. The only way
to remove the drug dependence of drug crop farmers is
by providing them with alternative livelihoods, with
skills to engage in other economic activities and with
markets where they can sell their output.

In that connection, Ukraine supports proposals to
develop, under the aegis of the United Nations, an
international strategy of complex counteraction against
narcotic drugs originating in Afghanistan.

Security, good governance and reconstruction are
the most critical problems confronting Afghanistan.
The Government of Ukraine expresses its readiness for
efficient collaboration with the United Nations, as well
as at the bilateral level, with the Transitional
Administration, to achieve the goals outlined by the
Bonn Agreement, the Security Council and United
Nations bodies and agencies.

