Mr. Edjang Nnaga (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to express our
delegation's welcome to His Excellency Mr. Aleksandar
Vucie, President of Serbia, and Mr. Hashim Thaci,
who honour the Security Council with their presence
at this important briefing on Kosovo. We also thank
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his detailed briefing on
recent developments.

As we have made clear in all of our statements
in this Chamber, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
always advocates recourse to dialogue, consultation
and negotiation to settle disputes and conflicts. In line
with that position, the delegation of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea regrets the problems that have arisen
between Kosovo and Serbia, and we call on the parties
to remain calm and refrain from making statements
or doing anything that might lead to an escalation and
undermine stability and security, not only locally but in
the Balkans in general.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea reaffirms its
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Republic of Serbia, and we are grateful for its
continued efforts aimed at finding a political, inclusive
and peaceful solution to the question of Kosovo. We
also encourage Pristina to refrain from actions that
could stifle regional cooperation, increase tensions
and damage the trust generated between the different
communities, thereby jeopardizing the entire effort of
the international community to find a peaceful solution
to the crisis in Kosovo.

We also encourage the parties to intensify their
efforts aimed at improving regional cooperation,
safeguarding good relations of trust among communities
and respecting the implementation of agreements
reached and the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999). Furthermore, we urge the countries that
support the parties to the conflict to do everything
possible to ensure that Belgrade and Pristina return to
the negotiating table as the only way to find a lasting
solution to the dispute between them.

Finally, we appreciate the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
and the support it provides to Kosovo's communities,
as well as regional and international actors and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
with a View to fulfilling the mandate of resolution 1244
(1999).

