Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by once again congratulating once again
Mr. Martin Griffiths on his appointment as Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen. I wish him
and his team every success. We express our appreciation
to Mr. Griffiths and to Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock, and thank them for their valuable and
important briefings on developments pertaining to the
humanitarian and political situation in Yemen.

I would like to emphasize three major points
today: the political and security developments, the
humanitarian situation and the message that the
Security Council must send out.

With regard to the political and security
developments, we have heard just now on the political
level from Mr. Griffiths about the outcome of a number
of meetings he held with Yemeni parties since he took
up his role as Special Envoy. I would like to express
our full support for his efforts as well as the efforts of
the United Nations to resolve the conflict in Yemen in
a peaceful manner.

The State of Kuwait is convinced that there can be
no military or humanitarian solution for Yemen. The
solution will have to be political and it must be based on
the three political references - the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative, the outcome of the National Dialogue
and the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2216 (2015). Furthermore, we welcome the
19 March statement issued by Mr. Griffiths's Office
where he says that he plans to revive the political
process between the Yemeni parties in accordance
with those three references, and to complete previous
consultations, including consultations that took place
in Kuwait in 2016 during which both parties were
almost ready to sign an agreement putting an end to the
fighting and the suffering of the Yemeni people.

On the security front, the deliberate attacks by the
Houthis against populated areas in Saudi Arabia show
that Houthis are defying the will of the international
community and working against a political solution to
put an end to the suffering of the Yemeni people. We
reiterate our condemnation in the strongest terms of the
attacks using ballistic missiles against Saudi Arabia,
the threats made against neighbouring countries, as
well as the threats made to maritime shipping at Bab-
Almandab in the Red Sea. All of those aspects are a
danger for regional and international peace. We support
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in all measures that it
is planning to take in order to safeguard its security
and stability.

The Security Council also adopted a very clear,
explicit and unified position to condemn the ballistic-
missile attacks against the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
The presidential statement of 15 March (S/PRST/ZOlS/S)
condemned in the strongest terms the ballistic-missile
attacks. Later, on 28 March, the Council issued a
statement to the press (SC/ 13270) in which it robustly
condemned the ballistic-missile attacks, which had
targeted cities in Saudi Arabia, including the capital
Riyadh, and demanded an end to such attacks. In
response, the Houthis have done nothing but continue
to launch missiles, which shows once again that they
are in clear defiance and not being earnest. They stick
to military escalation and violence, and not to peace
and dialogue. We underscore that all Member States
must respect the arms embargo pursuant to resolution
2216 (2015).

With regard to the humanitarian situation, we
welcome the outcome of the donor conference on the
humanitarian situation in Yemen, which was held
in Geneva and organized by the United Nations,
Switzerland and Sweden. The conference was able to
garner contributions amounting to $2 billion dollars. At
that conference, the State of Kuwait pledged to provide
$250 million in humanitarian assistance to Yemen. We
call on members to uphold those commitments given
the urgent humanitarian needs in Yemen. We also
welcome the $1 billion joint contribution announced by
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, as well as
the generous contributions of the United Kingdom and
other countries. We hope that those contributions will
improve the humanitarian situation in Yemen this year.

Pertaining to the Security Council message, the
Council must remain unified and firm in the light of the
crisis in Yemen. The Council must send a clear message
to all parties in Yemen, in particular the Houthis,
that they cannot continue to defy Security Council
resolutions and international law and refrain from
engaging in the political process. It is unacceptable to
put personal interests and political ambitions over the
interests of an entire people. It is also unacceptable at
all that ballistic missile attacks continue to be carried
out against neighbouring countries, threatening vessels
crossing Bab-Almandab and the Red Sea. That is
a serious threat to regional and international peace
and security.

The ideal solution to the crisis must be centred on
the three reference points I mentioned and must ensure
the unity, independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Yemen and respect for its constitutional
order. Any interference in Yemen's internal affairs must
be rejected. That was affirmed at the Arab summit held
in Saudi Arabia a few days ago. We urge the Yemeni
stakeholders to work together with the Special Envoy
in that regard.

