Mr. Mufioz (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I
would like to thank my colleagues for their praise for
my work as Chairman of the Al Qaeda and Taliban
sanctions Committee during this period, and for the
work of my support team in the Mission of Chile, in
particular Carla Serazzi. I would like to thank the
Secretariat for their unfailing support, in particular the
Monitoring Team coordinated by Mr. Richard Barrett,
which has been an extremely valuable support for the
work of the Committee, as I am sure it will continue to
be. I would also like to express my appreciation for the
support of the colleagues who joined me on trips
during this period and who contributed substantively to
the dialogue that we had with the Governments of the
countries we visited. I would also like to thank the
Governments that we worked with during this
period - Australia, Cambodia, Iran, Libya, the
Philippines, Switzerland and Thailand - which not
only received us cordially, but which were also able to
arrange interviews which were very important for our
work. I would especially like to thank the Government
of Australia, which received us shortly after an
election, and the Government of Iran, which received
us on a religious holiday and yet was able to organize
excellent meetings.

Finally, I would simply like to say that, though
there were not any specific questions, there were many
valuable comments that seemed to coincide with our
Committee's assessments, and I agree with what a
number of speakers had to say today.

First is the importance of strengthening the list
with new names and constantly improving its quality.
So that that instrument can continue to be useful, its
quality is as important as the quantity of names it
contains.

Second is the cooperation among the Al Qaeda
and Taliban sanctions Committee, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and the 1540 Committee,
including the proposal made here regarding the
possibility of carrying out joint visits in the future.
That seems to be an idea worth exploring.

Third is attention to issues of human rights and
due process, particularly in relation to the delisting
process, so that we will make fewer mistakes and carry
out our work as transparently as possible.

Fourth is technical cooperation, which - as I
believe the Ambassador of Pakistan said - should be
carried out over the long term with the countries that
need it. As the representative of Benin said, that is
often a question of a lack of capacity and not of
political commitment. A lack of capacity leads some
States not to fully implement on the ground the
sanctions agreed by the Security Council. We must
recall that, as the representative of the United States
said, those sanctions are mandatory, not optional.
Therefore, those who cannot implement them need
assistance, and those who are able to do so must
comply with them.

Fifth is the importance of visits and dialogue with
the countries, particularly on the ground. Although the
reports that we receive are useful, nothing can replace
concrete dialogue; it enables us to sense nuances and
problems and to listen to observations and suggestions,
which we have often received and which have become
elements of some of the resolutions that we have
adopted. Both the information received directly from
the Member States we visit and the dialogue in New
York are irreplaceable, and we hope that countries can
take advantage of the opportunity to engage in
dialogue with the Committee to explain their points of
view or their concerns.

Last is cooperation with other United Nations
bodies and other organizations such as INTERPOL,
with which we have already begun an extraordinarily
fruitful relationship.

I believe that there is currently considerable
agreement with respect to the work of the Committee. I
am sure that, in the forthcoming period, that work will
be not only maintained, but intensified.

I would like to thank the President for having
convened this meeting and my colleagues for their kind
observations with regard to the work of our
Committee.

