Mr. Ocaziones (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation is grateful for Mr. Oshima's briefing to
this meeting of the Council.

The picture of the humanitarian situation in
Angola that he has painted continues to present some
disturbing aspects. We feel deeply the suffering
undergone by the people of Angola, and we share their
hopes for a better future. We also greatly admire the
dedicated efforts of the humanitarian organizations that
are working there, including United Nations agencies,
which are striving to help rebuild individual lives,
families and an entire country.

After hearing the statement made by the
representative of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, it is clear to us that, at this
particular stage of the return of peace to Angola, the
humanitarian needs of its population have grown
immensely. Those needs were always great, but the
conditions of war have prevented the international
community from determining the true magnitude of
those needs. Even today they cannot be accurately
assessed, because mined land and destroyed roads
make it impossible to carry out a complete appraisal of
the situation.

However, my delegation takes that view that, as
Mr. Oshima has noted, the international community
now has an opportunity to show Angola and the rest of
the world what peace dividends and the benefits of
peace are. It seems to us that the Security Council has
the important task of focusing attention on this
important aspect, and we trust that the United Nations
will continue to provide a humanitarian presence in the
country.

We believe that the pressing needs of internally
displaced persons require that the reception centres for
those persons be properly equipped, that families return
to their homes and that they be able to embark on an
economically viable way of life. Efforts need to be
made not only in terms of financial resources, but also
in the areas of human rights, public administration,
political agreements and security guarantees on the part
of the Angolan Government.

In Angola, we are facing perhaps a more
encouraging situation than others that we have
addressed here in the Council. We have a Government
that has stated its readiness to carry out the necessary
reforms and which, moreover, has the potential
resources to improve the living standards of the
population. While we call for a generous response on
the part of donor countries in order to address Angola's
needs, my delegation trusts that the Government of the
country itself will meet the expectations of the
international community in this regard.

Humanitarian tragedies such as that of Angola
should never happen again anywhere in the world.

