Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and the delegation of Cameroon on
assuming the presidency of the Council for the month
of October. May I also express our appreciation for the
efficient presidency last month in the hands of
Ambassador Tafrov and the delegation of Bulgaria. I
also wish to thank the President for arranging today's
public meeting of the Council on the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).

Ireland fully agrees with the statement that will
be made shortly by Denmark on behalf of the European
Union.

The work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
under the leadership of Ambassador Greenstock, has
been remarkable. A year ago, the world saw what the
forces of barbarism, if unchecked, will do in defiance
of our vision. That vision has been embedded by the
United Nations in laws and norms respecting human
dignity and diversity. It is a vision of a common moral
world where nations and people live by certain shared
standards and ideals. Today we can say with reasonable
confidence that such atavistic forces now face an
international community acting in concert and in a
common endeavour so as to deny them capacity to act
or ever again to inflict such atrocities on our world.

Ireland therefore pays warm tribute to what has
been achieved by the Counter-Terrorism Committee in
requiring and encouraging full implementation of the
provisions of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001).
That work has been done with patience, with openness
and with a sense of realism and balance. We all accept
that many of the requirements laid out in resolution
1373 (2001) cannot be fully achieved by every State
overnight. For this reason, in the five 90-day
programmes and in the responses to national reports,
the Committee has rightly sought to encourage rather
than admonish, and to foster cooperation and shared
effort rather than finger-pointing. This is certainly the
right approach.

It is also right for us to be aware of the need for
vigilance and caution in maintaining and strengthening
our common values, even as we confront together those
who seek to destroy or erode those values. We do
ourselves no service unless we accept that terrorism
flourishes all too easily where injustice also flourishes;
or that the fight against international terrorism can all
too easily be used to attack or criticise legitimate
political dissent; or that a blanket approach of
endorsing in the round every action taken by every
Government under the rubric of fighting international
terrorism would be a flawed approach. A year after the
barbarism of 11 September, we need to always recall
that the fabric of laws and codes that we have
painstakingly built up over recent decades in the
United Nations remains all too fragile and vulnerable.
Rights lost in any country are not easily restored.
Voices stifled can indeed be muted, but at a great cost.
Values endangered are our common loss.

Ireland warmly endorses the report of the Policy
Working Group on the United Nations and Terrorism.
In terms of the future work of the CTC, we especially
agree with the recommendation in the report that it
should be ensured that expertise developed in the
various United Nations system offices is made
available to the CTC. We should, in the view of my
delegation, pay strong attention to the views of human
rights experts, including, of course, those of High
Commissioner Sergio Vieira de Mello, who is building
on the work of his predecessor, Mary Robinson; but
also those of the Special Rapporteurs of the
Commission on Human Rights.

Ireland fully supports the recommendations of the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
contained in the note entitled "A human rights
perspective on counter-terrorism measures".

I have focused on human rights aspects not
because the Committee is at all unaware of that
dimension, but because, as we assess future steps in
strengthening international cooperation against
terrorism, it seems to my delegation salutary to stand
back and look at the landscape as a whole and to
remember that our work here in the United Nations is
about values of humanism and humanity.

There are three particular achievements of the
CTC in its first year that I want to emphasize.

First, capacity-building among States must be
strengthened so that the requirements of resolution
1373 (2001) are translated into operational action, not
just laws on the statute book. Secondly, the
strengthening of regional cooperation in the fight
against terrorism has been a signal achievement of the
past year. Thirdly, the CTC has strongly focused on
assistance to States requiring support and advice in the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). Ireland was
pleased recently to submit details of Irish national
experts for inclusion in the directory of assistance.

Today's debate is an opportunity to say "thank
you and well done" to the CTC, to its Chairman, to the
experts advising the CTC and to the Secretariat. This,
on behalf of my delegation, I warmly do and wish the
Committee every success in its future work on behalf
of all of us.

