Mr. Diop (Mali) (spoke in French): It is always with
renewed pleasure that I address the Security Council
for the review of the quarterly report (S/2017/27l) of
the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali. With me
here today is Mr. Mohammed El Mokhtar, Minister for
National Reconciliation and of the Diplomatic Council
of the President of the Republic of Mali .

Mali's delegation takes note of the report of the
Secretary-General and thanks Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations Lacroix for his
presentation of the report.

Since the Council's review of the Secretary-
General's previous report (S/2016/1137) on the situation
in Mali, in January (see S/PV.7864), significant
progress has been made in the areas of policy, security,
the restoration of State authority throughout the
country, the protection of human rights, development
and humanitarian action. I am pleased that the report
underlines that progress and acknowledges the efforts
made by the Government in that regard - under the
leadership and firm commitment of Mr. Ibrahim
Boubacar Keita, President and Head of State of the
Republic of Mali.

In his New Year's address to the nation, the
President announced important measures for 2017,
within the framework of the implementation of the
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.

Today I am pleased to confirm to the Council that
in addition to the many institutional measures under
way, the conference for national harmony, which took
place from the 27 March to 2 April in Bamako, has
concluded successfully. This was an opportunity for the
children of Mali to come together, and the conference
lived up to its promise: it was fully inclusive, as all
Mali stakeholders were able to set out together on the
path to peace and national reconciliation, including the
Government of Mali, the Coordination des mouvements
de l'Azawad, the Platform coalition of armed groups,
the majority and opposition political parties, and all of
the active forces in the country. Discussions were frank,
open and in-depth, in a spirit of complete of freedom of
speech, in keeping with article 5 of the agreement, and
resulted in relevant recommendations that will form the
foundation for the elaboration, under the auspices of the
President of the Republic, of a charter for peace, unity
and national reconciliation.

Another major step in the implementation of the
agreement was the compromise reached by the parties
at the high-level meeting of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee held on 10 February to establish interim
authorities for all regions in the north of Mali. The
interim authorities were already effectively put in place
on 28 February in Kidal and on 2 March in Gao and
Menaka. Pursuant to the consultations conducted by
the high representative of the President of the Republic
in charge of the implementation of the agreement, we
hope to see the establishment of interim authorities in
Timbuktu and Taoudenni on 13 April, God willing.

In the area of defence and security, the Government
of Mali has taken the necessary measures to
operationalize mixed patrols. The terrorist attack
against the Operational Coordination Mechanism in Gao
on 18 January, as terrible as it was, in no way weakened
the resolve of the Malian parties to ensure a successful
outcome to the process. Security-sector reform is also
under way, as are the cantonment and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) processes.

In parallel, the process of reviewing the Constitution
is also under way. The goal here is to focus on the
relevant provisions of the peace agreement, in particular
through the establishment of a second chamber in
Parliament. The Government has already forwarded to
the National Assembly a draft law on this issue, which,
once adopted by the national representation, will then
be submitted to the people of Mali via referendum by
the end of the year.

Above and beyond these measures, the Government
is continuing its development efforts on the ground, when
security conditions allow, through such programmes
as the emergency programme for development in the
north of the country and the programme for economic
reconstruction and recovery.

These progress that I have just described was made
possible, as I mentioned earlier, thanks to the leadership
and the resolute personal commitment of the President
of the Republic of Mali and by the gradual rebuilding
of trust among the stakeholders in Mali. Nonetheless,
these still-fragile accomplishments should not make
us lose sight of the many challenges still facing the
process. These include issues related to the mobilization
of resources for the effective implementation of the
agreement and for the cantonment and DDR processes;
the restoration of State authority throughout the territory
of Mali, as Council members have just mentioned,
which is a strategic objective of very high importance
for the Government of my country; and the provision
of a peace dividend to the people who live in regions
affected by the crisis, basically all of the Malian people,
who are suffering from the effects of the crisis.

The security situation in central Mali is also a
source of concern for the Malian authorities. In order
to rise to the challenge, we have taken the following
three measures.

The first measure is the adoption of an integrated
security plan for these regions aimed at ensuring the
presence and operationalization of public administration
at all levels as well as basic social services, and to
enable us to combat the proliferation oflight weapons as
well as coordinate, monitor and assess the strategy for
fighting insecurity and terrorism in the central region.

The second measure aims to operationalize
traditional mechanisms for conflict prevention and
management, and the third is the creation of a team of
judges who will work with traditional leaders in the
framework of transitional justice. The implementation
of these measures will require substantial support from
all of the members of the Council and all partners.

Ten months after the adoption of resolution 2295
(2016), I wish to note that that the relevant provisions
of the resolution are, unfortunately, still difficult to
implement on the ground, in particular because of
the gaps that Council members have just underscored
related to the operational capacities that the Mission
requires in order to properly discharge its mandate.

Here I would like to underscore the need for the
Council to provide the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
with the means necessary for it to fully carry out its
stabilization mandate in Mali and also to help the
Government in its efforts to gradually establish State
authority throughout the country's territory.

In this regard, we welcome the announcement made
by Ambassador Seck of Senegal of the deployment of
the rapid-reaction force within MINUSMA, made up
of a Senegalese contingent. I also wish to underscore,
as several Council members, including China, Egypt,
Kazakhstan and Senegal, have done, the need to
strengthen the capacity of the Malian security and
defence forces. Indeed, regardless of the nature of the
mandate, it is the Government of Mali and the Malian
defence and security forces, which face no limitations
in terms of mandate or timeline, that must accomplish
the work on the ground. Today our forces are the ones
on the front lines of the fight against terrorism and the
ones suffering the highest casualties, so it is extremely
important to view this issue in parallel with that of the
strengthening of the Mission itself.

I wish also here to reiterate our appeal to all partners
to honour the commitments they have undertaken in
order to promote the peace process in Mali.

One of the major challenges facing the
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali remains the upsurge of attacks by
terrorist groups, violent extremists and drug traffickers
against the civilian population; against the Malian
defence and security forces, as I just mentioned; against
the international forces; and, most recently, against the
signatory movements, which are increasingly becoming
targets for terrorists.

We are confronting the terrorist challenge along
with the countries of the Sahel region and the rest
of the world, as this challenge and threat is global in
nature. The Security Council is well informed, as was
mentioned by an eminent member of the Council, about
the situation in Libya and the threat that this presents
for the Sahel region. The Council last month visited
the Lake Chad basin region and witnessed the gravity
of the situation in Cameroon, Nigeria, the Niger and
in Chad owing to the activities of the Boko Haram
terrorist organization.

To deal with this worrisome security challenge, the
Heads of State of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) decided, during their second ordinary summit
held in Bamako on 6 February, to create a joint force
to fight terrorism, transnational organized crime and
illegal immigration throughout the G-5 Sahel territory.
In its capacity as current Chair of the G-5 Sahel, Mali is
coordinating this process in order to establish this force
as quickly as possible. Its strategic concept of operations
will be considered during the week of 13 April by the
African Union Peace and Security Council, which will
then submit it to the Security Council for approval.

Once the Security Council receives the concept of
operations, I strongly hope it Will quickly address this
issue and authorize without delay the deployment of
this joint G-5 Sahel force, with the financial support
of the United Nations and partners of Mali, which is
necessary for its functioning. I welcome the Secretary-
General's support for the establishment of the force,
which will work in close coordination, in perfect
harmony and in full complementarity with MINUSMA,
the Barkhane force and all the countries, institutions
and partners involved in the region. I would also like to
say that the goal of the Heads of State of the G-5 Sahel
is not to become involved in an endless war. We believe
that, by engaging in this fight against terrorism, we are
creating an environment that will be more conducive
to the success of MINUSMA in carrying out its work.
By doing this, we are fully aware that we are becoming
part and parcel of the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. The force,
therefore, can only create the conditions for better
implementation of all the commitments undertaken by
the all the parties.

With regard to the human rights situation referred
to in paragraphs 33 to 40 of the report of the Secretary-
General, the Government of Mali took note of the
statistics provided. It should be recalled that the majority
of cases of alleged violations that have been documented
and attributed to the Government have been carried out
in areas in which judicial and investigative units are
absent owing to the lack of security. In any event, I
reiterate the determination of the Malian authorities to
take all necessary measures to prevent and, ifnecessary,
punish proven cases of human rights violations. In that
regard, I should say that, at this stage, we are dealing
only with leads and only an investigation on the ground
can allow us to establish the facts and gradually bring
the perpetrators to justice.

I would not want to conclude without conveying the
warm congratulations of the Government of Mali to the
delegation of the United States of America on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council. We wish you,
Madam President, every success as you preside over
the Council. My congratulations also go to the United
Kingdom for its outstanding steering of the work of
the Security Council during the past month, one of the
highlights of which was the adoption of resolution 2347
(2017), on the protection of cultural heritage. Mali,
which has been a victim of the destruction of part of its
cultural heritage during the occupation of its northern
regions, of course became co-author of that resolution,
which was initiated by France and Italy, to whom I
pay tribute.

I would also like to commend the work carried out by
Mr. Herve Ladsous, former Under-Secretary-General,
during the six long years in which he led the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations. At the same time, I would
like to congratulate Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix on the
trust placed in him by the Secretary-General when he
was put at the head of Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. I would like to assure him of the full
cooperation of the delegation of Mali in the carrying
out his mission. I am pleased to express, once again,
the gratitude of the people and Government of Mali to
the United Nations; the countries and institutions that
are members of the Agreement Monitoring Committee,
presided by Algeria; the troop-contributing countries;
and the international community for the sacrifices they
have made in order to reach a definitive settlement of
the Malian crisis.

I would also like to pay tribute to all the victims
of this crisis - civilian and military, foreigners and
Malians - who died with honour on the battlefield.
Allow me to recall Julien Barbe', a French solider who
lost his life yesterday while carrying out a mission
in Mali. I would like to express to the Council, to
President of France Francois Hollande and the people
of France the deepest condolences of the President of
the Republic of Mali and all the people of Mali. This is
a tragedy and it once again reminds us of the sacrifices
made by France and many other countries to bring
about stability in our country. We hope that this soldier
will not have died in vain.

Finally, I welcome the efforts of the French
Barkhane forces and the excellent work of the men and
women of MINUSMA, with Special Representative
Annadif Mahamat Saleh at its head, with whom the
Government of Mali has an excellent cooperative
working relationship.

Before concluding, I would like to say that I have
listened to Council members and I understand the
expectations that have been expressed at this table
by members. I also understand the impatience that
every member feels and which is reflected by that of
the people of Mali on the ground, who also want us to
move much more quickly in ensuring the security of
our country, protecting it and ensuring its stability. I
have heard that message loudly and clearly and I will
convey it to the highest authorities in Mali.

I am convinced that we will do everything we can
to continue enjoying the trust that has been placed in
my country and my people by the Council. We hope
that, with God's help, in the upcoming months and
weeks, we will be able to bring a new dynamism to the
peace process in Mali in order to ensure that peace and

stability spread throughout the region.

