Ms. Nakamitsu: I thank you, Sir, and the other
members of the Security Council once again for
the opportunity to brief you on the implementation
of resolution 2118 (2013), on the elimination of the
chemical weapons programme of the Syrian Arab
Republic. As before, I will also provide them with an
update on the activities of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM). Mr. Mulet, Head
of the JIM. Leadership Panel, will join me at next
month's briefing.

I will first turn to the progress related to resolution
2118 (2013) and the elimination of Syria's declared
chemical weapons programme. Since my last briefing
(see S/PV.7946), I was able to meet in person with
the Director General of the Organisation for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to discuss
matters related to this file and to continue the good and
constructive engagement that has been established. In
addition, the Director General, Mr. Mulet and I spoke
by phone yesterday, in anticipation of the briefing.

I have also spoken with the Permanent Mission
of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations
and have now met with most members of the Council.
All these discussions have allowed me to deepen my
understanding ofthis complex and challenging portfolio.

Although there is little new to report since my last
briefing on 23 May, there have been small changes and,
I am pleased to note, some progress. The Secretary-
General's last letter noted the unchanged situation
with regard to remaining declared chemical weapons
production facilities. As members recall, one hangar
remained to be destroyed and the OPCW Technical
Secretariat had yet to verify the condition of two
aboveground stationary facilities. The lack of progress
in this regard was due to the prevailing security
situation, which precluded safe access to these sites. On
6 June, the remaining aircraft hangar was destroyed.
The destruction was observed by an OPCW team. As
of yet, however, there is no change to the lack of safe
access to the site of the two above-ground stationary
facilities.

The long-standing issues related to Syria's
declaration and subsequent amendments also remain.
Plans for a fourth round of high-level consultations
are continuing, but as yet no new dates have been set.
The last such consultations took place a year ago, in
June 2016. The Secretary-General continues to urge
cooperation between the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic and the OPCW to resolve these issues
in order for the OPCW to be in a position to verify that
activities are in accordance with the obligations under
the Chemical Weapons Convention and consistent with
the information provided in declarations. This in turn
will allow the international community to have full
confidence in the same.

In November 2016, the OPCW Executive Council
decided that the OPCW would conduct inspections
at the Barzah and Jamrayah facilities of the Syrian
Scientific Studies and Research Centre. The decision
also called upon the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic to provide full and unfettered access to the
Centre. The first inspections were duly carried out
from 26 February to 5 March. Four samples were taken
at the Centre - two from each facility. The results
of the sample analysis indicated that there were no
unscheduled chemicals present in the samples. The
OPCW is planning a second inspection to take place in
the second half of this year.

I am informed by the OPCW that the Fact-finding
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic continues
investigations into the allegation of the use of chemical
weapons in Khan Shaykhun on 4 April. Last month, a
status update on this investigation was transmitted by
the OPCW Director General to the Secretary-General
and subsequently circulated to the Security Council.
I am further informed that the OPCW Fact-finding
Mission team recently Visited Damascus and may do
so again. In addition, planning is still under way for
the deployment of a team to the site of the incident.
As always, any such deployment will depend upon the
most stringent security assurances for the OPCW team.
The OPCW was not able to say with certainty when
the Fact-finding Mission team will be able to submit
its conclusions on this incident, only that it will do
so when it considers that it has sufficient information
and evidence.

With the appointment of Ms. Judy Cheng-Hopkins,
the Leadership Panel of the JIM. is now complete.
Ms. Cheng-Hopkins had a long and distinguished
career at the United Nations, including most recently as
the head of the Peacebuilding Support Office. She joins
Mr. Mulet and Mr. Stefan Mogl and will be advising the
Panel on political matters.

As stated in the Secretary-General's most recent
letter to the Security Council (S/2017/469) following
its assessment of the report of the OPCW Fact-finding
Mission, the JIM. has started an in-depth investigation
into the 16 September 2016 incident in Umm Hawsh.
The Council will recall that the OPCW report
concluded that blood sample analyses of two female
casualties reported to have been involved in the alleged
attack indicated exposure to sulphur mustard, as did
a munition that was also reported to be connected to
the incident.

The JIM. is also preliminarily assessing the
status update report of the Fact-finding Mission, and
other available material, on the allegations of the use
of chemical weapons at Khan Shaykhun, to which I
referred earlier. The Leadership Panel expects to make
a decision on conducting an in-depth investigation into

this incident upon receipt of the Mission's final report.
As I noted at the outset, the smooth working
relationship between the Office for Disarmament
Affairs and the JIM. has continued. The Office for
Disarmament Affairs continues to work to support and
facilitate the work of the JIM, while fully respecting
its independence.

Both Mr. Mulet and I continue to urge the members
of the Security Council to avoid politicizing this
issue. In addition, as the Secretary-General states
in his most recent letter to the Security Council, the
continuing use of chemical weapons in Syria is not only
horrific in its own right, but also profoundly damaging
to the international community's confidence in its
non-proliferation architecture. This is to the detriment
of all of us. We have, collectively, worked to create
regimes for disarmament and non-proliferation in order
that our security will be enhanced. If we, collectively,
permit the erosion of those regimes, so too will our
security be eroded.

Nearly 100 years ago, the 1925 Geneva Protocol
stated that

"the use in war of asphyxiating, poisonous or other
gases, and of all analogous liquids, materials or
devices, has been justly condemned by the general
opinion of the civilized world".

Nearly 100 years later, we must continue not only to
speak but to act in accordance with that View. We cannot
go backwards. The Chemical Weapons Convention
calls upon us "to exclude completely the possibility of
the use of chemical weapons". Such use remains wholly
indefensible and is a threat to international peace and
security. Those responsible for their use must be held
accountable. Many things have changed in the years
since 1925; this View of chemical weapons should not
be one of them.

