The Secretary-General: The tragedy in Darfur is
one of the greatest challenges the international
community faces today. The whole world is watching
this tragedy unfold, and it is watching us. No one can
be allowed to sidestep or ignore their responsibility to
protect the innocent civilians. Our urgent task is to do
everything we can to help protect the people of Darfur
from further humanitarian suffering, terrible violence
and human rights abuses, and to bring their agony to an
end.

The humanitarian emergency in Darfur is
growing, and much, much more needs to be done to
mitigate it. I take this opportunity to reiterate my
strong appeal to the international community to
respond urgently and generously to the humanitarian
appeal for Darfur.

The African Union (AU) has assumed the great
responsibility of leadership in both the security and
political areas, and I warmly thank it for doing so. I am
very pleased to see the Chairman of the AU, President
Olusegun Obasanjo of Nigeria, here with us in the
Council. We must give the AU our unwavering support
in word and in deed.

The United Nations is supporting the AU's efforts
to strengthen its operations in all parts of Darfur.
Civilians are still being attacked. We must support the
expansion of the AU's mission to help the people there.
A proactive AU presence can help make them safer.
But that will require substantial international

resources - logistics support, equipment and
financing. Every country that can help must help, and
thereby give content and meaning to our own words of
concern.

The United Nations is also strongly supporting
the AU's leadership of the political process. The only
route to true long-term safety for the civilians in
Darfur, and to the return of 1.6 million people to their
homes, is a genuine political settlement. We all must
help the African Union to achieve that goal. I call on
the entire international community to make
unambiguously clear to both sides that we firmly
expect them to resume negotiations for a political
settlement in Darfur, and that they must bring to the
table the spirit of compromise necessary to reach
agreement.

I see that the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Mr. Konare, is here; we welcome his
presence in the Council.

The crisis in Darfur is not simply an African
problem. It concerns the entire international
community. Whatever name we give it, it imposes
responsibilities on all of us. We all must rise to this
challenge.

