Ms. Al-Thani: I shall now read out a statement on
behalf of the President of the General Assembly.

"Allow me to congratulate China on assuming
the presidency of the Council. I thank you,
Mr. President, for the invitation to speak and for
organizing this very timely debate.

"The headwinds against multilateralism are
present and clear. In a world of ever-increasing
interdependence and a close interrelationship
between human rights, development and peace
and security, we have no choice but to collectively
champion multilateralism.
"The conflicts in Yemen, Syria and other parts
of the world, as well as the tensions that continue
to simmer elsewhere, deprive the people of those
countries of the fruits of sustainable development.
But the rest of the world suffers alongside them
because, as the Chinese proverb goes, a rising tide
lifts all boats. We cannot achieve our ambitious
transformative sustainable development goals as
a world community when conflict and instability
limit the potential gain from cooperation. Simply,
we thrive as individual nations when all nations
thrive. That is the evidence of history and that is
the core value of our United Nations.

"The Security Council's own history and
experience, both as witness and actor, shows
that the enduring outcomes of conflict resolution
require a multilateral approach. We must reinforce
the multilateral mechanisms that have consistently
allowed for frank dialogue, mutual support and
joint action, convinced that a fragmented and
go-it-alone approach to peace and security is not
sustainable.

"As we prepare to mark the 100th anniversary
of Armistice Day, a moment in our common
historical memory of the carnage of war, we face
a test of leadership. Are we committed, like the
global leaders who fashioned our own United
Nations system, to responding equally to the global
challenges that threaten today's world? On this
note, I should like to make three brief points.

"First, I note that advancing multilateralism
is at the heart of my presidency. I remain deeply
convinced that dialogue and international
cooperation are the only tried and tested approaches
to addressing global challenges and, by extension,
to making the United Nations and other multilateral
institutions relevant to the peoples of the world.
That is particularly important around issues of
peace and security, which more frequently now
span borders and regions and cannot be addressed
or contained by any single country alone. This
sentiment was echoed by world leaders in the recent

general debate of the General Assembly, at which
multilateralism and commitment to international
peace and security were among the most cited
issues. I therefore call on all Member States to
reaffirm their commitment to the principles and
pillars of the Charter of the United Nations, to
strengthen the international legal order, and to
maintain binding international cooperation.
"My second point refers to the need to
empower women and youth in pursuing and
sustaining peace. The commitment to the inclusion
of women and youth - one of the key objectives
of multilateralism * is critical both to the success
of the peace and security agenda and to the
realization of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Our common interest in sustaining peace and
responding effectively to global challenges means
that we should promote international cooperation
to address inequality, exclusion and alienation.
We must therefore collectively work towards
empowering women and youth, including through
greater economic opportunities, decent work,
political participation and social protection and in
peace processes.

"My final point relates to the need for a greater,
more coordinated approach within the United
Nations system to address international peace and
security issues. As mentioned, global challenges
require global solutions. There is no body or
entity more representative or emblematic of global
cooperation and multilateralism than the United
Nations. We must continue to foster mutually
reinforcing and coordinated efforts among the
main organs of the Organization to boost and
uphold multilateralism. The General Assembly, the
Security Council and other United Nations organs
and entities all play crucial, complementary roles,
within their respective mandates, in fostering
international peace and security.

"As President of the General Assembly, I
commit to facilitating greater synergy within the
United Nations system, while taking advantage of
the renewed interest in the revitalization of the work
of the General Assembly and the reform process
across the three main streams of development,
peace and security and management. I am also
continuing regular consultations and periodic
exchanges of information with the Secretary-
General, the President of the Economic and Social

Council and the President of the Security Council
on important issues pertaining to international
peace and security.

"In conclusion, I must emphasize that
multilateralism does not represent, in any sense,
a threat to the sovereignty or national interests of
Member States. In fact, it offers the only way to
address the complex challenges that no country
could ever overcome on its own. My role as the
President of General Assembly is to serve as the de
facto guardian of multilateralism. I urge Member
States to stand together to uphold international
law and a system based on rules, dialogue and
cooperation. I also trust the Security Council to
successfully carry out its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and
security.

"It has become clear that peace is notjust about
the absence of war. To be sustainable, peace needs
to be nurtured before, during and after conflicts.
Development, peace and security and human rights
are all interlinked and mutually reinforcing. Only
by embracing multilateralism can we address the
many challenges to international peace, security
and prosperity. Let us work together to ensure
success on all counts."

