Mr. Ali (Malaysia): Israeli military aggression
into Gaza is entering its thirteenth day today. Over the
course ofjust less than two weeks, more than 600 lives
2
have been lost and more than 2,700 people injured, the
largest majority being Palestinian civilians, including
women and children.

Only yesterday, an Israeli attack killed at least 43
people and wounded about 100, who were taking
refuge inside a United Nations school. There is no need
to even mention the level and degree of destruction to
mosques, schools, homes and infrastructure that that
illegal Israeli action has brought upon the Palestinians
in Gaza, because any sensible person can imagine what
kind of destruction 13 days of Israeli bombardment
could bring about. Any right-minded sensible person
and Government would also deplore that Israeli action.
There is no justification for that disproportionate,
indiscriminate and excessive use of force in Gaza, not
even in the name of self-defence. The Israeli action is
against the rule of law and modern standards of human
decency. Its actions clearly demonstrate Israel's
complete disregard for international law and its
violation of the United Nations Charter. Malaysia
considers that act as a war crime and a crime against
humanity.

How could the death of innocent civilians,
particularly women and children, be in the name of
self-defence? How could any other Member States of
this United Nations accept that argument and condone
that action? How could the Security Council, which is
entrusted with the maintenance of peace and security,
not react to a clear violation of international peace and
security? How many more deaths and casualties and
how much more destruction will it take before the
Security Council is resuscitated from its paralysis in
dealing with the Palestinian issue?

Is it that, after almost two weeks into the illegal
Israeli aggression towards the people of Gaza, the
Security Council is now struggling to stop those
atrocities? We do not believe so, at least not judging by
how fast it reacted in other situations. On many
occasions we have expressed our deep regret over this
matter, and we once again record our deepest regret at
this apparent inaction by the Security Council.

However, despite that, we remain confident that
this Security Council, which is mandated to ensure
international peace and security, will take the necessary
and appropriate action in dealing with the Israeli
aggression. In fact, the Council has no option but to do
just that - to stop the killing of innocent civilians and
women and children and the destruction of homes,
09-20163
schools, mosques and other infrastructure. A durable
and sustainable cessation of hostility, including a
ceasefire, must be the immediate target, with the
deployment of an international monitoring or
peacekeeping force to de-escalate and stabilize the
situation. Israeli forces must leave the Gaza Strip.
Unless it does so immediately, there will be no let-up
in the death toll. One dead is far too many and the
blood of those who have perished and been injured by
that illegal Israeli action will also be on the hands of
the Security Council.

Malaysia urges all parties to exercise the utmost
restraint, in particular to avoid additional casualties
among innocent civilians and damage to civilian
property and infrastructure, and to refrain from acts
that could further exacerbate the situation.

We also urge this Council to ensure the
immediate lifting of the blockade on Gaza. The
destruction resulting from Israeli aggression has further
aggravated the humanitarian crisis of the beleaguered
people of Gaza, who urgently need food, fuel and
medicine. Israel, the occupying Power, must be made
to allow international assistance to reach the people of
Gaza. Despite repeated Israeli denials, what the people
of Gaza have faced prior to the recent Israeli assault is
nothing less than a man-made humanitarian crisis
caused by the Israeli siege of Gaza, which is a point of
significant importance, as it shows that the people of
Gaza are not suffering from a lack of resources.

The root cause of the current violence in the
Middle East is the occupation of Palestinian territories
by Israel. It began in 1947, when people living on the
periphery of the war in Europe found themselves
displaced and dispossessed to make way for another
group of people torn by that conflict, and went on to
the 1967 Israeli military aggression and continued
expansion of Israel's occupation of Palestinian land.

Since that time, a new theatre of conflict has
emerged in the Middle East, which has impacted the
state of peace and security globally. Since then, too, the
Security Council, in its wisdom, has adopted several
resolutions, including 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1515
(2003) and, most recently, 1850 (2008), aimed at
addressing that occupation, which is the longest known
in modern history. But the occupation persists and,
even worse, despite efforts towards a durable and
lasting peace, including the Quartet Road Map and the
Arab initiative, a comprehensive solution continues to
09-20163
elude us, not for lack of effort but through the sheer
intransigent practices and policies of the Israeli regime.

As recently as a year ago, in clear contravention
of its obligations under the Annapolis understanding,
the machinery of the Israeli occupation regime plodded
on relentlessly. The separation wall continued to be
constructed. The illegal Israeli settlements in the
occupied territories mushroomed. The network of
checkpoints and roadblocks continued to inextricably
hinder the movement and economic activities of
Palestinians.

How could one expect or even hope for a tangible
outcome from the peace process when one party, the
oppressed, is being asked continuously to make
concessions for peace when its homes are being
demolished, its lands and farms confiscated, its
families and communities separated and its children
uprooted schools and even killed in schools? The harsh
facts of life, especially for the children living under the
occupation, will bear negatively not only on them
when they enter adulthood but also on the prospects for
peace in the Middle East.

Indeed, the present situation is not conducive to
durable and lasting peace. The continuing loss of life,
the infliction of serious injury and the devastation of
property will only deepen hatred and divisions and will
not do any good to either party. Only negotiations
leading to a two-State solution will bring about a
durable and lasting peace for Israelis and Palestinians
and for the entire Middle East.

The path to peace is clear. Right now, we must
stop the violence and the killing. The Security Council
must act now. The Council must make every effort to
ensure that this Israeli military aggression cease
immediately. We reiterate that the Council must exert
every effort for an immediate ceasefire and the
deployment of an international force so as to de-escalate
the conflict and stabilize the situation, and establish
other confidence-building measures between the parties
with the objective of resuming the peace process. While
ensuring the implementation of the ceasefire, the
Security Council must also ensure the complete
observance of the Council's previous resolutions,
including among others resolution 242 (1967) which
clearly specifies that Israeli forces must withdraw from
the occupied Palestinian territories.

At the same time, we also call on the leaders of
Hamas and Fatah and implore them to initiate talks
3
immediately to resolve their differences.
Reconciliation should be a priority if these leaders are
genuinely committed to pursuing the objective of
creating a sovereign and independent State of
Palestine. Unity among the Palestinians themselves is
the most critical element in attaining a solution to the
predicament faced by all Palestinians.

Last year, we failed to make 2008 the year of a
peace treaty between Israel and Palestine as envisioned
in the Annapolis understanding. Let us concentrate our
efforts again on achieving the goal we set last year -
the solution of two States living side by side in peace
and security, with the creation of a sovereign State of
Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital. For now,
let us stop the bloodshed in Gaza before the situation
spirals further, leaving no chance and hope for peace.

