Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. We congratulate your sisterly country, and we
are fully convinced that you will successfully guide the
work of the Council during this very challenging time
thanks to your wisdom, your unfailing courtesy and
your well-known skills.

The issue before the Council today is a serious
matter and an issue that is fraught with danger. This
makes it incumbent upon all of us to act with wisdom
and objectivity. We were struck by the fact that the
Iraqi crisis, whose impact has been felt throughout the
world and which has led to extensive debate in the
media and in political and intellectual circles, has
received very limited consideration in the Council. We
would have expected the Council to broaden the scope
of its ongoing consultations so as to include non-
members, for the sake of justice and transparency. We
do not expect there to be heavy locked doors around
the Council, reducing discussion and limiting the
number of participants in consultations to no more than
five. The Council's responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security pursuant to the
Charter must, therefore, today more than ever, be
carried out with full respect for the provisions of the
Charter and with clarity and transparency.

There is no better time to translate our aspirations
into reality. The legality of measures taken and
resolutions adopted by the Council derives from the
mandate entrusted to it by Member States. It is the
Member States that have entrusted to the Security
Council the task of preserving international peace and
security on their behalf. Based on this logic, the
Council should not - and we certainly do not expect it
will - take important decisions without consulting the
membership early on in its discussions and, in
particular, the States directly involved at a later stage.
That twofold level of consultation is indispensable, if
the Council's decisions are to be universal in character.
That requirement cannot be ignored if the Security
Council truly wishes to reflect the will of the
international community.

We have all followed the developments in the
Iraqi situation, in particular the most recent ones. We
have all called for respect for international law and for
compliance with Security Council resolutions with
regard to the return of international inspectors to Iraq.
Iraq made a wise decision in accepting the return of
inspectors without restrictions or conditions. We
welcomed its decision at the time, believing it to be a
necessary step towards resolving the crisis, making it
possible to defuse tensions, avoid war and enable the
sanctions imposed on Iraq to be lifted, with full respect
for the requirements of international law, including
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Iraq and Kuwait and the resolution of outstanding
issues, such as the question of Kuwaiti prisoners of war
and missing persons. You will no doubt remember, Mr.
President, that the Beirut Summit of Arab States, held
last March, supported that position and welcomed the
reconciliation between Iraq and Kuwait.

We respect international law. It is our resort and
our refuge, if it is applied in a neutral and objective
manner without selectivity, or double standards. In this
connection, I would like to point out that the Security
Council proved itself unable to fulfil its responsibilities
in preventing Israeli attacks on the occupied
Palestinian territories. The Security Council preferred
to ignore the fact that Israel has refused to comply with
any ofthe 29 Council resolutions on the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories. Furthermore, Israel has
continued to develop weapons of mass destruction and
to threaten the peace and security of neighbouring
countries and the entire region.

The world does not need another war, in which
innocent people, including children, women and elderly
people, are killed or left homeless. The peaceful
settlement of disputes, in conformity with international
law in an equitable and objective manner, is the only
option for peace-loving countries. It is the only
guarantor of preserving international peace and
security in conformity with the principles ofjustice and
equity.

We must call for restraint. We must give the
inspectors the necessary time to discharge their
mandate, instead of hastily adopting new measures,
which will have a lasting negative effect. We believe
that the present situation does not require the Security
Council to adopt any new resolutions.
We should all recall that the Charter was adopted
for the purpose of saving future generations from the
scourge of war. This Council is entrusted with the
maintenance ofinternational peace and security. We do
not expect the Council, under any circumstances, to be
unleashing the dogs of war.

