The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
briefing by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on progress in the
implementation of its resolution 1244 (1999) of
10 June 1999.

"The Security Council commends the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the commander of the international security
presence (KFOR) for their ongoing efforts to
implement fully resolution 1244 (1999),
undertaken under difficult circumstances, and
welcomes the priority areas of work identified by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General.

"The Security Council welcomes the
establishment of a working group under the
authority of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General aimed at developing a legal
framework for provisional institutions for
democratic and autonomous self-government in
Kosovo and stresses the need for all ethnic groups
to be represented in the work of this group. It
underlines the need to keep the Government of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia informed on
the process. It calls on all parties to support the
efforts of the United Nations Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) to build a stable multi-ethnic
democratic society in Kosovo and to ensure
suitable conditions for Kosovo-wide elections. It

stresses the importance of a number of steps
being taken for the holding of these elections: the
establishment of the legal framework, in
particular the definition of the functions and
powers of the elected bodies; the development of
an integrated voter registry which should include
the refugees and internally displaced persons; full
involvement of all the communities in the ballot;
and a high security environment for the voting.

"The Security Council welcomes close
contact between the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and UNMIK and KFOR,
in particular the steps taken towards the opening
of an UNMIK office in Belgrade, which will
facilitate these consultations. lt stresses the
importance of substantial dialogue between
Kosovo political leaders and the Government of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

"The Security Council calls for an end to all
acts of violence in Kosovo, in particular those
which are ethnically motivated, and urges all
political leaders in Kosovo to condemn these acts
and to increase their efforts to create inter-ethnic
tolerance. lt reiterates the importance of resolving
the problem of the missing and detainees and
notes that this would be a major confidence-
building measure. lt welcomes the initial steps
taken by the Government of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia in this regard.

"The Security Council remains concerned
about the security situation in certain
municipalities in southern Serbia as a result of the
violent actions of ethnic Albanian armed groups.
It welcomes the ceasefire agreements signed on
12 March 2001 and calls for strict compliance
with their provisions. lt stresses that a peaceful
settlement of this crisis can only be achieved
through substantial dialogue. lt commends the
continued restraint of the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and Serbia. The
Security Council welcomes the plan of the
Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia for southern Serbia and supports its
initiative to find a peaceful and durable solution
through a process of dialogue and confidence-
building measures. lt expresses the opinion that
the swift implementation of confidence-building
measures would be an important element in a
peaceful settlement, and underlines the

importance of continued political and financial
support for this process by the international
community.
"The Security Council welcomes the
decision taken by the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) to authorize the
commander of KFOR to allow the controlled
return of forces of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to the Ground Safety Zone as defined
in the military-technical agreement signed in
Kumanovo on 9 June 1999 referred to in annex ll
of resolution 1244 (1999) as a first step in a
phased and conditioned reduction of the Ground
Safety Zone.

"The Security Council reiterates its strong
support for the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, as set out in the statement of its
President of 7 March 2001 (PRST/200l/7). lt
strongly condemns the continuing extremist
violence in parts of the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia supported from outside the country,
which constitutes a threat to the stability and
security of the entire region and underlines the
importance of maintaining the territorial integrity
of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
and all other States in the region. It supports
efforts by the Government of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia to cooperate with NATO
and other international organizations to end this
violence in a manner consistent with the rule of
law.

"The Security Council will remain actively
seized of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2001/8.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.45 pm.
