Ms. Samson (Netherlands): At the outset, on
behalf of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, I would
like to express our deep condolences to the family,
loved ones and colleagues at the Permanent Mission
of C6te d'Ivoire on the sudden passing of Ambassador
Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue. He will be sorely missed
as a colleague and friend who was truly committed to
the values of the United Nations and the work of the
Security Council.

Turning to Colombia, I would like to start by
thanking Mr. Arnault, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his clear and detailed briefing.
We commend him and the United Nations Verification
Mission for the excellent work that they are doing and
assure them of our full support. I also want to express our

sincere appreciation for the presence of Vice-President
Naranjo Trujillo and Foreign Minister Holguin Cuellar
with us here today. Their presence demonstrates the
ongoing commitment of their Government to continuing
to pursue peace.

The peace process is transforming Colombia. The
participation of the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Comun (FARC) political party in the peaceful
democratic parliamentary elections held on 11 March
was a milestone, and we congratulate all stakeholders
on the progress achieved. I would like to make three
points today. The first is on the need to improve the
security situation; the second is on the need for the
inclusive reintegration of former members of the
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-
Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) and the full and
effective participation of women in the peace process;
and the third is on the importance of a new ceasefire
between the Government and the Ejercito de Liberacion
Nacional (ELN).

First, I would like to highlight the importance of
improving the security situation in former conflict
areas. Significant progress has been made so far.
However, sustainable peace can be achieved only once
the civilians living in those areas can benefit from the
peace dividend. The Kingdom of the Netherlands is
concerned about new armed-group activity in those
areas. We welcome the Horus plan and encourage its
further implementation in coordination with other
national efforts to restore State authority. That includes
strengthening civilian institutions and the provision of
services. Improving the security situation is a first step
towards the sustainable development of such areas and
a peaceful future for its inhabitants.

The problematic security situation in former
conflict areas has also led to an increase in threats and
acts of violence against community and social leaders
and human rights defenders. Their protection should
be a key priority, particularly given the upcoming
elections. We appreciate the Colombian Government's
increased efforts to ensure that, which should translate
into an improved security situation on the ground.
However, those responsible for the threats and violence
must also be held to account.

My second point is that inclusivity is a condition for
the success of the peace process, and ensuring it is an
important way to address the root causes of the conflict.
The political, socioeconomic and legal reintegration of

former FARC-EP members must remain a priority. That
includes progress on the amnesty provisions, access to
land and productive projects. In particular, the Kingdom
of the Netherlands calls for women's full and effective
participation in the peace process. That includes the
implementation of the specific gender provisions
regarding security guarantees and the reintegration of
female former combatants. In that light, we welcome
the forum for gender focal points to be organized by
the United Nations Verification Mission, to which the
Netherlands has contributed.

Our third point is a message of support for the
resumption of negotiations between the Government
of Colombia and the ELN. We hope that the recent
challenges will be overcome and that the negotiations
will continue. We encourage all parties to commit
to a ceasefire agreement and to give peace a chance.
The Netherlands stands ready to support Colombia,
including as a member of the Global Partnership for the
Prevention of Armed Conflict.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
supports the peace process in Colombia, as well
as the people of Colombia. We therefore call on all
stakeholders to continue their efforts to implement and
uphold the Peace Agreement now, during the months
ahead and in the years to come. Together, they can
change the future of Colombia.

