Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): Africa is
on the Security Council agenda for the fourth time in
February - the fourth time in less than three weeks.
That frequency - testimony to the importance that the
Council attaches to African issues - is to the credit of
the Council, and, in particular, to the credit of China,
your fine country, Sir, which is known to be a good
friend of Africa.

We would like to thank Mr. Kalomoh, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
outstanding briefing, as well as the Secretary-General
for the comprehensive report that he has submitted to
us (S/2004/52). That timely report paints a realistic
picture of the situation in Central Africa and of the
relevant actions undertaken to implement the
recommendations ofthe Security Council mission.

Since the return of the mission, we have observed
significant progress in the transition process both in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Burundi, as
well as tangible signs of peace and reconciliation that
show the political will of the two Governments and of
others involved in the peace process to break the cycle
of missed opportunities and make a real commitment to
peace.

We welcome the peaceful changeover that took
place in Bujumbura, which made it possible to begin,
without incident, the second part of the transition
period, as provided for in the Arusha Peace Agreement,
as well as the inauguration in Kinshasa of a
Government of national reconciliation in accordance
with the comprehensive and inclusive agreement.
Those major events were a decisive turning point in the
peace process in those two countries. The obstacles
that remain to be overcome are considerable. They
require that all the parties redouble their efforts to meet
the timetables established, in order to put a definitive
end to the conflict.

At this current crucial stage, those two countries
deserve to be encouraged and supported in their efforts
to build a lasting peace for the well-being of their
respective populations. In the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and in Burundi, referendums under
conditions of transparency and credibility are the
cornerstone of the peace process and require that the
agreed measures be implemented quickly, in particular
the establishment in both countries of national armies
under unified command, and improvement of the
security situation, which is necessary in order to
organize the elections.

We welcome the commitment undertaken by the
transitional Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to make considerable progress, before the
first anniversary of its establishment, in the
establishment and functioning of the various elements
of the security forces, including the police, the close
protection corps and the army. If respected, that
commitment should provide even more encouraging
results with regard to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) in the country, the progress of
which is not meeting our expectations.

We encourage the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to define clear priorities, in
spite of the many measures it must undertake in order
to make more visible the country's progress towards
holding the scheduled elections. We are also pleased to
see the renewed commitment of donors to continue
their support for the transition process, through various
programmes in identified sectors, in agreement with
the transitional Government.

In that regard we welcome the very efficient role
of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), and in
particular its redeployment in eastern Congo to
improve the security situation there. We are gratified
by the constant improvement in relations between the
Congo and its neighbouring countries, and in particular
by the creation of bilateral structures of cross-border
cooperation to resolve shared security problems.

Concerning Burundi, while there are grounds for
hope in the recent peaceful transition and the admission
into the Government in December 2003, of the Conseil
national pour la defense de la democratic-Forces
nationales pour la defense de la democratie (CNDD- FDD), the situation, in our View, remains of great
concern due to continued fighting around rural
Bujumbura and in the north-western part of the
country, in spite of the decision taken in early January
2004 by officials of the Palipehutu-FNL (Rwasa) to
enter into direct talks with the transitional Government.
Today we urgently appeal to the rebel forces to lay
down their arms and to join the peace process taking
place in Burundi so that it can succeed according to the
established timetable.

We urge the international community, which has
shown remarkable generosity in its solidarity with
Burundi within the partners development forum which
took place in Brussels in early January 2004, to use all
of its influence to attain a comprehensive ceasefire in
Burundi as soon as possible.

In that regard, it is important that the help
promised to Burundi be promptly mobilized in order to
support the peace process as a whole, and that such
help, above all, contribute to financing the
implementation of DDR programmes that are now
under way in liaison with the African Mission in
Burundi (AMIB). We welcome the constructive role
played by AMIB, which has concretely proven the
determination of the African Union to work resolutely
to solve the conflicts that are afflicting the continent.
With regard to the deadlines and the need to speed up
the peace process, it is urgent that the Security Council
consider the request ofthe Government of Burundi and
of the facilitation and regional initiative for Burundi to
transform AMIB into a United Nations peacekeeping
operation.

All the efforts to stabilize the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burundi cannot assure a
sustainable peace in those countries unless they are
accompanied by a comprehensive improvement in the
situation among the countries of the Great Lakes
region. We therefore welcome the considerable
progress already made in the framework of
preparations for an international conference on the
Great Lakes region, and in particular the establishment
ofthe Group of Friends ofthe Great Lakes region.

My delegation supports the Secretary-General's
recommendations on strengthening the resources
available to the Office of his Special Representative for
the Great Lakes region to allow him to complete
preparations for the conference as soon as possible. It
is important today to take the opportunity of the
progress already made in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Burundi and the hopes for national
reconciliation that it raises to expedite the holding of
this long-awaited international conference on the Great
Lakes region. We are of the view that the conference
will help to capitalize on the current dynamic of peace
to achieve the stabilization of the whole subregion in
order to promote integrated regional development
through the rational use of its resources to bring well-
being and prosperity to its peoples.

