Mr. Nikolov (The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia): Before I start, I would like to thank Mr.
Steiner for his useful briefing and express my gratitude
for the statement made by Deputy Prime Minister
Covie. I would also like to thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to address the Security Council.

The Government of the Republic of Macedonia
welcomes the efforts and activities undertaken by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) to further improve the situation in
Kosovo, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. We believe
that the positive developments and the whole process
of stabilization of the situation in Kosovo will continue
in the future, if we work together to build a multi-
ethnic society and democratic institutions, consolidate
the economy, achieve substantive progress in the area
of security, strengthen the rule of law, reform the
judicial system, combat terrorism and organized crime,
and tackle crime and violence, et cetera. In this regard,
we also welcome the recently established benchmarks,
a concept being developed by the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative that we consider to be
of great importance for promoting the democratization
process in Kosovo.

In order to facilitate the movement of citizens in
Kosovo into the Republic of Macedonia, the
Government of the Republic of Macedonia has recently
abolished visas for the holders of UNMIK travel
documents and has taken a decision to recognize
vehicle plates issued by UNMIK. At the same time,
intensive efforts have been made to find practical
modalities for issuing temporary permits to Kosovar
citizens who own grazing lands in the Republic of
Macedonia, as well as for citizens of the Republic of
Macedonia who own land in Kosovo. This has been
done with the aim of facilitating movement within the
border area and the cultivation of land.

The protocol on police cooperation is in the final
stages of signature. Other memorandums regarding
customs and bus transportation are being prepared. The
Government has also decided to open a new border
crossing, Tanusevci-Kodra Fura, between the Republic
of Macedonia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
Furthermore, the Macedonian authorities have
established a solid channel for communication with
UNMIK for consultations on all of the above
mentioned issues in order to find practical solutions.
Nevertheless, the Joint Expert Committee mentioned in
paragraph 52 of the report of the Secretary-General on
UNMIK (S/2002/779) has never been established.

Before concluding, I would like to take this
opportunity to once again welcome the prompt and
decisive reaction of Special Representative Steiner
with regard to the declaration of local Kosovo
authorities renouncing the agreement on border
delineation and demarcation between the Republic of
Macedonia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
The Republic of Macedonia firmly believes that the
United Nations and the international community will
continue efforts to prevent any activities that could lead
to destabilizing the border area and the region as a
whole. In that regard, the roles of UNMIK under
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) and of the
Special Representative are of the utmost importance in
preventing possible consequences that could not only
affect regional security but could also be considered as
attempts that could damage the reputation of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
reaffirm the firm position of the Government of the
Republic of Macedonia with regard to the proposed
solutions to the problems faced by the local population
aimed at facilitating communication between the
people living on both sides of the border that must
fully respect the agreement on border delineation and
demarcation between the Republic of Macedonia and
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

