Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation): We thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Kosovo, Mr. Zannier, for his presentation of the
Secretary-General's report (S/2009/497) on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). We welcome the participation in today's
meeting of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
Mr. Vuk Jeremie, whose assessments we share. We are
compelled to note that the ideas offered by Mr. Hyseni
are often very different from the realities on the
ground.

The position of the Russian Federation on the
issue of Kosovo remains consistent. We are convinced,
as before, that resolution 1244 (1999) is still fully in
force and remains the international legal basis for a
Kosovo settlement binding upon all. The Russian
Federation fully endorses UNMIK's actions in
fulfilling its mandate and the provisions of the report
of the Secretary-General of November 2008
(8/2008/692). That document enshrines the primacy of
the United Nations Mission vis-a-vis other
international presences in the province. No one,
therefore, has the right to impede UNMIK's fulfilment
of its mission, including issues related to securing in
Kosovo the democratic standards established by the
international community.

At the same time, we continue to hear calls from
Pristina for the drawdown of UNMIK. We consider
these unacceptable and even dangerous. Any tolerance
of such suggestions will lead to a destabilization of the
situation, which has manifested itself lately in the
burning of vehicles belonging to international
presences.

On the basis of the lead role of the United
Nations Mission in Kosovo, we should build its
relations with the European Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX). Any attempt to question the
competence and authority of UNMIK or to replace it
with other international structures in the province is
unacceptable, as it would run counter to the Security
Council's approach package for the reconfiguration of
UNMIK, adopted in November 2008.

In the context of the completed reconfiguration of
UNMIK, the Mission should fulfil its functions in a
proactive and comprehensive way within the
framework of the mandate entrusted it by the Security
Council. We are concerned about attempts to
marginalize UNMIK's role, not only in the area of the
rule of law, but also in the context of the negotiation
process on the six technical issues. Representatives of
UNMIK should participate in all Belgrade-EULEX
meetings. Albanian Kosovars should also be more
actively motivated to cooperate on practical aspects of
restoring the daily life of the Serb community in the
province. What is important here is the active
participation not only of UNMIK, but also of States
with influence in Pristina. We note that the authorities
in Pristina, in contrast to Belgrade, have thus far
pursued a policy in this area that is not constructive.

We consider any further downsizing of UNMIK's
operational personnel to be unacceptable, as it would
limit its ability to discharge its Security Council
mandate, including on the issues of the return of
refugees and internally displaced persons, and the
protection of Serb cultural heritage. The situation in
that sphere is alarming. This outrage cannot be swept
under the carpet.

Regarding the municipal elections scheduled for
15 November in the province, we stress that UNMIK
and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) should carry out a
coordinated and status-neutral policy aimed at averting
tensions that could have unpredictable consequences.
This applies equally to the issue of the return of
Albanian Kosovar property in the North of the
province. The situation in this respect is marked by a
potential for explosive conflict, which has arisen
largely as a result of the illegal activities of Albanian
Kosovars.

We reiterate our readiness to continue political
efforts to elaborate a legally correct, fair and effective
settlement of the Kosovo issue. The next stage in that
context should be the oral hearings beginning
1 December in the International Court of Justice on the
question of the legality of Kosovo's unilateral
declaration of independence, in which Russia intends
to participate.

I have one further important point. We draw the
Council's attention to the unacceptability of the
arbitrary participation of Kosovo representatives in
international forums, including the United Nations and
its specialized agencies. Unfortunately, we were
recently witness to blatant violations in that regard.
During the high-level week of the sixty-fourth session
of the General Assembly, representatives of Pristina
enjoyed illegal, unfettered access to the Assembly Hall
and other Headquarters premises intended exclusively
for the official delegations of Member States. There,
these individuals engaged in bilateral contacts with
other delegations without the mandatory presence of
UNMIK representatives, as required under resolution
1244 (1999). Such flagrant breaches of the provisions
of resolution 1244 (1999) and of United Nations rules
and procedure are unacceptable, and we assume that
they will not happen again.

