Mr. Baublys (Lithuania) (spoke in French): We
would like to personally express our delegation's
gratitude to you, Mr. President, and your team for your
presidency of the Council this month.

(Spoke in English)

There has hardly been a day under the French
presidency without a public meeting of the Council,
and barely a day has passed without a briefing from
the presidency at the stakeout. The French delegation
has been superb in managing numerous emergencies,
including on Yemen, Boko Haram and Ukraine. We
also thank the presidency for focusing the Council's
attention on the issues of child recruitment and the dire
future of minority communities in the greater Middle
East.

Statistics do not lie. The Council's workload has
grown by leaps and bounds. Lately, the programme
of work barely leaves a window for the Security
Council Sanctions Committees and working groups to
do their work. With the establishment in March of a
sanctions committee for South Sudan under resolution
2206 (2015), the United Nations is managing a record
number of sanctions regimes. There are more informal
meetings, more complex negotiations and more
products. More demands are placed on Secretariat
bodies and interpreters. At some point, we will need
to review some of the Council's working methods and
the cycles in which items appear on its agenda, and to
consider keeping open at least a minimum number of
windows every month for the work of the subsidiary
bodies that operationalize the Council's decisions. The
ambit of the Council's work continues to expand. There
are ever more conflicts on a growing geographical map:
Ukraine, the Lake Chad region, Yemen, South Sudan,
Libya, Syria and Iraq, to mention just a few.

Despite strong early warnings, United Nations
mediation efforts, and political pressure from the
international community, Yemen stands perilously close
to a civil war. The relevant Council resolutions and the
presidential statement adopted the Sunday before last
(S/PRST/2015/7) emphasize the political unity of the
international community. Yet the Council's decisions
have not made a meaningful impact on the ground.
The Houthis have advanced to Sana'a, to Taiz, to Lahej
province and to the Al-Anad air base. The emerging
sectarian strife and disintegration of this country will
benefit only Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula, the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and their coterie.
The gruesome attacks on two mosques on 20 March are
a testament to that.

The Council has not been able to bring pressure
to bear on actors in Yemen, largely because we were
not doing enough. According to the Panel of Experts
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014), former President Saleh amassed up to
$60 billion, assets that have been used to undermine the
legitimate Government. The Houthi military venture is
no coincidence. Ali Abdullah Saleh was designated for
sanctions, yet the Council has been slow to identify and
freeze assets controlled through his family members
and entourage. We have listened carefully to the Panel's
call for new measures to be considered to restrict
the flow of arms into Yemen. Over the past 50 years
military actions have never proved a lasting solution
in Yemen. Only negotiations with all stakeholders will
lead to a sustainable solution.

When 29 students died in a Boko Haram attack on
a school in Buni Yadi in February 2014, the Council
received an early warning. The first Council reaction
followed in April. A year later, Boko Haram remains
a growing threat to peace and security in the region
of Lake Chad and beyond. A week ago, 500 children
went missing from Damasak in Nigeria. Kidnappings,
killings, pillaging, sexual enslavement and pure terror
perpetrated by Boko Haram have engulfed north-eastern
Nigeria and its neighbours. We welcome the steps that
have been taken to operationalize a multinational joint
task force. Military operations against Boko Haram
should be conducted in accordance with international
humanitarian law and human-rights law. In the Council,
Lithuania will support regional efforts.

Last Friday, the Council extended the arms embargo
on Libya, among other measures, one more time. As
Mr. Bernardino Leo'n, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, mediates between the parties to
form a Government of national unity, the fundamental
challenge remains. Libya is awash in weapons,
thousands upon thousands of miles of borders remain
mere markings on the maps, and terrorists, fighters
and smugglers operate in that back country at will.
Pouring more weapons into the region adds fuel to the
fire. Resolution 2213 (2015), adopted recently, again
calls upon Libya and international partners to address
the illicit transfer of small arms and light weapons
(SALW), manage stockpiles and destroy surplus or
illegal weapons. More transfers, in particular of small
arms and light weapons and ammunition, into Libya
will end up with armed groups. Increasingly, small
arms from Libya have seeped in substantial quantities
into sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle East and even
farther afield.

The failure to address systematically the
implementation of the embargoes and small arms
controls through disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and security sector reform in many of the
conflicts has led to recurring cycles of costly Violence.
How many of the 26 arms embargoes imposed by the
Security Council to date have achieved the objective of
restoring peace and security? We think that the Council
needs to seriously address the management of arms
embargoes by strengthening their design, particularly
in addressing the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons and ammunition, and by providing more
uniform support to States on its agenda. The Council
lacks the structural ability to identify, formulate and
follow up SALW embargoes in a systematic way across
the sanctions committees, peacekeeping operations and
relevant political missions. Lithuania looks forward
to receiving the recommendations of the Secretary-
General on how to address the implementation of the
relevant resolution 2117 (2013) in the forthcoming report
on small arms and light weapons. We look forward to
applying those recommendations, and we hope Council
members will support that effort.

Finally, let me conclude by wishing the best success
to the Jordanian presidency during the month of April.
The delegation may count on our support.

