Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Many times, we have put forth in this Chamber
the essence of the Russian position regarding the cause
and development of the internal crisis in Ukraine. That
general context is important to understanding our view
of the draft resolution submitted by the United States
(S/2014/189) for the Council's vote today.

It is a secret to no one that the Russian Federation
will vote against the draft resolution. We cannot go
along with its basic assumption, which is to declare
illegal the planned referendum of 16 March whereby
the people of the Crimean republic will themselves
determine their future.

The philosophy of the sponsors of the draft
resolution runs counter to one of basic principles of
international law, the principle of equal rights and
self-determination of peoples, enshrined in Article 1
of the Charter of the United Nations. That principle
is confirmed in the 1970 Declaration on Principles
of International Law concerning Friendly Relations
and Co-operation among States in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, and in a number of
other decisions of the General Assembly, as well as the
Helsinki Final Act of 1975.

We do not dispute the principle of the territorial
integrity of States. It is indeed very important. It is
also understandable that the enjoyment of the right
to self-determination involving separation from an
existing State is an extraordinary measure, applied
when further coexistence within a single State becomes
impossible. Moreover, as practice has demonstrated, in
the majority of cases, the realization ofpeoples' right to
self-determination is achieved without the agreement
of the central authorities of the State.

With respect to Crimea, that case resulted from a
legal vacuum generated by an unconstitutional armed
coup d'etat carried out in Kyiv by radical nationalists
in February, as well as by their direct threats to impose
their order throughout Ukraine.

It should also be noted that generally agreed
principles of international law are closely interlinked and
that each should be considered in the light of the others,
the relevant political context and historic specificities.
The political, legal and historic backdrop of the events
of today in Ukraine is extremely complicated. In that
context, it is useful to recall that up until 1954, Crimea
formed part of the Russian Federation. It was given to
Ukraine in violation of the norms of that time under
Soviet law and without taking into account the views
of the people of Crimea, who nevertheless remained
within a single State - the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics.

When the Soviet Union fell, Crimea automatically
became part of Ukraine. The View of the people of
Crimea was once again ignored. After the fall of the
Soviet Union, for more than 20 years Crimea attempted
to exercise its right to self-determination.

In January 1991, a referendum was conducted in
Crimea, resulting in the adoption of a law in Ukraine
regarding the establishment of autonomous Crimea.
In September 1991, the High Council of Crimea
adopted a declaration on State sovereignty. In 1992, the
constitution of Crimea was adopted, declaring Crimea
an independent state within Ukraine. However, in 1995,
through a decision of the Ukrainian authorities and the
President of Ukraine, the constitution was annulled,
without the agreement of the Crimean people.

We set out a number of other arguments in favour of
the legality of the Crimean referendum at the Council
meeting on 13 March (see S/PV.7134).

In conclusion, we wish to confirm that we will
respect the will of the Crimean people during the
referendum of 16 March.

