Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Abou Moussa, Head of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA),
for his briefing on the initial work of the Office and his
report on the Lord's Resistance Army-affected areas
(S/2011/693). I welcome Mr. Sylvain-Goma, Secretary-
General of the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS), and thank him for his
briefing. I also welcome Ambassador Antonio,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations.

I will discuss two points. The first is related to
the work of UNOCA. The expectations for this new
political mission are very high. It is essential that it
focus its efforts on a realistic number of priorities. In
that respect, the efforts undertaken to forge quality
partnerships with organizations in the region, in
particular ECCAS, are most welcome and should be
pursued.

Choosing from among the range of regional
situations requiring cross-cutting responses, such as
maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea or the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA), is also desirable, given the
limited resources of the Office. We call on UNOCA to
increase its collaborative efforts with United Nations
missions, primarily the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS), as well as with the family
of United Nations agencies working on such issues.

In regard to resources, we are grateful to the
Gabonese authorities for having provided adequate
logistical means to set up the Office, and we encourage
continued efforts to identify sources of flexible
voluntary funding.

Regarding the Lord's Resistance Army, we
roundly condemn the violence and massacres that it has
perpetrated over the past 20 years, beginning in
Uganda and extending to several Central African
countries today. The humanitarian impact, with
440,000 displaced in the most recent period, is
enormous and demands a strong and effective response.

We urgently call on LRA combatants to leave that
criminal group and to reintegrate into civilian life. We
applaud the efforts of MONUSCO in that regard and
encourage it to pursue its efforts.
Beyond the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
we would like to think about the best way to expand
that programme to include all of the countries affected
by the LRA, within the limited available resources of
UNMISS and the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic.

We recall that the International Criminal Court
has issued arrest warrants for the leaders of the LRA
and that those warrants must be executed. We
encourage the African Union to pursue and accelerate
its efforts to respond to that threat. In that regard, we
welcome the recent decisions taken by the African
Union on the mechanisms to be established to tackle
the LRA issue.

We recall the primary responsibility of States in
the region to protect their civilians from the LRA, and
encourage them to bolster their coordination efforts to
that end. Information sharing among the various actors
is crucial in effectively fighting the LRA.

In conclusion, we support the draft presidential
statement and would like discuss the situation in the
region on a regular basis.

