The Secretary-General: Let me begin by thanking
the Government of China for convening this meeting
to focus on enhancing African capacities in the area of
peace and security.

In my first days as Secretary-General, I attended
the African Union (AU) Summit in Addis Ababa. I
wanted to launch a new era of cooperation with the AU,
founded on a core conviction. I firmly believe that the
international community needs to change the narrative
about Africa and to establish a higher platform
of cooperation that recognizes Africa's enormous
potential and promise.

In the area of peace and security, the African
Union and the United Nations have a shared interest in
strengthening mechanisms designed to defuse conflicts
before they escalate and manage them effectively if they
do occur. Enhancing African capacities is essential both
in the context of our collective response to international
peace and security challenges as well as for the African
continent's own self-reliance. That is why, on 19 April,
Ijoined with Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, in signing the
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security. Our
shared objective is to work together closely on the basis
of the principles of mutual respect and comparative
advantage in all stages of the conflict cycle and to do
so systematically, predictably and strategically. We
are committed to institutionalizing our partnership
through formal annual consultations between the
Heads of the secretariats of both organizations. The
Framework includes four key action areas. The first
is preventing and mediating conflict and sustaining
peace; the second is responding to conflict; the third is
addressing the root causes of conflict; and the fourth is
continually reviewing and enhancing our partnership. I
will address each item in turn.

First, with regard to our joint efforts to prevent and
mediate conflict and sustain peace, the Framework's
effective implementation requires coordinated and
complementary action on the part of both the United
Nations and the African Union. We must identify
the underlying causes of conflicts, work closely on
developing joint analyses, share information and
strive to reach a common understanding on issues
that can lead to prompt action. They include key
areas of ongoing collaboration such as good offices
and mediation, electoral matters, human rights and
humanitarian assistance.

It is also critical to ensure that we build on our
work with subregional mechanisms with the aim of
tackling political disputes. In the Gambia, for example,
the strong leadership of West African nations, with the
support of the Economic Community of West African
States, the African Union and the United Nations,
made a significant contribution to reaching a peaceful
settlement to a political crisis. And in South Sudan,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
African Union and the United Nations are actively
coordinating efforts to achieve a durable peace,
including through a joint call for an immediate end
to hostilities and a comprehensive and inclusive
political dialogue.

Secondly, where responding to conflict is
concerned, the African Union and various subregional
organizations have deployed tremendous efforts to
develop and operationalize the African Standby Force
and its Rapid Deployment Capability. Under our new
Framework, we look forward to further supporting the
strengthening of the Standby Force and to exploring
synergies with the United Nations Peacekeeping
Capability Readiness System. We must also promote
coordinated efforts to confront new asymmetric
threats to peace and security such as terrorism and
violent extremism.

In Somalia, the United Nations continues to
provide logistics, technical and training support to the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and to
the Somali National Army. Despite many challenges,
our cooperation has helped to facilitate concrete results
that have yielded crucial progress, such as the recent
successful holding of elections. I firmly believe that
with predictable funding and enhanced support to
AMISOM, together with a coordinated effort to build
the Somali army and police force, Al-Shabaab can be
defeated, paving the way for a more peaceful future
for the people of Somalia and beyond. That is an
opportunity we should not miss.

In Mali, we must intensify our collective
commitment to further supporting the peace process,
with a focus on restoring and extending State authority.
I welcome the initiative taken by the Group of Five
for the Sahel to create a Joint Force, and I hope that
the Security Council will recognize the importance
of ensuring that it has a strong mandate and credible
funding. In the Lake Chad basin, we must continue to aid
the efforts of the African Union and the Multinational
Joint Task Force against Boko Haram, as well as other
regional initiatives aimed at countering terrorism and
violent extremism, ideally with more effective support.

The third pillar of the Joint United Nations-AU
Framework focuses on addressing the root causes of
conflict and emphasizes our commitment to increasing
cooperation related to peacebuilding and the rule of law.
Sustaining peace and continued development requires
strengthening national institutions in order to address
the root causes of conflict.

Fourthly, we should underscore the importance
of establishing a process for the continuous review
and enhancement of the partnership through regular
consultations and coordination. It will include staff
exchanges; joint fact-finding missions; strengthened
cooperation in promoting national peace infrastructures;
the mobilization of funding for AU peace operations
that are authorized by the Security Council; and the
prevention of violent extremism and illicit flows
of weapons and ammunition. The Framework also
emphasizes how critical it is to further advance the
agenda on women and peace and security.

Enhancing African peace and security capacities
requires adequate, timely and predictable financing
for AU peace support operations. In May, I submitted
a report (S/2017/454), pursuant to resolution 2320
(2016), That welcomed the African Union's decision
to fund 25 per cent of AU peace support operations,
a commitment in line with the AU's goal of achieving
self-reliance and African ownership in the area of peace
and security. My report included options for financing
those operations and highlighted the importance of
compliance and oversight in African Union peace
support operations through robust and effective human
rights mechanisms and a framework for conduct and
discipline. The African Union is working to develop
those capacities and the United Nations stands ready to
provide the necessary support.

Taken together, the Joint United Nations-AU
Framework, the adoption of the African Union Peace
Fund and resolution 2320 (2016) represent significant
steps in our efforts to reinvigorate cooperation with
the African Union. I pledge to continue working with
all Council members to further elevate our platform
of cooperation for sustainable peace, stability and
development throughout the African continent, and I
hope their deliberations on this important topic will
be fruitful.

