Mr. Hunter (United States of America): We thank
Special Representative Annadif for his briefing today
and we welcome Foreign Minister Drame to the Council
today. We very much look forward to working with him
and with Mali's new Government.

Every quarter, we sit in this Chamber and listen
to how the security situation in the centre of Mali
continues to deteriorate. We hear how violence against
civilians surpassed the previous quarter's reports. We
hear how attacks against United Nations peacekeepers
and international forces remain the norm and we hear
worries about how such volatility is spilling over and
destabilizing other Sahel countries.

In this reporting period alone, 333 civilians were
killed in intercommunal violence, with the latest
massacre being the deadliest incident in Mali since
2012. That is a sharp increase from the 43 civilians
killed in intercommunal violence during this reporting
period last year. Additionally, 148 peacekeepers have
been killed in hostile action since the establishment
of the peacekeeping mission. The United States pays
tribute to those who have paid the ultimate price and to
all the soldiers, civilians and their families who make
sacrifices daily in order to bring peace and stability
to the people of Mali. We offer our condolences to the
families of the most recent victims.

In addition to hearing how things continue to
grow worse, we hear how there is little progress
between the Government of Mali and the signatory
armed groups in implementing the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Four years after
signing the agreement, it seems as though the parties
and the Government are always on the verge of a new
understanding or a road map that will lead to progress on
the agreement's signature political and security tasks.

As we have said before, the status quo is
not acceptable. At the Council's March meeting
(see S/PV.8497) and in the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2019/2) that followed, the Council made
clear its dissatisfaction with the signatory parties'
performance on the benchmarks in resolution 2423
(2018). The renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) is our opportunity to demonstrate
that frustration and make changes based on evidence
and analysis. It is also an opportunity to show the world
that the people of Mali deserve better. Considering the
stark realities of the political and security dynamics in
Mali, the new mandate must achieve four key objectives:
pressure, balance, transition and performance.

First, we must continue to apply pressure on
the signatory armed groups and the Government to
implement the peace agreement. One way to do that is
by strengthening the Council's tools to respond when
signatory parties fail to meet the key benchmarks in a
mandate. Additional pressure can and should be applied
to ensure that inaction and obstruction have specific
and concrete consequences.

Secondly, the mandate must augment MINUSMA's
single strategic priority to support implementation of
the agreement with a second strategic priority that will
adequately address the worsening security situation in
the centre, focused on stabilization and the protection
of civilians. Nevertheless, we expect the Government
to do all it can, as soon as it can, in the centre to be the
enduring security and governance solution there and
for all of Mali.

Thirdly, it is essential to focus on the long-
term transition, or else remain in a reactive posture.
MINUSMA'S collaboration with the country team on the
integrated strategic framework was an important step
in that regard, but this mandate should further empower
the civilian and military leadership of MINUSMA to
begin identifying a plan for the Mission's transition
and departure and for other capable entities such as the
United Nations country team, the Government of Mali,
the Malian security forces and the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel to assume a greater role in
political, security and stability tasks.

Lastly, regarding performance, the political and
security realities demand that MINUSMA focus its
efforts on the peace agreement and on the centre.
This mandate must streamline its tasks to enable
MINUSMA to do that effectively. It must request that
the Secretariat increase its effectiveness in repatriating
and remediating poorly performing troops and work to
provide MINUSMA with capable, flexible forces with
minimal caveats. The mandate must set paradigms in
that regard so as to ensure that MINUSMA receives
adequately trained and equipped troops.

The Security Council must have the political will
and vision to adjust mission mandates as a result of
fact-based analysis. We cannot allow another year to
pass and be no closer to seeing progress on the core
political and security tasks ofthe agreement. The peace
agreement addresses important drivers of conflict, and
its implementation will have a positive impact on the
lives of Malians. We must expect political courage from
stakeholders on all sides to work together, break the
status quo and achieve real and lasting positive changes.

