I thank President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for the useful briefings. We appreciate the good cooperation between the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and the Government of Rwanda. Today's briefing, as previous ones, is a reminder to the Security Council that victims are still waiting for justice. The Government of Rwanda takes note of the transfer of Mr. Kabuga to the Mechanism and his initial appearance. Now that Mr. Kabuga is in the custody of the Mechanism, Rwanda expects from the court efficient proceedings and for the trial to commence and conclude swiftly in order to finally render justice, 26 years after the genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda and 23 years after Mr. Kabuga was indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda in 1997. A constant of all reports by the Mechanism to the Security Council in the past two years is the lack of cooperation from some Member States with the Office of the Prosecutor in apprehending remaining genocide fugitives, which the Council has mandated that the court bring to justice. It is quite troubling that some Member States continue to fail to honour their legal obligations to cooperate with the Mechanism in bringing to justice genocide fugitives. The Office of the Prosecutor has struggled to obtain the cooperation of Member States in apprehending fugitives, even where there were clear leads and evidence of their presence in those countries. The pronouncements of commitment to international law and justice are not credible unless matched by action. Rwanda will not tire in seeking justice for the more than | million souls exterminated during the genocide against the Tutsi in 1994. Two other issues stand out in the Mechanism's report that call for the attention of the Council. With regard to the issue of genocide denial, the Office of the Prosecutor has regularly reported on genocide denial. The court has expressed its grave concern in that regard and called for urgent attention to those issues by the Council. Action must be taken by the Council to condemn genocide denial and hold to account cases of contempt of the court and attempts to revise witnesses' testimonies. Finally, Rwanda disagrees with the characterization in the President's report on the issue of the resettlement of the nine acquitted and released persons. The report states that "the resettlement of the nine acquitted and released persons who are presently residing in Arusha and are unable or afraid to return to their country of citizenship remains unresolved. The present dilemma constitutes a humanitarian crisis that profoundly affects their rights." The qualification of "humanitarian crisis" in reference to nine free men living comfortably in villas paid for by the international community, in a residential area of the touristic town of Arusha - with cleaning, cooking, communication and all accommodation services, with freedom of movement and visits - 1s abusive. Rwanda wishes to remind the Council that, in all meetings with the principals of the Court, the Government has consistently made it clear that the nine Rwandans acquitted and released by the Court are free to go back and live in Rwanda, should they wish to do so. If they decide to do so, they will certainly not be the first Rwandans to return to Rwanda and live side by side with all other Rwandans in the enjoyment of their full rights. This has been the case for hundreds of thousands of Rwandans, former refugees, combatants and former genocide convicts who today live peacefully side by side with genocide survivors, a testament to the success of Rwanda's unity and reconciliation. That decision to return to Rwanda, however, is theirs to make. If, on the other hand, they wish to live in other countries, that also is their full right, and they should apply for asylum in their country of choice, as is the case for every asylum seeker. What we find highly questionable is why those nine free persons, who are today free men and have no ongoing proceedings with the court, should continue to be the burden of the international community.
