At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on the Russian presidency of the Security Council this month. I appreciate your efforts to lead the Council's work in the light of the many challenges facing the international community, particularly the repercussions of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. I am also grateful for the briefing provided by the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Nickolay Mladenov. Egypt associates itself with the statements submitted on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (annex 19), the Group of Arab States (annex 28) and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (annex 48). This year, as we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, which has given the peoples hope that security, peace and stability will be achieved worldwide, we continue to witness the decades-long suffering of the Palestinian people, despite the many resolutions adopted by the United Nations, particularly the Security Council, on that people's right to an independent State with East Jerusalem as its capital. The Palestinian people has remained under Israeli occupation and has been denied its right to self-determination. Although negotiations have been held, agreements have been signed and initiatives have been taken on the matter over many years, none has achieved its objective as a result of Israeli practices designed to impose a fait accompli and undermine the two-State solution in order to render the independence of a contiguous, viable Palestinian State unattainable. The world, including the Palestinian people, has faced many challenges recently as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, particularly with regard to efforts to contain the pandemic and provide the necessary medical supplies and materials. In addition, the economic repercussions of the pandemic have affected the ability of all countries, particularly donor countries, to help the Palestinian people. The settlement activities of Israel, however, have continued. The occupation authorities have persisted in confiscating land, expelling Palestinian citizens, destroying their homes and announcing plans to build more settlement units. At the same time, Israeli settlers have violated the rights of the Palestinian people in the West Bank. Holy sites, particularly Al-Quds Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa Mosque, have not been spared violent acts, despite the city's centrality to the followers of the world's three monotheistic religions. Although Israel has announced the suspension of its plans to annex Palestinian land in the West Bank, we hope that it will permanently cancel them, given that any annexation plans violate the rules of international law and international legitimacy, particularly resolution 2334 (2016). Egypt is also calling for a freeze on settlement activity. The continued construction of settlements, such as the recent announcement of 5,000 new settlement units in the West Bank, undermines the chances for establishing a Palestinian State. Such unilateral measures will only worsen the situation in the occupied territory and the chances for peace, and will adversely affect security and stability throughout the region. They will also lend support to extremist and radical voices that are hostile to peace and coexistence among the peoples of the region. Egypt has always asserted its constant position concerning the Palestinian people and that people's legitimate right to an independent State based on the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital. In the light of current developments, Egypt believes that the only way to uphold the rights of the Palestinian people is to halt Israeli practices in the West Bank and lift the blockade on the Gaza Strip. Those steps would create a climate conducive to the resumption of negotiations on the basis of a two-State solution, the Arab Peace Initiative, international law and internationally recognized resolutions. The other crises in the Middle East are not faring much better than the question of Palestine. Our region is increasingly affected by a dogmatic terrorist project that uses religion as a smokescreen to seize and monopolize power, destroying the principles of the nation-State and citizenship, without regard to the cost to the peoples of the region. It is regrettable that the United Nations and its organs continue to turn a blind eye to the crude and destructive actions of the Governments of a limited number of States in the region in support of these warped designs, while those States continue to spread terrorism, chaos and sectarian divisions, flouting the most important principles of international law. Those malicious schemes are doomed to fail. In the end, the solutions that will prevail are those that serve the interests of the peoples of the region and meet their aspirations for security and development through sovereign democratic States that respect the principles of citizenship and do not use religion as a smokescreen for political ambitions or expansionist fantasies. Egypt endorses the call for a global ceasefire, including the appeal made at an early stage by the Secretary-General, to enable the peoples of the region to address pandemic-related developments and lay the groundwork for a comprehensive political process based on the terms of reference set out in the relevant Security Council resolutions on resolving protracted regional conflicts. The United Nations must ensure that efforts aimed at peacefully resolving the crises in Syria and Yemen are guided by the peoples of those countries, free from foreign interference or dictates. Egypt also supports the efforts of the Special Envoys of the Secretary-General for Syria and Yemen to reach a political settlement, a comprehensive ceasefire and the implementation of relevant Security Council resolutions, and emphasizes the need for the Security Council to play a more active role in efforts for the political settlement of those crises, which may help to establish conditions for the voluntary and safe return of refugees. Egypt reiterates its deep concern at the alarming findings set out in the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2020/531), published in June. Those findings relate to the origin of smuggled weapons seized en route to Yemen, as well as to the missiles and uncrewed aerial vehicles used in attacks on vital facilities in Saudi Arabia last year - attacks that Egypt condemned in the strongest terms. Egypt maintains its firm position in support of the political settlement of the Libyan crisis under the aegis of the United Nations and in accordance with the conclusions of the Berlin Conference. That position is that a ceasefire must be established and hostilities must cease on the Sirte-Jufrah line, as stated by Egypt on more than one occasion. In order to complement the continued efforts of Egypt to support the political resolution of the Libyan issue - efforts that have included the Cairo declaration and the hosting of meetings of tribal elders and other leaders - the meetings of the Libyan military dialogue, which served as the first official talks between the Libyan National Army and the Government of National Accord and, to a great extent, paved the way for the meetings of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission in Geneva, were jointly hosted by Egypt and the United Nations in the city of Ghardagah this month. In that connection, Egypt believes that the best use must be made of the current opportunity to stabilize the ceasefire and stimulate Libyan political dialogue, with Libyans themselves playing a key role in shaping the future of their country and approving any future security arrangements. Under those arrangements, all foreign forces and mercenaries will need to leave Libya and well-known regional parties will need to stop playing a dubious role in undermining the security and stability of Libya and the entire region by transferring foreign terrorist fighters and mercenaries there to play roles that serve their own narrow self-interests. The time has come, 75 years after the founding of the United Nations, for the Security Council to assume its role in maintaining international peace and security, fulfil the hopes and aspirations of the peoples of the region to live in security and peace, preserve the region's resources, rather than squander them in conflicts, and guide efforts to build a better tomorrow for those peoples and for future generations.
