Mr. Mufloz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the Ambassadors of the United States and the United
Kingdom for their briefings on the situation in Iraq,
pursuant to paragraph 24 of resolution 1483 (2003).

The evolution of the situation in Iraq undoubtedly
arouses the attention of world opinion, and since the
last report received by the Council, we have seen the
violent action of partisan elements of the old regime
seeking to oppose the changes. Clearly, the task of
building democratic institutions in a country that has
been governed by despotism is not easy, owing to the
resistance of sectors that have lost privileges. In
addition, the task of building and achieving peace is
always more difficult than that of removing a
dictatorial regime.

The actions of the extremists - as we have all
been able to see - are directed not only against the

Coalition forces, but also against the United Nations
and other international organs. The premeditated attack
on the central offices of the United Nations on 19
August and the attack against the headquarters of the
International Committee of the Red Cross are
unequivocal demonstrations of an attempt to isolate the
population from the help and influence of the
international community. We are convinced that those
who perpetrate such criminal attacks are no more than
minority groups that cannot represent the feelings of
the overwhelming majority of Iraq's population, which,
we believe, wishes to have a freer, more democratic
and more prosperous society and to live in peace.

Given the prevailing security situation, the
Secretary-General has deemed it necessary to
temporarily withdraw all international personnel from
Baghdad. We regret that decision, but we understand
and respect it, for the very reasons for which he
adopted it. We know that the work of the United
Nations is still being done by local personnel, but we
hope that the security situation will enable the
Organization to resume its role under resolutions 1483
(2003) and 1511 (2003) as soon as possible. We are
aware of the Secretary-General's willingness in that
regard.

We Wish to join the international expression of
grief at the deaths due to the terrorist attacks that
occurred in recent days in Baghdad and Nasariah,
including today's attacks against hotels and other
facilities in Baghdad. It seems that the world is facing
the risk of terrorism as never before, and the
international community - and some countries in
particular - have had a rude awakening to this reality
of a threat that knows no borders.

Terrorism uses its support networks on the basis
of a globalized system to transfer people, funds and
weapons in order to perpetrate terrorist attacks, not
only in Iraq, but in many places around the world, as
we see daily in the news media. This new global
terrorism can be fought only through joint and
organized action by the international community,
particularly this Organization. So we have before us
the challenge of strengthening the measures that the
Security Council has taken with regard to the scourge
of terrorism.

As part of the international community's global
response to terrorism, I believe we must not forget
poverty, injustice and the day-to-day misery

Sll'V.4869

 

experienced by millions of human beings. Those
things - together with a lack of hope - provide a
breeding ground for the recruitment of extremists.

We noted with interest the announcement, on 15
November, of a plan to transfer sovereignty to the Iraqi
people in the coming months, in keeping with the
provisions of resolution 1511 (2003). This should
include the transference of responsibility for the
building of new national institutions in Iraq, within a
democratic framework of respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, as well as respect for minorities
and the broad participation of all democratic sectors,
including women.

We are grateful to the United States for the
information regarding the announcement by the
Governing Council of Iraq about the new institutional
arrangements, which anticipate, for the beginning of
2004, the adoption of a framework law that includes
procedures for the formation, by mid-2004, of a
transitional national assembly made up of people
elected by the various provincial councils.

The appointment of a national assembly and a
provisional government with sovereign powers will be
a decisive step in the devolution of sovereignty - a
step for which the Security Council has called. We
hope that that process will be completed in 2005, with
the election, on the basis of universal suffrage, of a
constitutional assembly charged with the task of
drafting a new constitution, as a result of which -
subject to approval by referendum - an election will
be held to choose, for the first time in Iraq's history, a
new freely-elected democratic government.

We hope that those arrangements will be
formalized to an even greater extent than as was set out
in the presentation given by the Governing Council of
Iraq to the Security Council. We are, of course,
concerned that all of these steps are threatened by the
security situation today and, in all probability, for the
foreseeable future. However, we are facing an
important, decisive step towards the building of a new,
more stable, democratic and independent Iraq that is at
peace with itself and its neighbours, assisted by the
strong and sustained support of the international
community in political, human and financial terms, as
demonstrated at Madrid.

In conclusion, I would like to say that Chile is
ready to cooperate by providing assistance in terms of
agricultural development and food for school-age

children, as well as with regard to other humanitarian
needs that we have identified, with the aim of
contributing in some measure to the goal of restoring
sovereignty to the Iraqi people and helping to build the
basic institutions of a democratic State.

