The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now proceed to the election of one
remaining member of the International Court of
Justice, in accordance with Article 13 of the Statute of
the International Court of Justice, to fill the remaining
seat that will become vacant on 5 February 2012.

Document S/201l/453 indicates, inter alia, the
national groups by which each of the two remaining
candidates was nominated.

On 10 and 22 November the Council conducted a
total of eight ballots. Today the Council will conduct a
ninth ballot.

The Security Council has before it a
memorandum by the Secretary-General contained in
document S/2011/452, describing the present
composition of the Court and setting out the procedure
to be followed in the conduct of the election.

I should like to remind the Council that, under
Article 10, paragraph 1, of the Statute of the
International Court of Justice,

"Those candidates who obtain an absolute
majority of votes in the General Assembly and in
the Security Council shall be considered as
elected".

The required majority in the Security Council is
eight votes.

The voting will be held by secret ballot. When we
proceed to the vote, members of the Council will
receive a ballot containing the names of the two
remaining candidates. No candidacy withdrawal will be
accepted once the ballot papers have been distributed.
However, it will be possible to withdraw between
ballots.

Members of the Council will be requested to
place an "X" in the box next to the name of the
candidate for whom they wish to vote. Only the two
candidates whose names appear on the ballot are
eligible for election.
2

I should like to remind members of paragraph 10
of the Secretary-General's memorandum, which
specifies that "[e]ach elector may vote for not more
than five candidates on the first ballot". Given that the
Council will now vote to elect the one remaining
member of the International Court of Justice, any ballot
paper containing votes for more than one name will be
considered invalid.

I should like to inform Council members that, in
accordance with established practice, the ballot papers
in the Security Council will not be counted until it has
been verified that the ballot papers in the General
Assembly have also been collected. The Council will
remain in session pending the receipt of that
information.

When one candidate has obtained the required
majority of votes in the Security Council, I shall
communicate the result to the President of the General
Assembly. I will request the Council to remain in
session pending receipt from the President of the
General Assembly of the result of the voting in the
Assembly.

At the 6551st meeting of the Council, the
delegations of Gabon and Nigeria were selected to
serve as tellers. The delegation of Gabon is unable to
serve as a teller today. The delegations of Nigeria and
South Africa have been invited to serve as tellers. I
invite the tellers to be seated at the tables behind the
Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mrs. Aguwa
(Nigeria) and Mr. Laher (South Africa) acted as
tellers.

The President (spoke in Russian): May I take it
that the Council is now ready to proceed with the
election of the one remaining member of the
International Court of Justice?

It is so decided.

The Council will now proceed to the ninth ballot.
I request the Conference Officer to distribute the ballot
papers.

Members of the Council should place an "X" in
the box next to the name of the candidate for whom
they wish to vote.

***
11-63468

The President (spoke in Russian): I take it that
all the members of the Council have now voted and I
ask the Conference Officer to collect the ballot papers.

*>l<*


The President (spoke in Russian): All the ballot
papers have been collected. I should like to remind
Council members that, in accordance with the
established practice, the ballots will not be counted
until it has been verified that the ballot papers in the
General Assembly have also been collected. The
Council will remain in session pending the receipt of
that information.

>l<>l<>l<


The President (spoke in Russian): 1 have now
been informed that the ballot papers have been
collected in the General Assembly. The counting of the
ballots in the Security Council will now begin. The
tellers will now count the ballots. As agreed in our
consultations, there will be two independent countings
of the ballots, one by each teller. I should like to
remind Council members that in accordance with
established practice, I shall wait for the General
Assembly to complete its count before I announce the
results of the voting in the Security Council. The
Council will remain in session.

>l<>l<>k


The President (spoke in Russian): The result of
the voting is as follows:

Number of ballot papers: 15
Number of invalid ballots: 0
Number of valid ballots: 15
Number of abstentions: 0
Required majority: 8
Number of votes obtained:
Ms. Julia Sebutinde 9
Mr. Abdul G. Koroma 6

I wish to inform members of the Council that I
have received the following letter from the President of
the General Assembly:

(spoke in English)

"I have the honour to inform you that, at the
84th plenary meeting of the General Assembly,
held today for the purpose of electing five
members of the International Court of Justice, the
following candidate obtained an absolute
majority of votes in the General Assembly:
Ms. Julia Sebutinde."
(spoke in Russian)

Accordingly, the same candidate has received the
required absolute majority of votes in the Council and
in the General Assembly. As both the Security Council
and the General Assembly have agreed on the same
candidate, the jurists Mr. Giorgio Gaja, Mr. Hisashi
Owada, Ms. Julia Sebutinde, Mr. Peter Tomka and
Ms. Xue Hanqin have been elected to the International
Court of Justice for a period of nine years, beginning
on 6 February 2012. I should like to congratulate them
warmly and to wish them every success in the high
office to which they have been elected.

On behalf of the Council, I would like to thank
the tellers for their assistance in the conduct of the
elections.

The Security Council has thus concluded its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.10p.m.

