Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): We
welcome to the Security Council today the Secretary-
General, whose presence today is as important as it
is appreciated.

Human rights violations that stir up hatred are the
direct cause of tensions and violence, sometimes to
the point of destabilizing entire countries and regions.
That is why the Security Council has already developed
measures to prevent abuses and protect human rights
within the framework of its mandate as the guarantor
of international peace and security. Today's important
debate, for which I thank the American presidency,
offers us a welcome opportunity to reflect on how to
strengthen the Council's action as early as possible in
crises but also during conflicts, so as to prevent, protect
and sanction, which are essential tools for preserving,
restoring and sustaining peace.

The link between human rights and the maintenance

of international peace and security is clear, and the
Security Council experiences that fact on a daily basis.
In Syria, six years ago, it all began with the outrageous
violation of the dignity and freedom of young adolescents
in the town of Dar'a. Those massive violations of human
rights by Bashar Al-Assad - violations of the freedoms
to demonstrate and peacefully assemble, as well as
torture and enforced disappearances - have led to the
conflict that we see today, one that is destabilizing the
entire region. Bashar Al-Assad continues to be guilty
of serious crimes by reasoning erroneously that he will
be able, through total repression, to put an end to a
situation that he himself created. Our responsibility is to
put an end to the headlong rush forward that confronts
us. France has long acted to enable the Security
Council to assume human rights responsibilities in
order to maintain international peace and security. In
that regard, the Security Council has been constantly
innovating on at least four levels.

First, the Council has adopted mandates for
peacekeeping operations and special political missions
that enable them to document violations and assist the
authorities in the areas of the rule of law, security and
justice, in particular in Mali, the Democratic Republic of
Congo and the Central African Republic. Peacekeeping
operations must continue to have the means to fully
and effectively implement those mandates. They have
a duty to serve as an example. In that regard, we
welcome the Secretary-General's stepped-up efforts,
in particular his zero-tolerance policy with respect to
sexual abuse. The Security Council has also used its
sanctions regimes to list individuals responsible for
violating human rights, as is the case, for example, with
respect to the Democratic Republic of Congo. That
aspect needs to be strengthened.

Secondly, the Council has established specific
mechanisms for children's rights and women's rights.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict and the Security
Council Working Group on the subject have made
considerable progress over the past 15 years, including
in situations that were not on the Council's agenda.
France has always been a leader in that field and has
been at the forefront of the international community's
efforts, which my country remobilized on 21 February
2017 with the adoption of the Paris Principles relating
to the status of national institutions for the promotion
and protection of human rights. We thank Sweden for
chairing the Working Group. We pay tribute to Leila
Zerrougui and have no doubt that Virginia Gamba will
carry out her mission with as much conviction and
efficiency as her predecessor. Considerable progress
has been made in the protection and participation of
women since resolution 1325 (2000). The women and
peace and security agenda can still - and still needs
to - move forward.

Thirdly, the Council has played its part in the
fight against impunity, which must be eliminated in
order to ensure lasting peace. It supported the creation
of the Special Criminal Court in the Central African
Republic, which enables Central Africans to assume
their responsibilities. In a complementary way, when
nothing can be done at the national level, the Rome
Statute provides for the possibility of the Security
Council making referrals to the International Criminal
Court (ICC). In the case of Syria, as we know, France's
proposal to seize the ICC with that issue came up against
the veto. We cannot agree to leave it at that. Recent
experience has shown that the right to veto cannot be
an unconditional privilege, if our Council is to be able
to fulfil its responsibilities fully, especially in the face
of mass crimes. That is the meaning of the initiative
launched by France and Mexico on limiting the use of
the veto. Some 99 States support the initiative today,
and the movement continues. Finally, the Council
has established a useful dialogue with human rights
bodies in various formats. Our exchanges could be
more frequent.

In order to allow the Security Council to play a more
effective role, France proposes to work on several tracks.
The first track is to have the briefings of the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General integrate
more systematically and more comprehensively
information on human rights situations gathered by the
peacekeeping operations and the teams of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.

The second track is for the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights to speak as often as
necessary in the Security Council on human rights
violations that could be warning signs, the causes of
conflict or factors aggravating an already evident
crisis. That is imperative with respect to Burundi,
where the calls for violence and the cases of torture and
rape relayed this morning by the High Commissioner
are of deep concern to us.

The third track is the search for more synergy with
the Human Rights Council, a body to which France
is very attached. The Security Council should not be
sealed off from the work of the Human Rights Council,
which the General Assembly has made the principal
United Nations organ for protecting those rights. Special
procedures such as the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic
must have formal access to the Security Council in
order to alert us and advise us as to our actions.

Finally, the Security Council's field Visits must
serve as an opportunity for it to establish systematic
contacts with civil society and human rights defenders.
The Security Council devoted an important share of its
latest visit to the Lake Chad Basin to that endeavour.

The protection of human rights is part and parcel
of the responsibilities of the Security Council in the
peaceful settlement of disputes and in responding to a
threat against peace or a breach of the peace. In failing
to protect human rights at all stages of a conflict, the
Security Council cannot effectively fulfil its mandate
to maintain international peace and security. That is
an essential component of both its effectiveness and
its legitimacy. Indeed, that shows how obvious are the
links between international peace and security, on the
one hand, and human rights Violations, on the other,
and how timely is the thematic meeting that we are
holding today.

In the same vein, the Council must be able to address
humanitarian challenges when they are consequent to
or fuel conflicts. Accordingly, France is very concerned
about the resurgence of famine situations in Nigeria,
Somalia, South Sudan and Yemen. We would like to
see the Security Council consider that topic, and we
propose as a first step that an Arria Formula meeting
be held during the next several weeks.

Human rights are our best guide in our efforts to
ensure lasting peace and international security. The
initiative of the Secretary-General for lasting peace
and the deliberations underway on peacekeeping are
convergent. We must continue that effort within the
Security Council so as to strengthen crisis prevention
and lasting peace.
Let us therefore meet that challenge together.

