Mr. Dacie (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English interpretation provided by the delegation): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999). I would also like to take this opportunity
to thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for the efforts he has made and the
commitment he has shown in addressing the problems
on the ground.

Upon careful study of the report (S/2013/254) of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for the
period 16 January to 22 April this year, I very much
regret having to say that the report highlights some
important security challenges. The security situation in
the north of Kosovo is still very fragile, and frequent
incidents are of particular concern. According to the
data available to us, 60 ethnically motivated attacks
were registered in the first four months of 2013,
20 more than in the same period last year. I also must
bring to the Council's attention the ethnically motivated
low-grade crimes, such as threats, intimidation and
theft. Even if such crimes often go unreported, they are
no less effective as a means of applying pressure than
are physical attacks. Moreover, their numbers are on
the rise.

In the reporting period, Serbia repeatedly showed
its willingness to make an active contribution to
overcoming the problems that have accumulated. Our
principal goal is to achieve a sustainable solution that
will help everybody in Kosovo and Metohija, on the
one hand, and preserve the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of the Republic of Serbia, on the other.
Serbia will continue to care about the Serbian people
of Kosovo and Metohija and to make efforts to ensure
the safe return and sustainable livelihood of Serbian
citizens living there. We are convinced that, even
though that is a very difficult path, it is the best way to
overcome the legacies of the past.

Since the formation of the new Government of the
Republic of Serbia, eleven rounds of political dialogue
have been held in Brussels through the mediation efforts
of Baroness Catherine Ashton, High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy. The next round of negotiations is scheduled
for 20 June. During the dialogue my country invested
considerable efforts and demonstrated great flexibility,
which was recognized by many international officials,
including Baroness Ashton herself. In furthering
the process, Serbia will continue to be guided by the
firm belief that the negotiations may lead to a solution
acceptable to all that will be a solid basis for building
lasting peace and achieving full security for all people
living in Serbia's southern province.

The six-month political dialogue resulted in the
"First agreement on principles governing normalization
of relations". The Republic of Serbia is determined to
implement the agreement. At the same time, allow me
to point out that this is the first agreement reached
between Belgrade and Pristina, as negotiations on a
whole range of important topics - such as the status
of the Serbian Orthodox Church, the protection of
cultural and religious sites, the return of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and property rights, as
well as the modalities for the implementation of the
agreement - are yet to be broached by the two sides.

The Republic of Serbia has great expectations of
future meetings of the teams for the elaboration of
agreement implementation plans. My country deems
that it is very important that the agreed provisions for
the implementation of the agreement should be put
into practice, reflecting the will and intentions of the
negotiators who initialled the Brussels agreement, and
that by the same token the status of the Serbs in Kosovo
and Metohija should be defined in very clear terms.

Let me also recall that the first agreement provides
for the establishment of the "Association/Community"
of Serb-maj ority municipalities in Kosovo and Metohija.
The Community will be invested with many important
responsibilities in the fields of economic development,
education, health and urban and rural planning. The
ethnic structure of the police and the judiciary will
be respected in the territory of the Community, while
the future Pristina armed forces will not be allowed to
enter the North without the permission of the Kosovo
Force (KFOR).

The survival of the Serbian population in the
province, both north and south of the Ibar River, is
linked directly to its physical security. Since June 1999
and the arrival of the international civil and military
presence in Kosovo and Metohija, almost 7,000
physical attacks have been registered in which 1,262
persons, 1,037 of them Serbs and non-Albanians, have
been killed and 1,818 injured. Out of the 427 towns and
villages in which Serbs lived prior to 1999, 311 have
been completely ethnically cleansed. Serbs do not live
there any more, but we want to believe that, over time,
conditions will be created for their return. In particular,
it is necessary that they be encouraged to return,
which can be achieved only by creating conditions for
the physical and economic sustainability of returnee
communities throughout Kosovo and Metohija. A
sustainable IDP return would provide an opportunity to
create a multi-ethnic Kosovo and Metohija.

It is with regret that I have to say that the process of
IDP returns to Kosovo and Metohija has been very slow
and difficult to sustain. The returnees are supported in
word rather than in deed; they are eventually left to their
own devices and face attacks by local communities.
They ask the Republic of Serbia for support or to return
to the place of displacement. Admittedly, it may be too
much to expect that the returnees will be welcome in the
communities to which they return, yet there is no doubt
that the relevant Kosovo and Metohija institutions are
obliged to provide at least basic living conditions, such
as physical security.

According to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), 22,982
persons have returned to Kosovo and Metohija since
1999, only 42.6 per cent of them from the Serbian
community. According to our data, there have been
only about 4,000 so-called sustainable returnees in the
past 14 years. Particularly worrisome is the fact that 47
returnees from minority communities were registered
in the first quarter of 2013, nearly half as many as in the
same period in 2012, when 87 returnees to Kosovo and
Metohija were registered.

Of particular interest are the assessments contained
in the report of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Mission to Kosovo and
Metohija from October 2012, in which it is contended
that the

"absence of a sustainable solution for approximately
235,000 displaced persons (DPS) from Kosovo
continues to pose a major challenge for all
concerned".

UNHCR in Geneva intends to end the financing
of programmes for IDPs in Serbia. Even though the
amount of $2.8 million earmarked for IDPS is to be
approved in September, regrettably no donor has yet to
pledge any money for the UNHCR fund for IDPs from
Kosovo and Metohija. I take this opportunity to call on
all to continue to help the displaced persons, as many as
96,000 of whom live below the poverty line.

The process of return has been made more difficult
by the fact that the system of the rule of law in Kosovo
and Metohija suffers serious shortcomings and has been
unable to provide proper protection against repeated
human rights violations, in particular the violations of
the rights of minorities. That is confirmed also in the
report of the European Court of Auditors from October
2012, in which it is said that, even though Kosovo is the
largest per capita recipient of financial aid in the world,
this assistance has not been sufficiently effective to
establish a proper system of the rule of law. The report
states that the European Union has helped Kosovo to
build certain capacities in the field of the rule of law,
but that the reach of the assistance to police and the
judiciary has been limited.

The position of the European Court of Auditors is
corroborated by the fact that the practice of arresting
members of the Serbian community continues unabated
and without explanation as to who is responsible and
the legal basis on which the contentious warrants are
being issued. This in no way helps to build confidence
or a sense of security within the Serbian population.

The presence of the international community in the
field is of decisive importance to the implementation
of all agreements. We therefore consider that the
United Nations should continue to coordinate the
work of the international organizations acting in the
territory of Kosovo and Metohija under its auspices
and that the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) should continue to carry
out its mandate and ensure that missions in Kosovo
and Metohija act exclusively within a status-neutral
framework as provided for by resolution 1244 (1999).

We have learned from experience that the role of
UNMIK in stabilizing the situation in the region is
irreplaceable. Although we understand the reasons
for the planned budget restrictions, we believe that its
present mandate must remain unchanged, its activity
enhanced, and its cooperation with the European Union
Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) made more efficient.

Of all institutions in Kosovo and Metohija, the
minority communities trust UNMIK the most, since its
political team addresses sensitive issues of exceptional
importance to the Serbian community, including the
protection of cultural heritage, raising the level of legal
and security protection, and the implementation of the
right to free return and reconciliation. We therefore
believe that, rather than be reduced, the UNMIK
political team should be strengthened as we enter an
even more sensitive period in which we shall be called
upon to implement agreements on these important
issues.

Of particular concern is the situation relating
to the suspension of the financing of the UNMIK
Administration in Mitrovica by the provisional
institutions of self-government and the establishment
of the so-called Mitrovica North Administration Office
without consultations or agreement with the Serbian side
or UNMIK, which is tantamount to an attempt to take
over the existing competencies ofthe Administration in
Mitrovica. I recall that the Administration in Mitrovica
was established in accordance with resolution 1244
(1999) and that its responsibilities and concrete powers
are defined in UNMIK Administrative Direction
No. 2007/12, by which the legitimacy of governance
is extended to the Municipality of Mitrovica by
establishing, on a temporary basis, UNMIK's direct
administrative responsibility for the northern part of
the municipality.

Nonetheless, the UNMIK Administration in
Mitrovica continues to perform functions in mediation,
reconciliation and conflict prevention, as pointed out in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2013/254), in which
it is also said that the Mitrovica North Administration
Office cannot exercise effectivejurisdiction in the north
of the province. Therefore, we expect that the question
of the Administration financing will be resolved soon.

Well aware of the magnitude and importance
of the task ahead of us. We have invested enormous
efforts and harnessed all our potentials with the aim of
achieving an agreement in order to make the life of all
in the province easier and to bring us closer to lasting
reconciliation. I must therefore bring to the attention
of the Security Council that, even though they comply
with all procedures, the officials and renowned public
figures ofthe Republic of Serbia continue to have access
to and stay in Kosovo and Metohija, belying the fact
that the so-called institutions of independent Kosovo
continue not only to violate their right to freedom of
movement but call into question their readiness to reach
an agreement.

Even though we understand that, unlike in Belgrade,
considerable political forces exist in Pristina that are
opposed to any agreement whatsoever, we cannot
understand the absence of response in cases of violation
not only of laws, but of basic civilizational norms. We
understand, for instance, that the devastated Serbian
cemetery in southern Mitrovica can never be restored
to its previous state, but we do not understand why
nothing is being done to bring the perpetrators of the
vandalism to justice or to prevent future devastations
or restore the cemetery. Surely, we would insist on
such measures being taken in northern Mitrovica
had the local Muslim cemetery ever been desecrated,
which has not been the case. The attacks against the
Serbian Orthodox Church, its facilities and clergy and
the plundering of churches and monasteries continue
unabated. Although all of the cases have been reported
in a timely manner to the Kosovo police and KFOR, no
report on the investigation results has been received in
any particular case and no perpetrator has ever been
apprehended. Such attacks are tolerated even in the
case of an attempt to protect the Serbian heritage, such
as the Supreme Court of Kosovo's decision confirming
the ownership of the Deeani Monastery by the Serbian
Orthodox Church. The demonstrations at Decani were
organized after that decision by the Self-Determination
Movement and officials of the Decani municipality and
ended only after KFOR intervention. That protest is
just another example of the instigation to ethnic hatred
and religious intolerance by Albanian extremists and
another reason why KFOR should stay in Kosovo and
Metohija. I thank the United States for its decision not
to reduce its contingent.

I would like to highlight the question of the Serbian
cultural heritage and religious sites in Kosovo and
Metohija, which will be one of the topics of future
negotiations between Belgrade and Pristina. In that
context, the establishment ofa specialized, multi-ethnic
unit for the protection of cultural heritage and religious
sites within the Kosovo police is a positive, but
insufficient step in the right direction of providing
additional guarantees for the security of the cultural
heritage and religious sites in Kosovo and Metohija,
especially because the Serbian population and Orthodox
clergy do not trust the Kosovo police.

The Government of the Republic of Serbia also
has no confidence in the privatization carried out by
the Kosovo Privatization Agency, formally the Kosovo
Trust Agency. We deem the process to contravene
international and European conventions on human
rights, since it disregards the rights of the legal owners.
Let us recall that the Republic of Serbia invested billions
of dollars in public companies in Kosovo and Metohija
over many decades, and, as a guarantor, continues to
pay international creditors the instalment payments
for loans taken out to help companies in Kosovo and
Metohija. The rights of workers in non-majority
communities, especially the IDPs, who are to receive
part of the proceeds from the sale of such companies,
are threatened by the privatization.

The privatization of public and State-owned
companies in Serbian communities is also of particular
concern. The sale of those companies to persons of
Albanian nationality, with capital of suspect origin,
have resulted in the loss of economic resources in
these communities and is instrumental in stepping up
the exodus of the Serbian population from Kosovo and
Metohija for economic reasons and owing to the lack
of security.

In the previous political process, my country,
notwithstanding the unilateral nature of the declaration
of independence of Kosovo, granted a limited
international status and legitimacy to the provisional
institutions of self-government in Pristina. It considers,
however, that negotiations at a high political level
should be conducted without addressing the question of
the international and State legal status of the provisional
institutions in Pristina. The goal is to establish
administrative organs in the province that will be
respected by all of the parties included in the process,
with formal, legal and political guarantees at the level
of the province and the international community for
the political, territorial and other rights of national
communities throughout the territory of Kosovo and
Metohija.

The Republic of Serbia has already demonstrated
its openness to dialogue and will maximize its
efforts to overcome the current difficulties in the
relations between the Serbian and Albanian peoples.
The unreduced presence of UNMIK is of paramount
importance for our efforts in order to ensure the
effective advice of the Security Council and the United
Nations, which play an irreplaceable role in providing
legitimacy to the comprehensive solution.

It is evident that, owing to the long-standing
problems presented in the report of the Secretary-
General, the non-majority population in the province
has concerns. The respect for human and minority
rights, the protection of the interests, life, cultural and
religious heritage of all citizens alike, as well as the
full implementation of the European standards in all
areas are the goals for which we intend to fight with
determination and resolve. We believe, that, by insisting
on those values, the Balkans can overcome its past and
use its multi-ethnicity as a precious asset, which it is,
rather than as a source of conflict. Despite all of those
problems, historic progress has undoubtedly been made
in the period between the two meetings of the Security
Council dealing with Belgrade-Pristina relations. Much
more courage is needed to talk peace, much less to
begin a war.

Serbia is resolved to commit the past to the past,
which we know we cannot change. What we can
do though is to shape our present and our future. At
this historic moment, we expect the international
community to give an impetus to the implementation
of the agreement and the building of regional stability.
That is the support that I expect from members of the
Security Council and from the Council of the European
Union, which is expected to decide on the opening of
the European Union membership negotiations.

Iwould also like to use this opportunity to encourage
the authorities in Pristina to find a compromise and a
common language in the interests of our people and
our common future. Many meetings of the Security
Council have been convened to discuss wars, sanctions
and bombings in the territory of the former Yugoslavia.
It is now time that we convened meetings to discuss
the consolidation of peace and the better future of our
people.

