Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to offer our greetings to the Permanent
Representative of Nepal, whose presence in the
Security Council is welcomed by Costa Rica.

We listened to Mr. Ian Martin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Nepal, who
updated us on the situation in Nepal and provided an
analysis of what the Secretary-General and he consider
to be that country's main achievements, challenges and
problems in the light of the new situation following the
elections for the Constituent Assembly, the declaration
of its new status as a federal and democratic republic,
and the announcement that, as we hope, a president
will be elected tomorrow. We thank Mr. Martin for his
presence and for his contributions to that process and
this debate.

Given all that, and with regard to the case of
Nepal, we should consider the challenges and problems
of societies that have undergone such profound
changes. On the one hand, it is commendable that the
Nepalese have chosen to establish a democratic
republic as their form of Government. On the other, it
is imperative to bear in mind that such a Government
does not take shape spontaneously or easily - quite
the contrary. All too often, when peoples have been
subjected to totalitarian forms of Government, they
find that, once they have gained the freedom to
establish institutions that respect the will of the
majority, peaceful dissent, pluralism and basic human
rights, divisions of class, culture, aspirations and
experience forcefully emerge. In addition, new
obstacles - sometimes unforeseen and unimagined -
emerge in the building of a democracy.

In such circumstances, what is required is firm
and illustrious leadership, endowed with vision and a
sense of history, to help guide the people in a
constructive manner and to prevent petty, egoistic
interests or demagoguery removed from reality from
prevailing. This is the time to learn to compromise,
while fighting by legitimate means for the interests of
those who are being represented. It is precisely the
time for the force of arms to give fully way to reason.

Nepal has begun to build its democracy, and the
United Nations must continue playing an important
role in that process. That is why Costa Rica has
supported the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN) for an additional
six-month period. During that period, we hope that the
political parties and their leaders, assisted by civil
society in its diverse forms, will begin to address in a

democratic manner the problems related to the needed
strengthening of the police forces, both with regard to
the crucial technical aspects of providing security for
the population, and with regard to human rights and the
rule of law. Incidents such as those in which certain
police sectors were involved after the elections must
not recur.

For Costa Rica, the involvement of children in
armed conflicts is unacceptable. We know that, in
Nepal as in other countries that have experienced
serious and bloody conflict, it is a reality that cannot be
hidden. Nevertheless, we call for the swift
demobilization of those individuals and for their social
reintegration, given their status as minors. To that end,
they must be offered education, health care and
opportunities so that they can realize their potential as
human beings. Impunity too is unacceptable for Costa
Rica. Therefore, we believe that Nepal should establish
transitional justice mechanisms that will guarantee
respect for the rights both of victims and of the
accused. There will be no lasting peace without justice.
It is unacceptable for those who carried out acts of
extrajudicial justice, whichever group they belong to,
not to be tried appropriately.

The issue of human rights is fundamental. It is
part of the foundation upon which the United Nations
is built. We know that the National Human Rights
Commission of Nepal and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in that
country have been working together. We hope to see
that collaboration strengthened and yielding the
anticipated results.

As we see it, the extension of UNMIN's mandate
has one central aim: disarmament, including the
management of the arms of personnel in cantonments
and the integration of such personnel into the Nepal
Army or other activities beneficial to them and to the
country, thus completing the reconciliation and
peacemaking process in accordance with the content of
paragraph 64 of the Secretary-General's report.

That should be UNMIN's main undertaking
during this phase, while other United Nations offices
and entities, as well as the Nepalese Government and
civil society, should focus on other aspects and tasks
that are indispensable to peaceful, democratic
reconstruction. Activities related to arms, peacemaking
and reconciliation constitute the main added value that
UNMIN can provide during this delicate period.

Costa Rica understands that peace, human rights
and socio-economic development are the three pillars
of the raison d'etre of the United Nations. That is no
coincidence. It is the logical conclusion after observing
the history of humankind. Nepal has now broached a
new phase of peace and the further strengthening and
protection of human rights, at a time when the global
economy is in not in the best of situations. The rapid
surge in the prices of oil and basic foodstuffs has had
an impact on broad sectors of the population, in
particular in least developed countries. That further
complicates the tasks that lie ahead of the people and
leadership of Nepal. In turn, it requires great wisdom
and solidarity, and we trust that they will exhibit both
of those.

Finally, we would like to indicate that Costa Rica
has stressed the need to establish a clear date or
benchmark for the conclusion of the Mission. That
emphasis has several purposes, including, first, to
remind ourselves, the United Nations, that missions
cannot be extended indefinitely. Secondly, the
Nepalese, who have retained control and ownership of
the process, should exercise this fully as of a particular
moment. At the same time, they should have all the
time they need to prepare for that; the same applies to
the troop-contributing countries and all those
participating in the Mission.

Furthermore, in this specific case, this will also
send a signal to the Nepalese leaders that time is
marching on and that they must therefore redouble
their efforts to reach agreement and undertake action.
Especially with regard to the demobilization or transfer
of combatants, leaders cannot shirk that difficult and
delicate task, even though it entails costs of several
kinds. It would thus be better to proceed while UNMIN
is present on the ground in order to draw on all the
assistance that the Mission can provide - albeit within
a defined time limit. It is not about trying to rush
matters or attempting to do things before it is possible.
Rather, it is about expediting action and acting
accordingly.

The people of Nepal are putting an end to years
of armed confrontation and are on a new path towards
prosperity. Costa Rica wishes them well in that
endeavour and reiterates its staunch support, in areas
where we can be of assistance, so that the success
gained to date can be further built upon.

