Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank you
so much, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. I
also thank the briefers - Assistant Secretary-General
Zerihoun; Under-Secretary-General O'Brien, who has
led for so long on this issue and challenge; and, above
all, Ms. Askira, for sharing the vital voice from the
ground. I think what she described speaks to what the
briefers have noted, which is the generosity of people,
who have so little themselves, and how generous they
have been in opening up their homes to these internally
displaced persons. The fact that the vast majority ofthe
displaced in Maiduguri live with other families who
themselves are struggling to deal with this threat and
to deal with very difficult socioeconomic conditions,
really demonstrates tremendous goodness. Ms. Askira
is an embodiment of that and I thank her.

In 2016, a famine likely happened on our
watch - not in one of the places that dominates the
Security Council's agenda, but in the Borno state of
north-eastern Nigeria, in the area of Bama - a likely
famine. Severe fighting kept humanitarian agencies
from reaching Bama for nearly 18 months. When they
were finally able to access the town and assess the
situation, they found that at least 2,000 people in Bama
had died from the effects of famine last year, mostly
young children.

The situation in Bama has since improved somewhat
with the arrival of aid. But right now, across north-
eastern Nigeria there are far more towns that are not
getting food assistance, where people are experiencing
the most extreme levels of hunger. As many as 800,000
people are living just like the people of Bama last year,
cut off from food aid; 800,000 people who are at acute
risk - as we sit here - of literally starving to death.

Famines, as we all know, are not natural
occurrences. Famines are man-made. The fact that
anyone could be experiencing famine conditions in
the year 2017 should spur the Council to do everything
it possibly can to ensure that food assistance reaches
those who are starving. The world does not lack for food
to send, but aid workers need more funding and they
need greater security. And the Nigerian Government,
at every level - federal, state, and local - must
collaborate with United Nations humanitarian agencies
and international non-governmental organizations to
get aid out the door. If famines are man-made, that
means that the solutions are man-made as well.

To be clear, it is impossible to overstate the savagery
of Boko Haram - the savagery of the group that has
set in motion the events that have given rise to these
conditions and the misery that they have caused around
the Lake Chad basin. This is a terrorist group that
forces mothers with infant children and girls as young
as 9 years old to walk into markets and detonate suicide
vests. Boko Haram fighters systematically enslave and
rape women and girls in camps deep in the forest, force
marriages and brainwash defenceless victims to get
them to carry out more attacks. They forcibly conscript
boys to fight in Boko Haram's ranks, and they hold
those boys in captivity in virtual enslavement against
their will.

The Chibok girls kidnapped more than 1,000 days
ago from their school remain the most well-known
example of Boko Haram's brutality, with 195 of the
original 276 girls still in captivity to this day. They are
among the thousands and thousands of people held by
Boko Haram, as millions across the region live in fear
that Boko Haram will capture them or their loved ones
next. The deepening linkages between Boko Haram and
the Islamic State are alarming and ominously suggest
that such a clear and present threat to international
peace and security may get worse.

As the Council has heard, the statistics are grim.
According to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, there are 1.64 million internally
displaced persons (IDPs) in north-eastern Nigeria
alone. Because that area remains so insecure, owing to
Boko Haram, 76 per cent of the IDPs fear going back to
their homes, where they could plant crops and take care
of themselves and their families. Across the entire Lake
Chad basin region, 5.1 million people are food-insecure,
which includes 455,000 with what the United Nations
system and others call severe acute malnutrition.
In plain English, severe acute malnutrition means
that if those 450,000 kids do not get food rations and
emergency nutrition interventions quickly, one out of
five of those 450,000 will likely die.

Statistics alone cannot convey the human cost of
the crisis or the extent of the brutality that drives it.
Last spring, I visited refugees camps in the region - in
Cameroon and Nigeria - to meet with victims of Boko
Haram. I have seen many refugee camps over the course
of my career, but meeting those who fled from Boko
Haram was like nothing I had ever experienced before.
Virtually every individual whom I met described for
me either a close relative who had been slaughtered by
Boko Haram or an experience where they had had a
child who was literally grabbed from their arms - an
infant child, daughter or son. The marauders just came
in and stole their child. Many of us here are parents and
can well imagine how a parent must feel remembering
the clutching and the cries of their child as they were
taken by such savages.

In the wake of crimes like that, those broken,
shattered families are too frequently stuck in squalid
IDP camps, with virtually no services, no health care
and no education. Those are the people now dying
because assistance is not getting through fast enough.
I would urge the Council to witness that situation up
close, travel to the region to see the crisis and meet
the families, speak to men who have seen their wives
and daughters dragged off into the bush, women who
have watched their sons gunned down before them.
We must be emboldened by their pain. There should
be more people here in the Security Council Chamber
for today's discussion. This kind of thing is not run of
the mill. It is an extreme crisis, and we have to draw
more coverage to it. I think that a trip could help to
achieve that. But we also have to bring a greater sense
of urgency to our deliberations.

It is definitely the case that there are many in the
Nigerian Government - and I know that we will hear
from our Nigerian colleagues - who are working
tirelessly to save lives. On the other hand, we continue
to see reports, including this week, of some who dispute
the magnitude of the crisis and state that humanitarian
agencies are exaggerating the statistics. Some have even
maligned the role of the United Nations in delivering
lifesaving assistance. It is extremely important that
United Nations officials be able to get in there and visit
people in need so that they can ascertain in an impartial
way what the needs are.

Part of what is causing some of the access issues
is a concern about the rampant insecurity, a concern
about Boko Haram, and that is a very legitimate concern
and something that preoccupies the humanitarian aid
workers in the region as well. But it is essential for the
aid groups, the United Nations and the Government
to expeditiously develop a plan for improving access.
Nearly every time the humanitarian agencies acquire
access to a new location that had previously been
off-limits, the needs encountered prove far worse
that had been imagined before. For example, when
United Nations agencies and other non-governmental
organizations arrived in the town of Rann in Borno
state on 22 December, just a couple of weeks ago, aid
workers discovered around 400 fresh graves of people
who had just died of hunger and untreated illness.

What more can the Council do? In order to defeat
Boko Haram, the international community has to
generally devote far more resources to supporting
a more effective, regionally led military response.
Here too, there are positive signs. Together, Nigeria,
the Niger, Chad, Cameroon and Benin are slowly but
steadily improving regional military coordination.
Boko Haram controls a small fraction of the territory
it had back in 2015. The military operations of those
countries deserve our collective support, and the United
States is dispatching advisers, sharing intelligence and
providing training, equipment and logistic support to
our partners. But there is no separating the imperative
of defeating Boko Haram from the need to address
the humanitarian catastrophe unfolding in the region.
That means that Governments must facilitate access
for humanitarian organizations, and I cannot stress
access enough.

The Nigerian Government must work with the
United Nations and regional Governments to develop
options for delivering aid to more areas, even near
the front lines. Although we know that the military
operations must continue, humanitarian organizations
are ready. They work in war zones all the time, but they
need permission to move in. In some cases, security is
still fragile, so the aid groups can reach communities
only with the help of armed convoys that must be
coordinated with the Nigerian military. Unfortunately,
coordinating aid with the availability of armed convoys
is now turning into a serious bottleneck, a serious
impediment. The Government and the United Nations
will need to work together on expediting aid delivery.
It is a logistic and operational question that needs to be
resolved soon.

Donors have to do far more. As we have heard, the
Lake Chad basin region has become the site of one of the
world's greatest overlooked crises, and I think that we
see it in the modest level of interest in today's meeting.
The United Nations 2016 humanitarian appeal ended
up just half-funded. The States Members of the United
Nations need to move quickly to donate the $1 billion
that the United Nations has requested for this year.
Let me conclude with a final suggestion, and
that is, once again, to reinforce my claim that far
more Security Council involvement is needed. What
we are discussing today is a transnational, counter-
terrorism challenge involving one of the world's most
dangerous terrorist groups, and the region's desperate
humanitarian needs are the result of that group's
monstrous actions. The situation in the Lake Chad
basin region presents therefore the textbook definition
of a threat to international peace and security. It is what
the Council is on this Earth to address.

Let us do it then; let us see the crisis for ourselves.
Let us demand that the United Nations and its partners
have access to the millions of people who so badly
need food, water and medicine, and let us look for
other ways to have the United Nations play a positive
role, such as helping to reintegrate the victims of Boko
Haram's violence - too many of whom, as we have
heard, carry a stigma when they are freed or manage to
escape. Or, after discussing on Tuesday the importance
of sustaining peace (see S/PV.7857), let us work on
rebuilding institutions in that region.

The need could not be more urgent. In an interview
last week, a Me'decins sans frontieres doctor talked
about what it was like to visit camps in Borno, Nigeria.
She said,

"when I go to the field, I am used to being
surrounded by a lot of kids, but in Borno, the kids,
especially children under five, were missing. Most
of them have, unfortunately, already died".

A 31-year-old mother in Cameroon named Dayo
told an aid worker that she was sometimes so hungry
that she was losing her senses. Dayo said,

"When somebody spoke to me, I couldn't even tell
if it was a man or a woman".

Or finally, Awa Mudu, stranded in another IDP
camp, was interviewed coming back from a nearby
forest, carrying some leaves to eat. As Awa said, "The
leaves are not enough to live on, but that is all we have."
The Council can help give the people of the Lake Chad
basin, people like Awa, more to live on. But we must
do far more.

