Mrs. Mungwa: Allow me to join previous
speakers in commending you, Mr. President, for
organizing this important meeting and for the invitation
extended to our Mission to participate. Thank you also
for the concept note to facilitate the meeting. Our
appreciation also goes to the Under-Secretaries-
General for Field Support and for Peacekeeping
Operations, Ms. Susana Malcorra and Mr. Alain
Le Roy, for so kindly sharing the executive summary
of their non-paper on the New Horizon and for their
briefings to the Security Council this morning. The
African Union certainly looks forward to receiving the
full non-paper in order to continue engagement in that
process.

This important meeting is taking place at an
equally important moment for the African Union
because the preparatory meetings for the thirteenth
ordinary session of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the African Union are already under
way in Sirte, Libya. I would therefore like once again
to extend our apologies for the absence of my
Ambassador, Her Excellency Mrs. Lila Hanitra
Ratsifandrihamanana, Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations, who is away
from New York this week to attend those meetings.

Issues of peace and security rank high on the
agenda of the ongoing summit meetings of the African
Union, and so, as we launch the discussions on the
New Horizon for United Nations peacekeeping, we
wish, at this initial stage, to express to the Security
Council through you, Mr. President, the appreciation
and strong support of the African Union for that
important process.

As the Security Council is aware, since its
inception in 2002, the African Union has been actively
involved in efforts for the resolution of conflicts and
the furtherance of peace and security around the
continent, building on the experience of the former
Organization of African Unity. We wish to seize this
opportunity to restate the profound appreciation of the
African Union to the Security Council for its vital and
continuous support for and cooperation with the
African Union. We would also like to restate the
appreciation of the African Union to all international
partners and donors for their generous logistic, materiel
and other assistance, as well as for their support for the
peace efforts of the African Union.

09-3860]

We would also like to take this opportunity to
commend the role and the sacrifices of the troop-
contributing countries (TCCs) and the police-
contributing countries (PCCs), and, in particular, to
pay tribute to the valiant men and women who have
given their selfless service and paid the ultimate price
in the service of peace and security in Africa and
around the world.

As you are aware, Mr. President, the relevant
experiences and the lessons learned from the African
peace support efforts helped inform the shaping of an
enhanced vision for confronting peace and security
challenges in Africa. That is the African Peace and
Security Architecture, a major step of which was the
establishment of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union as the standing decision-making organ
for the prevention, management and resolution of
conflicts, and as the collective security and early
warning arrangement to facilitate timely and efficient
responses to conflict and crisis situations in Africa.

The Council will be supported by the African
Standby Force, the Panel of the Wise and the African
Continental Early Warning System, which are currently
being established. Various components of that African
Peace and Security Architecture are, however, still in
their infancy and experiencing teething problems. Thus
African Union peace support efforts in the field are
facing challenges in terms of mission planning, the
mobilization of logistic, technical and other support,
and there are weaknesses in the administrative
capacities of the Organization.

Those problems have been well articulated in
various frameworks of the engagement between the
African Union and the United Nations and, most
recently, in the report of African Union-United Nations
panel (S/2008/813), established by the Secretary-
General pursuant to Security Council resolution 1809
of April 2008. As is known, at its l72nd and 178th
meetings, held on 24 February and 13 March 2009
respectively, the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union considered the report of that panel.

The Peace and Security Council further
participated in the debate of the Security Council on
the report, held on 18 March 2009 (see S/PV.6092),
and, as requested by the Security Council during that
meeting, the African Union Commission has been
working closely with the United Nations Secretariat, in
particular towards the preparations for the report to be
submitted by the Secretary-General later this year.

We therefore encourage the Security Council to
place special emphasis on the need to strengthen
cooperation between the Security Council and regional
organizations, and, in particular, the need for the
Council to strengthen its support for peace support
initiatives of the African Union in this new process of
the New Horizon of United Nations peacekeeping. We
wish to thank all previous speakers who have also
echoed that call during this meeting.

Finally, as you are aware, Mr. President, in the
conceptualization of the African Peace and Security
Architecture and in the conduct of its peace support
operations, the African Union has always reaffirmed
the primary responsibility of the Security Council for
the maintenance of international peace and security. In
that light, the African Union has maintained the
conviction that its peace-support operations deployed
with the authorization and the consent of the Security
Council are conducted on behalf of the Council and the
international community, in furtherance of
international peace and security. We are therefore
pleased to note that the executive brief of the non-
paper by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Field Support rightly couches
the New Horizon for United Nations peacekeeping in a
partnership framework - a partnership in terms of
purpose, action and the future.

The African Union clearly sees itself as a natural
and integral part of that partnership. Indeed, we believe
that the peace-support operations and efforts of the
African Union have clearly demonstrated Africa's
resolve to assume its fair share of the burden of
international peace and security. In other words, the
African Union stands fully ready to play its role in
such a partnership with the United Nations and other
stakeholders of the international community as a matter
of shared vision, responsibility and ownership, in order
to strengthen new hopes and confidence in efforts to
pursue peace, security and development in Africa and
around the world.
Indeed, the launching of the first African Union-
United Nations hybrid operation, in Darfur, was an
important step in the evolution of peacekeeping
operations. It revealed what the international
community can achieve when working together in a
coordinated and coherent partnership. We therefore
strongly encourage the Security Council to draw on all
the related, relevant and constructive ideas that have
emerged from that special peacekeeping mission and
from the work of other United Nations-related
processes, such as that of the United Nations Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the Council's
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations and other
initiatives taken by Member States, as well as on the
strategic exchanges that have taken place in the past
few years between the African Union and the United
Nations. We also encourage the Security Council to
draw from the overall process of United Nations
reform, and in particular Security Council reform.

