Major General Obi: I will first attempt to address
the issue of inter-mission cooperation. I will also touch
on the issue of the use of technology in early-warning
situations and perhaps also comment on robustness.
With regard to the issue of inter-mission cooperation, I
would like to give examples of how we are going about
it and also highlight some problems that I have been
asked to cover.

Withregardto theissue of inter-mission cooperation,
I want to start with the Jonglei crisis. In that regard,
I must thank the Under-Secretary-General and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo (MONUSCO),
which came to our rescue through their support with
military helicopters, which we did not have. Those
helicopters were available and we used them for the
movement of dangerous cargo. That was a very clear
example of inter-mission cooperation.

I also want to say, with regard to the other areas
in which we cooperated, that we wished we could
have done even more. In that regard, let me cite an
unfortunate incident involving the troops of United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei who went into
a mine and lost persons. That was a very clear-cut case
where helicopters from the south were placed on standby
to move in to transport out the casualties. Of course,
we were in communication to share information. There
was also the possibility of helicopters coming from
the north to also move the casualties. In that regard,
I also want to say that the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General was very involved in her
communication with Khartoum to see how we could
move in to facilitate that process. But I also want to say
that there was a challenge of access to helicopters from
the south. That is where I think the Council would be
very helpful to us. When lives are involved, I think it
is important that helicopters move in from whichever
direction possible to save lives.

With regard to the issue of border verification, let
me give an instance where we had to cooperate with
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) to cover the area bordering South
Darfur and Northern Bahr Al-Ghazal. There we were
able to work together on verifying bombings and, at
times, on troop cooperation. We also went as far as
to the disputed areas to verify incidents of bombings,
and we were able to report effectively to DPKO and,
subsequently, to the Council.

I also want to say that there will be a lot of need
for cooperation between the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) and UNAMID in the area
of border monitoring. The Sudan and South Sudan
share a border that is very extensive - about 2,200
kilometres - and we also know that we must share access
with UNAMID, which we have been doing in terms of
logistics. As UNAMID deploys, UNMISS is already
cooperating and stands by to cooperate even more in
the areas of logistic support and information-sharing.

We have also benefitted from Mi-26 helicopters
deployed on 6 June from UNAMID for our deployment
in South Sudan. We think that has been very helpful.
All of that has been possible through the system of
the global field support strategy, which allows support
elements to move across missions.

We also have the issue of the Lord's Resistance
Army (LRA), where we are mandated to protect
civilians as it relates to the LRA. UNMISS works
very closely with the missions - UNAMID and
MONUSCO - we also share information with the
United Nations mission in Khartoum and recently
we have had to have meetings together. We have had
conferences, including in Entebbe, and we are engaging
right now. I have been to the African Union Regional
Task Force, with which we have established a liaison.
Together with the LRA-affected countries, the Uganda
People's Defence Force and other stakeholders, we are
sharing information and are able to focus on the issue
of the LRA as it affects civilian protection in South
Sudan. That has been helpful to us in UNMISS.

With regard to the issue of technology, I also want
to say I think that would have been very useful to us
in Jonglei, which is a large expanse of land without
access. It is waterlogged and people moving on foot to
attack other communities can hide under shrubs and
so on. The helicopters available to us, especially the
civilian helicopters, are cumbersome for one to observe
through the windows to be able to locate people.
They are limited in range, visibility and the ability to
carry out operations at night and in different types of
weather. Therefore, there are a lot of challenges. Those
also have to do with monitoring instruments not being
available. In that regard, therefore, we think that the
use of technology will assist us in identifying the
movement of persons who may want to attack others,
cattle rustlers and the rest of them. In that regard, I
also want to say, as I have long said, that in order to
effectively monitor the border between the Sudan and
South Sudan with a mission that does not have much
manpower and a limited range of helicopter movement,
the mission will need everything it can get in terms of
technology to be able to support its ability to monitor
cross-border movements between the two countries. I
think that will be very important.

As to robustness, I think that we demonstrated in
Jonglei that even when we were not fully staffed we
held out, and our troops had very clear instructions
to protect. That is exactly what we did in the case of
Jonglei. I therefore wish to say that we are committed
to being robust and, of course, we appreciate all the
support we have been getting. We hope that our
demands will receive the support that we are asking
for in terms of helicopters and riverine capability. Of
course, manpower is always limited and the area of
coverage is very wide.

