The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Nigeria.

I want to join my colleagues in thanking Assistant
Secretary-General Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his
briefing on the latest developments in Ukraine. We have
observed very closely the unfolding events in Ukraine
since our last meeting on 28 March, when the Council
was briefed by the Secretary-General. Like others,
we are very deeply concerned about the fact that the
situation remains tense and, indeed, has deteriorated.
The utter lawlessness and state of anarchy witnessed
in at least six states in eastern Ukraine are provocative
and constitute a grave threat to peace.

Throughout our engagement on this issue, our
message has been unequivocal. The need to uphold
universally agreed principles and the sanctity of
international law is what we have stressed. That begins
with respect for the principles embodied in the Charter
of the United Nations, among which is respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
States. We have also highlighted the need to use the
existing bilateral and multilateral instruments to resolve
the crisis. The Budapest Memorandum of 1994 and the
Treaty between the Russian Federation and Ukraine
on Friendship, Cooperation and Partnership, signed by
both countries in 1990 and 1997, are significant points
of departure for negotiations. Those are the principles
that guide Nigeria's position and that inform our stance
on the issue. We believe that only a diplomatic solution,
achievable by direct and genuine dialogue between
the parties, can resolve the current crisis between the
Russian Federation and Ukraine.

Over time, the world has graduated from
nineteenth-century adventures. In this splendid
twenty-first century, the world should not encourage or
tolerate the establishment of power blocs or spheres of
influence. which are not only inimical to international
peace and security but especially detrimental to the
conduct of friendly and balanced relations between and
among States. We emphasize the futility and dangers
of a military solution to the crisis. Instead, the option
of dialogue between the concerned parties must be
vigorously pursued without preconditions. We call on
all parties to exercise maximum restraint in order to
avoid any further deterioration of the situation.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.

