Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I had not planned to take the floor again.
But the intervention just made by my colleague the
representative of France compels me to request the
floor once more.

What he describes as absurd and heresy is a
perfect description of the policies of successive French
Administrations towards my country, including that of
Sarkozy near the end of his mandate and the term of
Francois Hollande. Members will note that I will not
use terminology such as "the French regime" here in my
statement because I am a maven diplomat and I know
that those words are not fit for use in the Chamber. That
is why I say "the French Government" and "the French
Foreign Minister", and not "the French regime" or "the
Minister of the French regime".

France has been hostile to my country for decades.
We will never forget the colonial era, when France
occupied my country following the sinister Sykes-
Picot Agreement. However, the fact that the French
representative says that I have not touched upon the
humanitarian situation is means that he did not listen
to a word of my intervention. Any diplomat in this
international Organization who listened to what I said
today would realize that I spoke about the humanitarian
situation in my country and of the obstacles to the
resolution of the crisis, both political and humanitarian.
That is why I deeply regret that a representative of a
permanent member of the Security Council spoke in a
way unrelated to the topic at hand, as though he were
politically illiterate.

The games and terrorism that happened in my
country are over. The masks have come off. Today
public opinion in France, the United States and the
United Kingdom knows that their Governments'
policies towards my country are wrong. I have just
cited a work by an Australian author. His country is
14,000 kilometres from mine, but he understands the
truth of what is happening in Syria, which is why he
wrote a book describing what is taking place there:

terrorist aggression without precedent in the annals of
international relations.

How far will we go in destroying Member countries
of the Organization, sovereign States? Korea was
invaded on the basis ofa lic. Viet Nam was invaded on
the basis of a lie. Then Iraq was invaded on the basis
ofa lie. And then Libya. How long will we continue to

perjure ourselves, to be witnesses to the destruction of
States Members oflhis international Organization based
on lies, absurd ranting and absolute political ignorance?

