Mr. Lamamra: I would like to first acknowledge
the presence of President Jacob Zuma of the Republic
of South Africa. His decision to be here with us to
preside over this meeting is a further illustration of his
leadership and the commitment of South Africa to the
promotion of a strong strategic partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union (AU) in peace
and security matters. Over the years, South Africa has
used its successive memberships in the Security
Council to push forward that agenda, within the
framework of Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter. The African Union Commission is deeply
appreciative of that effort and the results achieved so
far.

Let me also recognize the presence of Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon. Since his appointment at the
helm of the Secretariat, he has spared no effort in

promoting the AU-United Nations partnership in the
area of peace and security, building on earlier
initiatives aimed at ensuring that regional arrangements
fully play their role in the post-cold war security
architecture. In his report of October 2010 on United
Nations support to AU peacekeeping operations
authorized by the Security Council, the Secretary-
General rightly observed that "[t]he complex
challenges in the world today require a revitalized and
evolving interpretation of Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations" (S/2010/5Z4, para. 54). The
African Union fully shares that view.

It would be remiss of me not to pay tribute to the
Security Council and to its members. In the past three
years, the Council has held no less than four meetings
devoted to the African Union-United Nations
partnership. This is a clear indication of its
commitment and of its realization that, indeed, the
daunting peace and security challenges that continue to
face Africa require an innovative and creative
partnership between the AU and the United Nations.

Today's debate comes at a time of renewed
recognition of the importance of building a strong
partnership between the AU and the United Nations in
order to enhance our efforts to promote peace, security
and stability on the African continent. The turbulence
that the partnership went through last year only adds to
the urgency of more clearly defining this relationship.

In carrying forward this debate, we have the
privilege of learning from our most recent experiences.
We also have the privilege of having before us the
reports submitted by both the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and the African Union Commission
Chairperson. These are two complementary inputs
which provide not only an assessment of where we
stand as far as the partnership is concerned, but also
useful recommendations on the way forward. I note
that at their fifth consultative meeting, held in Addis
Ababa on 21 May 2011, both the AU Peace and
Security Council and the Security Council stressed that
they were looking forward to these reports.

The strategic relationship between the AU and the
United Nations has been growing steadily. Cooperation
between the Commission and the Secretariat has
recorded commendable achievements, as demonstrated
by the regular consultations between AU and United
Nations senior officials on issues of common concern
and the mechanisms put in place to that end.

Innovative modalities such as the hybrid

operation in Darfur and the United Nations support

package to AMISOM. have been devised and

implemented to meet the requirements of the fast-
evolving realities on the ground.

The AU Peace and Security Council and the
Security Council have also endeavoured to deepen
their partnership. Their efforts are all the more
praiseworthy as they have to overcome numerous
challenges, not least the novelty of the exercise and the
differences in their respective mandates and scope of
action.

Yet we are just at the beginning of our journey
towards a more strategic relationship between the AU
and the United Nations in the area of peace and
security. Such an approach is made more compelling
by the fact that Africa, in spite of the significant
progress made over the past few years, still accounts
for the highest number of conflicts worldwide.

In addition to the traditional threats to peace,
security and stability, the African continent is now
facing a new set of threats: first, governance-related
intra-State conflicts and violence, including election-
related ones, which could severely undermine the
nascent democracies on the continent and negatively
affect the social fabric in many countries; secondly,
terrorism and transnational crime, which is
compounded by the proliferation of weapons; thirdly,
maritime piracy off both the east and west coasts of
Africa, as well as other challenges to continental
maritime security; fourthly, border disputes, especially
in View of the limited progress made in the delimitation
and demarcation of the African borders, a situation
which gives rise to "undefined zones", within which
the application of national sovereignty poses problems;
and fifthly, climate change, whose consequences,
whether they relate to scarce water resources, damage
to coastal infrastructure and cities, reduced agricultural
yields or environmentally induced migration, will have
a negative impact on the quest for peace.

Clearly, those challenges require concerted
responses by the African Union and the United Nations
and a much closer partnership, based on a creative
reading of the provisions of Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter to allow the African Union and its
regional mechanisms for conflict prevention,
management and resolution to fully play their role as
integral components of collective security.

The African Union and its regional mechanisms
are particularly well placed to make a significant
contribution to collective security, in view of their
proximity to and familiarity with the issues at hand. In
addition, they have developed comprehensive
architectures covering the whole range of security
challenges facing the continent, including those related
to governance.

It is critical to provide more effective support to
the African continent and its institutions, especially as
Africa has demonstrated renewed determination to deal
with peace and security issues on the continent and
provide the leadership that is required. Nowhere has
this proactive stance been more evident than in the area
of peacekeeping, where the African Union has shown a
strong willingness to take risks to seize the
opportunities that present themselves in order to
advance the agenda of peace, but is constrained by the
lack of the necessary resources, particularly in terms of
flexible, sustainable and predictable funding.

That is the background that informed the report
of the Chairperson of the Commission and the
subsequent decision of the Peace and Security Council
regarding the need for the AU and the United Nations
to develop a stronger partnership, based on an
innovative strategic and forward-looking reading of
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter.

More specifically, the African Union and the
United Nations should agree on a set of principles
aimed at clarifying their relationship and anchoring it
on a more solid platform. From the AU perspective,
such principles should revolve around the following:
support for African ownership and priority-setting;
consultative decision-making, division of labour and
sharing of responsibilities; and comparative advantage.
The African Union is committed to engaging in earnest
on a dialogue with the United Nations on the principles
that should underpin the relationship.

In parallel, and on the basis of the communiques
of the consultative meetings held between the Peace
and Security Council and the Security Council,
practical steps should be taken to enhance the
effectiveness of the annual meetings between the two
organs, develop regular interaction between their
respective chairs and undertake joint field missions.
Equally important is the need for the Security Council
to give due consideration to our legitimate requests and
to address, in a more systematic manner, the funding of

AU-led peace support operations undertaken with the
consent of the Security Council. On their part, the AU
Commission and the Secretariat should continue to
work towards greater collaboration and coordination.

We have come a long way in our efforts to build a
stronger partnership, but much remains to be done. As
we forge ahead, we need to draw appropriate lessons
from our past experiences, both our shortcomings and
our successes. We ought to be pragmatic and results-
oriented, driven, as we should be, by the imperative to
respond to the needs on the ground, to assist countries
and shattered communities to turn the page of violence
and conflict, to consolidate peace where it has been
achieved and, ultimately, to help Africa to fully exploit
its potential for the good of its people and humankind
overall.

In the past years, the African Union and its
regional mechanisms have demonstrated a strong
commitment to act, building on their comprehensive
and solid normative and institutional framework. The
responsibility of the United Nations, as we understand
it, is to fully support those efforts, which are consistent
with the principles and objectives of the United
Nations Charter, politically and by making available its
resources and expertise, as and when required.

