The President (Spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Burundi, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nteturuye
(Burundi) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now continue its consideration of the item
on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms its strong
support for the Facilitation of Former President
Nelson Mandela, and urges all Burundians of
goodwill to join in the cause of peace, democracy
and national reconciliation in their country. It also
calls upon all parties to cooperate fully with the
Implementation Monitoring Committee.

"The Security Council looks forward to and
strongly supports the 1 November 2001
installation of the transitional government in
Burundi. The Security Council believes that this
event, the creation of a broad-based and inclusive
government, will mark a critical turning point in
the Burundi peace process. It will also encourage
the donors to provide additional assistance,
including by honouring fully the pledges they

made during the Paris Donors' Conference in
December 2000.
"The Security Council calls on the
Burundian parties to reach agreement swiftly on
the establishment of a special protection unit
entrusted solely with the police function of
providing personal security for politicians
returning from exile. It welcomes the convening
by the Facilitation of a pre-implementation
stakeholders meeting in Arusha and urges the
international community to provide, on an urgent
basis, support for the training and deployment of
this special protection unit.

"Deeply concerned by the increase of
violence recently, the Security Council recalls the
urgent need to bring about a negotiated settlement
of the conflict and calls upon the Facilitation, the
Regional Peace Initiative for Burundi, the
Government of Burundi, the signatory parties and
the armed groups to devote their full attention to
the achievement of a definitive ceasefire. The
Security Council once again calls on the Forces
pour la defense de la democratie (FDD) and
Forces nationales de libe'ration (FNL) to suspend
hostilities, to continue negotiations and to join the
peace process. The Security Council believes that
the installation of a broad-based government on
the basis of an internationally sanctioned peace
process makes armed rebellion an unacceptable
means of political expression. It calls on the FNL
and FDD, together with the Burundi Government,
to observe strictly the rights of the civilian
population and other provisions of international
humanitarian law.

"The Security Council calls on all States, in
particular those in the region, to cease all forms
of support to the FNL and FDD, and urges all
Member States to encourage the armed groups to
join the peace process.

"The Security Council calls on the States of
the Regional Initiative to mark the installation of
the transitional government by further enhancing
their bilateral and regional cooperation with the
new government. The Security Council believes
that this cooperation is particularly important in
the area of regional security and calls on the
Governments of Burundi and its neighbouring
States to increase their cooperation in this regard.

"The Security Council expresses its concern This statement will be issued as a document of

at the deteriorating humanitarian situation and the Security Council under the
calls on all parties to create the conditions for the S/PRST/ZOOl/Zfi.

voluntary return of refugees, and for the safe and
unhindered activities of the humanitarian relief
community. It also calls upon the donor
community to increase their humanitarian
assistance to Burundi and to accelerate its The meeting rose at 1pm.

agenda.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
delivery."

