Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
Vitaly Ivanovich Churkin died yesterday. He was
a leading Russian diplomat and a key figure in the
Security Council, representing his country in a mature
manner for more than a decade. We mourn the loss of
our colleague and friend. We extend our condolences to
his family and friends. We are grateful to the members
of the Security Council for the words of condolences
that they expressed on what is a loss to us all. At the
same time, it must be recognized that the President
of the Security Council did not use this opportunity
to pay tribute to the doyen of the Security Council
with a statement from the President, as would have
been appropriate.

Today, one would have thought that the topic of
conflicts in Europe would long ago have become an
outdated absurdity. Unfortunately, it is an ominous
reality. We seem to have forgotten the horrific lessons
of the two world wars that broke out precisely on the
European continent. We sincerely hope that there are
no members of the United Nations that seek war, and
that we are all interested in strengthening international
dialogue and improving understanding among nations.
So then why are we unable to use Council discussions as
ways to find peace rather than just another opportunity
to exert public pressure and launch embarrassing
mutual accusations?

In our opinion, the reason for that is that
today - seven decades after the last world war - we
have apparently lost the acute sense of the possibility
of yet another global military disaster. And this time it
would indeed be the final one in the history ofmankind.
We have far too recklessly placed faith in the reliability
of mechanisms intended to prevent a man-made
apocalypse and in the infallibility of common sense
and the instinct of self-preservation. Unfortunately,
history teaches us that those mechanisms do not work
under conditions characterized by mutual alienation
and the lack of even minimal trust or willingness
to compromise, and where there is the tendency to
demonize our opponents. Those mechanisms will not
be able to stop us from sliding into a global conflict
as long as we believe in our monopoly on the truth and
righteousness - a monopoly that, by definition, can
only belong to us and never to our opponents.
However, those mechanisms are powerless unless
the major world Powers and their leaders find the civil
and moral courage to start a direct conversation with
one another about their shared responsibility to prevent
a new world confrontation, whether it be a cold one
or a hot one. If we do not accept the responsibility to
abolish the right arrogated by the stronger parties in
world politics, then we at least have the responsibility
to adjust that right in line with considerations of
humanity, solidarity, empathy and compassion.

Today, the world - including its representatives
in the United Nations - badly needs fresh, broad
discussions on the principles of the future coexistence
of countries and peoples. And such discussions should
certainly touch upon the conflicts in Europe, military
and security confidence-building measures. As was the
case 40 years ago, when the Helsinki Process was what
was needed to defuse tension and reduce the degree of
hostility, once again similar, decisive measures are now
required to overcome global alienation. Candid global
conversations on a new de'tente are now necessary, and
we believe that there is an urgent need for frank - not
merely ceremonial - and results-oriented dialogue,
primarily in the United Nations and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), on the
causes of the international crisis of responsibility and
on the ways of overcoming it. We do not need secret,
propaganda-style sallies into the media, exchanges of
resolutions or ceremonial summits every five years. We
need regular, personal meetings of the most courageous
and responsible world leaders in order to define the new
rules of a multipolar world. We also need to find ways
to ensure mutual respect for one another's interests, and
to recognize diversity and the variety of ways in which
the progressive development of human civilization can
be achieved.

Belarus has a credible record of unbiased
participation in such processes. The country is a
welcoming place for international communication, and
Belarusians - as dedicated advocates of international
dialogue and its unbiased organizers - are ready and
willing to continue to fulfil that role actively and in
good faith.

