Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala could not fail to take part in this debate in the
Security Council on the role of the United Nations in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. Ours is
one of the countries that is fortunate enough to be a

 

success story in this regard, a success that unfolded under
the auspices of the United Nations.

We are grateful for the lucid report introduced by the
Secretary-General. We believe that it highlights some of the
issues that have been part of our own experience since
December 1996, when an internal conflict that had lasted
for almost 40 year was brought to an end. In the case of
Guatemala, the three elements that form the subject of
today's debate - disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration - have received distinct, but interrelated
treatment, in my country's Peace Accords. I am happy to
report today on considerable progress in all three areas:
total compliance in disarmament and demobilization and
significant progress with regard to reintegration.

Since I am one of the last speakers, I can add little of
a conceptual nature to what has already been said. I can,
however, contribute concrete, real-life experiences. In that
respect, there are two aspects to which I would draw
attention.

The first concerns the way in which domestic actors
interact with the international community, and the second
the link between peace-building operations and
humanitarian assistance on the one hand, and development
on the other.

Let me turn to the first aspect. The international
presence, in particular that of the United Nations, was
noteworthy both during the negotiation of the Peace
Accords and during their implementation. But at no time
did that international presence replace the domestic actors
as a determining force. Indeed, we believe that one of the
lessons of the Guatemala peace process relates to the key
importance of the domestic actors being in the proverbial
driver's seat. When I speak of domestic actors, I am not
referring only to the Government and the ex-insurgents but
to civil society as a whole, since the peace process in
Guatemala has been quite participatory. The fact that the
international presence was not perceived to be excessively
intrusive is due to a large degree to the respect that the
United Nations engenders thanks to its impartiality and
neutrality. In fact, it was the United Nations that
coordinated, at least partially, the presence of other
international actors - the so-called Group of Friends of the
Guatemalan Peace Process - in the areas of the
consolidation of peace and of external cooperation.

That brings me to my second point. Activities to
consolidate peace in Guatemala are intimately connected to
the development effort. Indeed, the bulk of the specific
commitments contained in the Peace Accords involves
economic and social development. The United Nations
Verification Mission in Guatemala monitors development
and humanitarian aspects, and it maintains very close ties
with the United Nations Development Programme and the
rest of the United Nations system. All parties understand
that for demobilization and reintegration to be successful,
the economic environment must be favourable.

Finally, many of the issues raised in the Secretary-
General's report have found concrete expression in
Guatemala's experience, be it in the area of addressing
the needs of children who are victims of conflict, in the
area of disarmament or in that of promoting respect for
human rights. The activities of the Organization in the
field are providing many lessons that can facilitate our
collective actions in other parts of the world, in
compliance with the overarching objectives of the Charter
of the United Nations. For this reason, my country is truly
grateful to the United Nations.

