Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, my delegation would like to thank you
for organizing this open debate on small arms. We
welcome the attention given by the Security Council to
this issue, which is particularly sensitive because of its
implications for the maintenance of international peace
and security. I would like to thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2005/69) and Mr. Nobuyasu
Abe for his excellent introduction to it.

The scope and complexity of the issue of illicit
trafficking in small arms is more than ever before a
challenge to the international community to take
prompt, effective and bolder measures to curb this
scourge. Combating this multidimensional phenomenon
demands constant vigilance and effective action on the
part of the international community. There can be no
hesitation, and we cannot relent in our efforts. States
that have primary responsibility for this task must take
steps commensurate with the challenge, while at the
same time fully respecting the right of each State to
security, as enshrined in the United Nations Charter.

For the struggle to succeed, all Member States
must be unambiguously committed to ending illicit
trafficking in small arms and to cooperating fully at the
bilateral, regional and international levels to dismantle
networks of illegal arms brokers.

Tackling the causes of the problem clearly
demands that producer countries demonstrate the
highest level of responsibility in identifying the end-
user when contracting arms sales.

The General Assembly is making a real
contribution to mobilizing the international community
against illicit trafficking in small arms. The United
Nations Programme of Action on small arms, adopted
in July 2001, is certainly an important step forward in
combating this scourge, which feeds armed conflict,
particularly in the African continent, and fuels terrorist
networks and organized crime.

One of the advantages of the Programme is that it
sets forth a number of norms and principles that must
become a benchmark for any undertaking in this area.
The General Assembly's 23 December 2003 decision
to establish an Open-ended Working Group to
negotiate an international instrument on identifying
and tracing illicit small arms was a timely response to
the international community's concerns on combating
illegal movements of such arms.

Following open debates in August 2001 (see S/PV.4355), in October 2002 (see S/PV.4623) and in
January 2004 (see S/PV.4896), the Security Council
adopted three presidential statements containing
recommendations that support efforts made in this area
and that help to resolve the question of illicit trade in
small arms in situations of which it is seized. Here, my
delegation agrees with the recommendation in the
report of the Secretary-General on the need for
interaction between the General Assembly and the
Security Council - two principal organs of the
Organization - so as to better understand the
phenomenon and develop a long-term common strategy
commensurate with the challenge.

In our View, we will not be able to curb the
trafficking in small arms or to consolidate peace in
conflict and post-conflict situations unless there is
effective regional cooperation and international
cooperation that mobilizes resources to help in
collecting and destroying illegal small arms, within the
context of programmes for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants.

In this regard, Africa deserves the attention and
support of the international community in its sustained
effort and determination to combat resolutely the
scourge of the illicit traffic in small arms, which is
threatening Africa's stability and seriously
jeopardizing its development efforts.

Commendable initiatives have been made at the
level of the African continent - through, for example,
the Bamako Declaration and the West African
moratorium - which reflect Africa's unwavering
support and its resolve to participate actively in
international efforts to combat the illicit trade in small
arms.

In this context, Algeria, which is well aware of
the need to ensure regional cooperation to combat the
transborder movement of small arms in the African and
Arab regions, has agreed to organize, with the support
of the United Nations Department for Disarmament
Affairs and interested countries, a regional meeting on
this issue.

In conclusion, I would like to think the delegation
of Japan for having coordinated the negotiations on the
draft presidential statement, which my delegation fully
supports.

