At the outset, allow me to thank Mrs. Naledi Pandor, Minister for International Relations and Cooperation of South Africa, for convening this meeting and choosing this important topic as its theme. I also extend my warmest congratulations to the Republic of South Africa on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of December and wish it every success. I also express my deep appreciation to Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for its successful presidency of the Council during the month of November. I also thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Mr. Alexandre Zouev and Mr. Fernandez- Taranco for their valuable briefings. The world, in particular the African continent and the Arab region, is witnessing numerous tensions and conflicts that have caused heavy human and material losses and severe humanitarian crises for millions of refugees and displaced persons and are having their impact on the course of development, social cohesion and regional and international security, peace and stability. Notwithstanding significant efforts towards conflict resolution by the international community through the Security Council and United Nations peacebuilding missions, and the contributions of regional and _ subregional organizations to conflict resolution, the most important element continues to be the establishment of security, because it underlies the success of political efforts to resolve crises, build peace and sustain security, and prevents conditions from deteriorating and crises and conflicts from breaking out anew. It also provides reassurance to the peoples involved and helps them restore the normal rhythms of their lives and go about the work of reconstruction and development. In that regard, helping post-conflict countries to strengthen their capacities to achieve security, protect civilians and address the root causes of security vulnerability is an absolute priority. It is among the most important components of peacebuilding processes and key to the prevention of renewed violence and political tensions, as is noted in resolution 2282 (2016). For the process to be of benefit to the maintenance and consolidation of peace, it must include strengthening security sector governance and reforming existing institutions to make them more effective, thereby increasing the State's ability to extend its authority and exercise its law-enforcement powers. That must be done through national ownership and in accordance with the specificities of each context, with a focus on the needs and priorities of each stage, particularly with regard to achieving national unity and establishing a culture of peaceful dialogue and participation. We stress the importance of the role of the United Nations in helping the States concerned impose governance in the security sector and build security strategies that ensure that peoples are protected from violence. That opens the way for all the various elements of society to take part in the process and helps to ensure the success of the post-conflict recovery process, notably by strengthening the role of women and youth in achieving security, sustainable peace and stability, reintegration, national unity and development. While we commend the role of the United Nations and stabilization missions in the maintenance of peace and the peacebuilding process, we stress the importance of maintaining a focus on support for the security governance and reform track, while paying due attention to the considerations I mentioned. It is also important to continue cooperation and coordination between the United Nations and other international parties, provide adequate support and funding for national efforts and initiatives, and to include them in official development assistance programmes. Because of the intimate relationship between security, peace and development, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, adopted in 2015, recognized the central role of effective institutions, transparency and justice in achieving security, building peace and preventing violence and conflict. By the same token, the road to the goals of the 2063 agenda for development, integration and economic growth in Africa must inevitably pass through the consolidation of security, peace and stability throughout our continent, as enshrined in the Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative, which aims to free the continent from all ongoing wars and violent conflicts so that its people can go about the work of development and reconstruction. The experiences of our immediate surroundings and the world at large have demonstrated that security reform and governance is a basic precondition for the success of peacebuilding. It is also one of main prerequisites for the restoration of order by legitimate Governments and institutions in the post-conflict stages. It lays the groundwork for subsequent stages, from arrangements to build confidence and promote political settlement, through national reconciliation and on to sustainable development. This is a delicate and sensitive process that requires the participation of all, mutual understanding and complementarity between national efforts and assistance from the international community and the United Nations. In conclusion, I reiterate the commitment of Tunisia to continue to take an active part in promoting international peace and security, supporting preventive diplomacy and ensuring the success of all efforts and initiatives to rid the world of conflict and violence and provide sustainable security to all peoples.
