The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Argentina for his kind words
addressed to me and to my country, Benin.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Benin's Minister for Foreign Affairs and African
Integration.

The delegation of Benin welcomes the holding of
this meeting. I congratulate those who have made
statements for their contributions to our collective
deliberation on subregional cross-border issues posing
a threat to peace and security in West Africa. I would
like in particular to thank the Secretary-General, who
honours me with his presence. I would also like to
thank Mr. Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Office for West Africa, for his
introduction of the Secretary-General's progress report
on ways to combat subregional and cross-border issues
in West Africa (S/2005/86).

The report has the great virtue of highlighting a
series of problems that have, or could have, a decisive
impact on efforts to stabilize the West African
subregion. Some of the problems it addresses have
already been discussed in depth in the Security Council
this month. I would recall the presidential statements
adopted after the debates on small arms and children
and armed conflict (S/PRST/2005/7 and S/PRST/2005/8). The views of the Government of
Benin on those issues were amply covered on those
occasions.

The seriousness of the consequences of these
problems poses a real danger to the future of the States
of the West African subregion. No one questions the
need for effective action to combat them. In countries
emerging from crisis or armed conflict and in
neighbouring countries, those problems are made
worse by deficiencies in disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) programmes, which face very
serious funding problems in the critical reintegration
phase.

To that is added the humanitarian problems
experienced by displaced persons and refugees and
those associated with massive youth unemployment.
West Africa has arrived at a dangerous point due to the
risks that such problems pose to the stabilization
efforts of countries emerging from armed conflict as
well as to the institutions of countries that are now
stable. In that connection, it is absolutely necessary to
harmonize DDR programmes while taking into account
the needs of women and children affected by armed
conflict. We commend the various United Nations
entities involved in that process. The Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) has
demonstrated great energy in addressing these
problems. It deserves the full support of the
international community in order that it may continue
its work.

In that connection, I would like to reiterate the
determination of the Government of Benin to actively
contribute to the implementation of effective strategies
to resolve those problems. Benin also agrees with the
Secretary-General's analysis and with his
recommendations to the Council, particularly with
regard to the need to develop integrated strategies in
sensitive border areas. In that connection, I am pleased
to mention in particular the concept of local integration
among bordering countries that was adopted by the
ECOWAS Foreign Ministers meeting held in Accra on
18 January 2005. That concept, which promotes local
communities' management of border areas, has led to
the development of a programme with very specific
goals: the cross-border initiative. Those goals include,
first, the development of a convention on trans-border
cooperation in the ECOWAS area to enable local
border communities to conclude cooperation
agreements among themselves; secondly, the spread of
trans-border initiatives among all ECOWAS member
countries; thirdly, the formulation and implementation
of pilot cross-border projects; and, lastly, the exchange
of experiences with other regions, in particular with
regard to cross-border movements in Europe.

By adopting the concept, the ECOWAS Foreign
Ministers meeting decided to take appropriate steps to
ensure its implementation on the basis of a
participatory process that involves all ECOWAS
member States. Among other things, there is a plan to
establish an association of West African border regions
and towns. The United Nations Office for West Africa
should take those initiatives into account and give them
its full support in the context of its own work. Those
initiatives reflect true awareness of the need to manage
border areas and make them an instrument for the
promotion of peace and the well-being of the people
living there. They are part of the efforts being made to
improve basic conditions through the development and
implementation of an integrated and coordinated
approach to the prevention of conflicts in West Africa
that involve all potential stakeholders, as the Secretary-
General has advocated.

In that connection, there is real awareness in the
West African subregion of the role of such decisive
factors as good governance, the establishment and
strengthening of democratic institutions and the need
for security-sector reform. In that regard, West Africa
fully supports the approach outlined in the context of
the New Partnership for Africa's Development. We
encourage the concerted efforts being developed or
already begun to improve basic conditions in order to
promote stability in West Africa. That strengthens the
positive elements that make it possible -
notwithstanding the shocks that have considerably
weakened the area in recent years - to look forward
with some optimism to the future of the West African
subregion.

In that connection, the recent decisions taken by
the West African Economic and Monetary Union
(UEMOA) should be highlighted, as they set an
example for all ECOWAS member States. UEMOA
includes eight ECOWAS member States. It has just
decided to eliminate the roadblocks set up as
checkpoints on the main roads linking the countries of
the monetary area. They will be replaced by joint
patrols, which will make it possible to reconcile the
need for free movement of persons and goods between
countries with the requirements of national security.

Those positive changes will enhance the growing
confidence that development partners have constantly
shown towards the West African subregion. Support of
these measures could be a real expression of
commitment by the growing partnership between the
United Nations agencies and the countries of West
Africa. The effectiveness of the work done by the
international community for the West African
subregion requires massive mobilization, which should
extend over several years. The channels of cooperation
between the countries of the region, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
African Union and development partners, multilateral
and bilateral, should be supported through innovative
initiatives that are coordinated and tailored to the needs
of the countries and the local realities.

In conclusion, I too would like to express
condolences to Bangladesh, which has just lost some
members of its peacekeeping team in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We hope that very soon those
who have been injured will recover. This difficult
ordeal should not discourage us from continuing with
peacekeeping operations in countries that are in
situations of armed conflict.
I now resume my functions of President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Burkina
Faso.

