Mr. Sallam (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): It
is a pleasure for me, on behalf of the Group of Arab
States to convey to you, Sir, and to your brotherly
country our most sincere congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We are certain that you will guide the
work of the Council with skill and wisdom. We also
congratulate your predecessor, the Permanent

Representative of Italy, for having steered the work of
the Security Council in a wise and noteworthy way last
month. On behalf of the Group of Arab States, we
congratulate the new members of the Security Council
and wish them every success in their efforts. The Arab
Group also thanks you, Sir, for your prompt response
to the request to hold an emergency meeting of the
Security Council to review the latest developments in
the situation in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank.

War crimes are currently being committed against
Palestinian civilians in the Gaza Strip and the West
Bank by Israel, the occupying Power, which, in spite of
all of the efforts to restore peace, continues to commit
crimes against Palestinians and blatantly violates their
human rights. I would like to state, in this context, that
despite all efforts, the occupying Power has in the last
10 days killed at least 40 Palestinians, including seven
children. In the latest escalation of its operations, the
Israeli occupying forces launched on 15 January 2008 a
broad-scale attack against residential neighbourhoods
in Gaza, specifically the Zeitoun and Sajaayin districts.
The occupying forces invaded the area with armoured
vehicles, tanks and bulldozers, covered by its military
aircraft and helicopters.

The occupying Power needs to work to calm the
situation and to undertake confidence-building
measures in order to support the renewed direct
negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis. Instead,
its illegal aggressive acts poison the atmosphere,
undermine peace efforts and reignite the cycle of
violence under which our peoples have suffered far too
long. The aggression under way in Gaza raises doubts
about the seriousness of the Palestinian-Israeli
negotiations that began with the Annapolis Conference.
Those negotiations ultimately aim at putting an end to
the occupation and restoring the Palestinian territories.
As I said, current doubts regarding those negotiations
are a result of the recent developments in Gaza.

We call for an immediate end to the Israeli
aggression against the Gaza Strip and the West Bank
and a lifting of the siege imposed on the Palestinian
territories. We also call for a reopening of the border
crossings in order to facilitate the passage of
emergency international humanitarian assistance,
which the occupying forces have prevented from
reaching affected areas. Electricity and gas cut-offs
have led to a humanitarian tragedy and worsened daily

life to the point that even hospitals, clinics and
distribution points for humanitarian aid are unable to
provide basic medical relief.

All of that is due to the fact that the Israeli
Government considers the Gaza Strip a "hostile entity".
The Israeli Government is acting in violation of
international law and norms, which state that the
actions of that Government are illegal and illegitimate.
The Arab States call upon the Security Council, at this
emergency meeting, to shoulder its legal, political and
humanitarian responsibility to put an end to acts of
aggression that flout basic human rights and that run
counter to the expectations and positions of the
countries that have co-sponsored the peace process. We
call for an international inquiry on Israeli crimes of
aggression in the Gaza Strip, in order to put an end to
those crimes, which contravene international
legitimacy and international humanitarian law and
norms. We also call for prompt action by the Quartet,
which should fulfil its responsibilities with respect to
what is taking place in the Gaza Strip and the West
Bank.

The international community needs to step up its
efforts to bring about a peaceful, just and
comprehensive settlement on the basis of
internationally legitimate agreements: resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), 425 (1978) and 1397 (2002), the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Madrid terms of reference. They should
implement all of their obligations, as defined under the
Road Map endorsed by the Security Council in
resolution 1515 (2003), to end the occupation of
Palestinian territories and other Arab territories
occupied by Israel since 1967, in order to establish an
independent, sovereign and viable Palestinian State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. They also must
justly address the situation of Palestinian refugees in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 194
(III), in order to bring about a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace among all peoples and all States
in the Middle East.

