Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to express to you, Mr. President, and to
your friendly country, the United Kingdom, our
appreciation for your great and outstanding efforts to ensure
the effectiveness of the Security Council with regard to one
of the most important, sensitive and complex international
issues. My delegation would also like to thank Ambassador
Danilo Tiirk, Permanent Representative of Slovenia, for the
efficient manner in which he presided over the work of the
Security Council last month.

I feel it is my duty to express my gratitude, on behalf
of the State of Kuwait, to this body for the work it has
been intensively undertaking over the past nine months in
attempting to find the best way of alleviating the suffering
of the Iraqi people and of guaranteeing full implementation
by Iraq of all the relevant Security Council resolutions.

My delegation believes that the tremendous efforts
made by the Council on this issue provide important and
strong proof that it is eager to fulfil its responsibilities
under the Charter and to safeguard the implementation of
its resolutions meticulously and properly. There is no
doubt that this most important draft resolution before the
Council today is aimed at maintaining the foundations of
stability and security, not just in the Arab Gulf region, but
also in the Middle East as a whole and, indeed, in the rest
of the world. We believe that global security and stability
are closely linked. This is particularly true when stability
and security are threatened not merely by the acquisition
of weapons of mass destruction, or by the attempt to
acquire them, but also by the threat to use such weapons
against neighbouring countries.

My country, Kuwait, has direct concerns regarding
the draft resolution under consideration. It is therefore
appropriate for us to review our concerns in this regard,
and I should like briefly to highlight them. First, Kuwait
fully endorses the content of paragraphs 13 and 14 of part
B of the draft resolution, which address one of the most
pressing humanitarian issues before us, namely, Kuwaiti
prisoners of war and detainees, and third-country
nationals held in Iraqi prisons. The report of the third of
the three panels working on this issue stated clearly that
the Government of Iraq is responsible for the continued
suffering because of its failure to resolve this matter and
its denial of the existence of such prisoners of war, as
well as its failure to give details of their fate over the past
nine years.

The Government of Iraq has, for its own purposes,
exploited the preoccupations of the Security Council with
the issues of disarmament and the suffering of the Iraqi
people by procrastinating and failing to cooperate with the
Tripartite Commission and its Technical Subcommittee,
which were established by an agreement signed by Iraq in
1991. By suspending its participation in the work of those
two bodies last January, Iraq has shown that it is not
serious about resolving this humanitarian issue, thereby
disregarding the humanitarian dimension. Kuwait
therefore hopes that the Security Council will pursue this
issue with the same vigour that it has shown in addressing
the humanitarian suffering of the Iraqi people.

If the draft resolution is adopted today, we look
forward to seeing the Security Council rapidly take the
necessary measures to begin implementing its various
provisions. We also wish the Secretary-General every
success in appointing an eminent international personality,
known for his experience, skill and neutrality, to continue

 

to discuss the issue of Kuwaiti prisoners of war and to
report any developments to the Council, which is the body
responsible for follow-up, in accordance with all the
relevant resolutions. This matter cannot be delayed further.

Secondly, the State of Kuwait attaches great
importance to the restitution of Kuwaiti property stolen by
the Iraqi regime during its occupation of Kuwait. It
considers such property to be of great significance, as it
includes State archives containing documents belonging to
the most important executive Government agencies. During
deliberations on this issue, members of the Council referred
to these archives as "the memory of the State", because
they represent an accurate record of the history of Kuwait.
That is in addition to the military equipment that is central
to Kuwait's security and that Iraq is now using for its own
military purposes. We reiterate that it is imperative that Iraq
abide by Security Council resolutions calling for the return
of all this stolen property, particularly property for which
no cash compensation is possible as it is simply priceless.

T hirdly, Iraq's possession of weapons of mass
destruction adds to my country's concerns, because Kuwait
suspects and fears that Iraq's intentions are not peaceful
and because Iraq has not disclosed its stockpiles of such
weapons. The impact of those weapons on the peoples of
the region increases the risks we face and poses a threat to
security and stability, especially as we recall a bitter
experience witnessed by the world in recent years: the Iraqi
regime's use of those lethal weapons against its own
people. That country would thus not hesitate to use them
against the peoples of neighbouring countries.

In that context, Kuwait supports strict and meticulous
compliance with the draft resolution that is before the
Council today, should it be adopted, and with all other
relevant Security Council resolutions aimed at removing
Iraq's weapons of mass destruction, and the means for their
manufacture and for research into their development. That
is a necessary and effective step towards attaining the goal
of a Middle East region free from weapons of mass
destruction and towards bringing about international
stability.

Fourthly, Kuwait fully supports the provisions of part
C of draft resolution S/ 1999/ 1232 relating to the
humanitarian situation in Iraq, on the basis of its complete
empathy with the fraternal people of Iraq in its suffering,
the persistence of which is the sole responsibility of the
Government of Iraq. We believe that new measures adopted
by the Council to improve and promote the oil for food
programme would, if Iraq fully complied with them,
alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi people. We in Kuwait
are doing our utmost to provide humanitarian assistance
to any Iraqis we can reach.

Fifthly, Kuwait sincerely hopes that the Government
of Iraq will respond positively to the draft resolution,
should it be adopted, and that it will cooperate with the
United Nations in implementing it. Cooperation in good
faith by Iraq will help dissipate the atmosphere of distrust
that prevails in Kuwait in particular, and in the region as
a whole. The Iraqi Government continues to show that its
intentions are not peaceful, both by not complying with
the relevant Security Council resolutions and by repeated
official statements by high-ranking Iraqi Government
officials. This makes it clear to us that the Iraqi
Government still feels no guilt about its cardinal sin of
invading Kuwait and violating its sanctity, sovereignty
and independence through the 2 August 1990 occupation.

A striking example of this is the comment made by
the Iraqi Vice-President, Taha Yasin Ramadan, in an
interview aired on Moroccan television's Channel Two.
On the "Special Guest" programme broadcast on
Wednesday, 17 November 1999, Mr. Ramadan responded
as follows to the question of whether Iraq regretted its
invasion of Kuwait,

"No, never. We have no regrets over
confronting aggression. The aggression against Iraq
is too obvious. I think this has become even more
obvious in the wake of the disclosure of the many
schemes devised by the United States against Iraq
and against the Iraqi leadership. We discovered this
through the plots contrived by the United States,
which are known to the Iraqi leadership. We
continue to be faithful to our leadership because we
believe that it reflects the collective conscience of
our nation. In times of crisis, our Arab people has
clearly expressed its support of these goals - not
the goals of aggression, and not those leaders who
do not shoulder their responsibilities."

Against that backdrop, I think the Council can
understand the legitimate concerns of Kuwait and other
States in the Arabian Gulf area. We cannot feel
comfortable in the face of such explicit pronouncements
and of the open acknowledgment by Iraqi leaders that
they have no sense of remorse - which is the first step
towards repentance. Our main concern is that the
Government of Iraq will persist in its current practices
and policies of prevarication and selectivity in their
compliance with Security Council resolutions. That would

 

return our entire region to the vortex of crisis and
instability.

All the concerns I have mentioned today are covered
in the draft resolution before the Council. They are also
priority matters for the members of the Gulf Cooperation
Council (GCC), as clearly indicated by Their Majesties and
Their Highnesses the leaders of the GCC countries at their
summit meeting, held two weeks ago at Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia. The Final Declaration of the summit called, inter
alia, for the following: first, Iraq must implement all
relevant Security Council resolutions, especially those
relating to the release of Kuwaiti and third-country
prisoners and the return of stolen Kuwaiti property;
secondly, Iraq must demonstrate its peaceful intentions
towards its neighbours and acknowledge that its invasion of
Kuwait was a breach of Arab and international legal
conventions; and thirdly, Iraq must support all initiatives
aimed at easing the suffering of the Iraqi people.

Kuwait fully subscribes to the contents of the Final
Declaration of the GCC summit; they are in line with the
concerns of the Security Council as reflected in the draft
resolution before it today.

If the Security Council adopts this draft resolution
under Chapter VII of the Charter, it will thus become a
legally binding instrument that acquires its legal force from
the provisions of the Charter itself. Therefore, it must be
strictly implemented by the Government of Iraq, on the one
hand, and by members of the Security Council, on the
other. I would like to refer in particular to the permanent
members of the Council who have the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security under the Charter of the United Nations. Failure to
carry out this draft resolution, should it be adopted, would
undoubtedly undermine security and peace in our entire
region.

I wish to close by once again inviting the Government
of Iraq to respond favourably to the demands of this
Council and to make good use of the adoption of this draft
resolution, which defines in a balanced way the
responsibilities of the Council on the one hand, and the
obligations of Iraq in terms of implementing this and
previous resolutions, on the other. Iraq must recognize that
its full cooperation is now imperative, as peoples of the
region and the world are fully mobilized to face the
challenges of the new century and the challenges of
development and stability instead of living in the grip of
doubt, fear and uncertainty about the future.

As Kuwait sends out this appeal to the Government
of Iraq, we realize that this is an opportune moment that
coincides with a highly religious occasion for us as
Muslims, the holy month of Ramadan. It also comes at
the time of other religious events celebrated by the
followers of all divine creeds, and at the end of a century
that has been rife with wars and crises. Let us pray to
Allah, the Almighty, that this will be an auspicious
beginning for a century of peace, and a world imbued
with wisdom and reason.
