Mr. Akbaruddin (India): Climate change is an
unprecedented challenge to global civilization. We
therefore thank you, Mr. President, for providing an
opportunity to articulate views on specific aspects of
this overarching issue. We also thank the briefers for
their perspectives.

India believes that climate action should be a
priority area for international cooperation. Global
institutions should be responsive to felt human needs,
including disaster preparedness, as well as resilience
and response in the face of disasters. Such phenomena
tend to threaten human well-being. In addition, as we
have heard today, in some cases, such as rising sea
levels, the integrity of States is at stake, even in the
absence of violence and conflict.

On the other hand, from a policy perspective, as the
chapter on human security in the fifth assessment report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
summarized: "The evidence on the effect of climate
change and variability on violence is contested." Thus,
while climate risks are evident in some specific cases,
research findings on the generalized linkages between
climate disasters and security remain ambiguous.

The nexus between climate change and security
is complex, contingent and still contested. As
practitioners wanting to address such matters through
international cooperation, we therefore face dilemmas.
I will highlight three of the many irksome issues in
that regard.

First, can climate security be achieved through the
quick fix of securitization of climate change to address
climate-related disasters? International peace and
securityconsiderationsoftentrumpotherconsiderations.
Defining a problem as a security challenge therefore
often increases the attention and resources devoted to
addressing it. Securitizing climate change may help to
heighten public awareness but securitization also has
significant downsides. A securitized approach risks
pitting States into a competition, when cooperation
is clearly the most productive avenue in tackling this
threat. Thinking in security terms usually engenders
overly militarized solutions to problems that inherently
require non-military responses to resolve them. In
short, it brings the wrong actors to the table. As the
saying goes, if all you have is a hammer, everything
looks like a nail.

Secondly, are climate-related disasters amenable
to processes and solutions used to tackle threats to
international peace and security? To put it another
way, can mitigation and adaptation strategies be
fulfilled through enforcement action? Can those that
cite counter-terrorism and non-proliferation actions
by the Council as pathways for punitive measures
explain which are "the others" to be held accountable
for climate disasters? Will it be those that do not fulfil
their nationally determined contributions under the
Paris Agreement? Will those that do not provide the
committed climate financing be forced to provide such
support or will inconvenient truths be sidestepped?

Thirdly, can the needs ofclimatejustice be served by
shifting climate law-making from the inclusive United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) to decision-making by a structurally
unrepresentative organization? The disruptive spillover
of such a change, made through a mere decision of
the Council, on the UNFCCC processes and the Paris
Agreement, as well as on the other multilateral organs
currently engaged in cooperatively tackling climate
change, and indeed on multilateral law-making, is real.
We weigh in favour of a cautionary approach on this
contested subject. India supports a path that promotes
cooperation to achieve our common goal of preventing
and addressing serious disasters linked to climate
change. To address such issues, we need to collaborate
on climate actions, consistent with the principle of
common but differentiated responsibilities.

