Mr. Idohou (Benin) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to join the preceding speakers in
thanking the High Representative, Lord Ashdown, for
the informative briefing he has just presented to the
Council on the developments in implementing the
peace agreement in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

It would appear obvious that the normalization
and national integration process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has maintained all of its momentum, even
though the entity has been unable to achieve either of
the two major objectives, which are the conclusion of a
stabilization and association agreement with the
European Union, and integration into the Peace
Partnership Programme of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO).

In particular, we should congratulate the Bosnia
and Herzegovina authorities on their remarkable
achievements in reforming the defence sector and in
strengthening economic stability, with increased
participation by the Bosnian authorities in businesses,
and on the progress made in terms of unifying and
rehabilitating the city of Mostar and the Brcko district,
which has made such good progress that the High
Representative is considering withdrawing from it.
That remarkable progress is a tribute both to the Office
of the High Representative and to the international
community; it should be considered an achievement to
consolidate. Such consolidation requires continued
efforts on issues that have been addressed too slowly.
We agree with the High Representative's analysis
regarding the causes of that slowness. We must
resolutely tackle the inertia that continues to impede
the progress expected in critical sectors such as the
judicial apparatus; the restructuring of the police; the
intelligence sector; economic reforms, particularly
agricultural modernization and privatization; the
delimitation and demarcation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's borders with its neighbours; and the
creation of agencies and institutions that are essential
for its association with the European Union. Moreover,
we are concerned at the instability resulting from the
indictment of certain political figures whose actions
have compromised the smooth operation of national
institutions.

Concerning the issue of prosecuting war crimes,
the Council must remain firm regarding the principle
of apprehending fugitives still at large by finding them
and transferring them to the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. We must remind
the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities of their
obligation to ensure full and complete cooperation with
the Tribunal, particularly with regard to Mladic and
Karadzic.

Bosnia and Herzegovina must accelerate its
progress in all those areas so that it can attain its major
objectives. The High Representative must increase the
pressure on all the relevant structures to obtain
concrete results.

We are pleased at the European Union military
mission's substantial support for the activities of the
High Representative and its contribution to the
continuing efforts to stabilize Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We welcome its operations in priority strategic areas,
which are proving to be particularly beneficial, as
witnessed by the good reputation that the military
mission has earned on the ground in such a short
period of time.

In conclusion, we pay tribute to all actors in the
international community who are working together to
implement the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina and to consolidate the rule of law in that
country.

