Mr. Kay: I thank Security Council members for
this opportunity to brief the Council and for their
continued and united support for Somalia.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) completes its first year of work on 3 June.
A year ago, the Federal Government of Somalia asked
the United Nations for "one door to knock on" to help
coordinate international assistance as the country
emerged from decades of conflict. In response,
UNSOM. has established an integrated United Nations
presence across Somalia. Despite significant security
challenges, I am proud that today the United Nations
family has a larger presence on the ground in Somalia
than at any time in the past 18 years. The United Nations
commitment to live and work alongside Somalis is
strong. Our plans are for even greater expansion.

Our work depends on having strong partnerships
with the Federal Government, the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), the European
Union and Somalia's neighbouring countries and key
partners. Our partnership with AMISOM. is extremely
strong. With both leadership teams firmly based in
Mogadishu, we are working increasingly jointly on
delivering our mandates. I am pleased that, despite
setbacks and disappointments, Somalia has made
political, economic and security progress in the past
12 months and in particular in the last quarter.

Politically, the Federal Government has started to
address some of the outstanding disputes between the
centre and the regions. It has engaged actively with the
Interim Juba Administration in the south and decided
to support a three-region solution for State-building
in south-west Somalia. To the north, relations between
Mogadishu and Puntland are strengthening once more.
Somalia's leaders are travelling and engaging in the
regions, which is an encouraging development that
needs to be strengthened. However, I am concerned by
the political turmoil in Mogadishu, which I will address
when I turn to the challenges ahead.

Economically, the country has continued to
show signs of growth, albeit from a distressingly low
base. The Federal Government has also taken steps
to re-establish donor confidence. A new financial
governance committee has been established, composed
of Federal Government, World Bank, International
Monetary Fund and other representatives.

There have also been security successes in the
past three months. We discussed the recent AMISOM/
Somali national army offensive in our interactive
dialogue with AMISOM. in April in New York. My
friend and colleague Ambassador Annadif will brief
the Council further on that. I pay tribute to those Somali
and African Union colleagues who have lost their lives
in the past year bringing peace to Somalia.

There have also been recent improvements in
security in Mogadishu. A new Government strategy
and closer joint work with AMISOM. are beginning to
show positive results on the ground, although it is too
early and too rash to say that we have seen the end of
terrorism. Somali civilians are the ones who make up
the vast majority of the victims, but the United Nations
is not immune. The deployment of the United Nations
guard unit, which was officially inaugurated on 18 May,
will help us stay and deliver.

Recognizing political, economic and security
progress should not and does not blind us to the
significant shortcomings and challenges that remain.
Under the leadership of President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud, the new Government of Prime Minister
Abdiwali Sheikh Ahmed has injected fresh momentum.
However, progress on State-building has not been as
rapid as needed.

When I last briefed the Council in March (see S/PV.7132), I stated that the Federal Government was
close to finalizing a detailed blueprint for building
a federal Somalia, revising and implementing the
Constitution and preparing for elections in 2016.
Unfortunately, that critical plan, with timelines
and benchmarks, remains pending. As a first
priority, the formation of inclusive interim regional
administrations - the first step in the formation of
federal member states - needs to be finalized this
year. Progress made with the implementation of the
Addis Ababa Agreement, which created the Interim
Juba Administration, also needs to be accelerated. We
welcome the vital role IGAD is playing in that respect.

Police, judiciary and corrections are essential
to building sustainable stability and peace, as is
the rehabilitation and reintegration of disengaged
combatants, including through programmes tailored
to children. We must also ensure that those accused
and convicted of crimes related to Al-Shabaab have
access to programmes to curb extremist ideology and
behaviour.

The incidence of gender-based Violence in Somalia
remains unacceptably high. The United Nations team of
experts on sexual Violence visited Somalia in December
last year. We are striving to implement their important

recommendations with the Government, AMISOM
and other international partners. UNSOM. has also
been working closely with the Federal Government
and AMISOM. to provide training on human rights,
international humanitarian law and refugee law,
including child protection. The national human rights
commission has not yet been established.

I have travelled a lot in Somalia in the past year
and I have listened closely to the concerns and hopes
of the Somali people. One message I have heard loud
and clear is that they want to see a stable and united
country. They also want to see progress by the Federal
Government and its international partners to move
much further and faster. The year 2014 is critical for
Somalia. Time is short. I remain a firm optimist, but
it is clear that the Government and its international
partners must make faster progress.

I fear that Somalia is approaching a critical phase in
a number of areas. Politically, there needs to be urgent
progress in establishing the mechanisms to revise and
implement the Constitution, oversee the establishment
of federal states, and prepare for elections. I am
concerned that the current political crisis in Mogadishu,
which includes a call by over a hundred members of
Parliament for the President to resign, could herald a
return to the cycle of deadlock and infighting between
Somalia's political institutions that has paralysed
Governments since 2000. Somalia needs continuity and
stability in its political leadership.

The expectations of the Somali people are high
and patience is a Virtue in short supply. I have worked
and will continue to work with international partners
and with the President, Prime Minister and Speaker.
They are united in their search for solutions. Somalia
cannot afford further delays in its State-building
process. Its institutions should work together within
the distinct roles and responsibilities set out for them
in the Constitution to deliver what the people need and
expect.

There must also be urgent progress on security
and stabilization in the newly recovered areas. Locally
acceptable administrations need to be established and
local people must see peace dividends soon. Access
to those areas, currently obstructed by ongoing
Al-Shabaab activity, also needs to be secured urgently.
The United Nations Peacebuilding Fund has allocated
up to $10 million to support the Government's efforts
to deliver tangible peace dividends to communities in
those areas and other parts of south-central Somalia.
The lack of military helicopters for AMISOM. is
a critical obstacle. And without further contributions
to the trust fund for the Somali National Army, vital
logistical support will be impossible. Building a
sustainable, professional and truly national Somali
army is a strategic priority. To date, despite the
considerable efforts of international partners, progress
is still fragmentary and insufficient. Without action on
those issues, there is a danger that military success will
not be consolidated and that insecurity will return.

Without more economic progress and development,
the credibility of the international community and the
Federal Government is also in danger. The Somali
people must see greater benefits from the Somali
Compact. The United Nations Multi-Partner Trust
Fund is now operational, and a national stream has
been established to allow for a gradual increase in
direct support to the Treasury. More money needs to go
into and come out from this and the other international
funding mechanisms established to support Somalia's
development.

The humanitarian situation risks slipping into the
danger zone as well. My deputy and humanitarian
coordinator has recently flagged the troubling
similarities between the situation today and that before
the 2011 famine. There is a real danger ofa worsening
of the existing crisis as a result of ongoing conflict,
poor rains and lack of sustained access to towns due
to Al-Shabaab tactics of blocking main supply routes.

The funding crisis affecting existing humanitarian
operations is further exacerbating the situation. So far
this year, the consolidated appeal has received only
19 per cent of the $933 million requested - leaving
a gap of $756 million - to meet the needs of almost
3 million people. The funding situation is so bad that
aid agencies are looking at closing down life-saving
programmes. For example, UNICEF primary health-
care services for 3 million people are on the verge of
being cut. Some $60 million are needed immediately to
maintain current life-saving operations in just the next
two to three months. While we do not know which way
the food security situation will go, this is no time for
business as usual in Somalia. If Somalia's humanitarian
situation is allowed to slip back into emergency, it will
jeopardise the political, economic and development
gains that have been achieved.

The period between now and my next briefing to
the Council will be a testing time for Somalia. I remain
confident that its leaders and institutions will rise to the
challenge and that international partners will continue
and enhance their support in equal measure. But we
should not ignore the dangers.

I am proud of the collective efforts being made by
Somalia's friends in the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the African Union, the European Union,
the League of Arab States and the United Nations.
They all do so at some personal risk. I pay tribute to
those who have lost their lives in this endeavour, as we
saw again when two United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime colleagues were tragically killed in April.
Building peace comes at a price, but as we all recognize
that failure is a cost we cannot afford. I thank the
Council for its unwavering support and for its decision
to Visit Somalia later this year.

