Mr. Ilkin (Turkey): The objective set at
Annapolis - to reach an Israeli-Palestinian peace
treaty by the end of this year - appears unlikely to be

08-6603]
achieved. Yet, we should welcome the parties'
determination to continue the negotiations. Permanent
peace can be achieved only through direct and
intensive negotiations.

It is with that thought in mind that Turkey
welcomes Security Council resolution 1850 (2008), as
it underlines the irreversibility of the Annapolis
process and the significance of the Arab Peace
Initiative. The resolution also recommits the parties to
their previously agreed obligations. That, we believe, is
of particular importance, since the situation on the
ground will have a direct impact on the success of the
process.

In order to maintain the momentum in the
Israeli-Palestinian track at this critical juncture, neither
party should take any action that might undermine the
peace process and prejudice the final-status
negotiations. In that respect, the Israeli settlement
activities in the West Bank and East Jerusalem must
end. The construction of the separation wall must be
stopped. The daily difficulties experienced by
Palestinians at checkpoints and roadblocks must be
eased. Immediate steps must be taken to halt the rapid
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Gaza.

The Palestinian people should be able to feel that
what the future has in store for them is a better,
brighter and dignified life. The Palestinian people
should also be able to put an end to their internal
divisions. For their part, the Israeli people should be
able to feel secure and confident about a stable and
peaceful future, free from threats. Thus, the security
concerns of Israel must be addressed.

We all know that the problems of the region are
interlinked. Therefore what is needed is a
comprehensive peace. It is with that understanding that
we welcome the proximity talks between Israel and
Syria and the establishment of diplomatic relations
between Lebanon and Syria, as well as the tangible
developments in Lebanon in the implementation of
Doha Agreement. We believe that the people of
Lebanon will further promote and carry forward the
recent positive developments in their country. We also
hope and expect the resumption of the indirect talks
between Israel and Syria after the elections in Israel.

We agree with the Nobel Prize laureate,
Mr. Ahtisaari, that "All conflicts can be settled, and
there are no excuses for allowing them to be eternal". A
permanent and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East is indeed long overdue and should be within
reach.

With that belief, Turkey will continue to work for
a comprehensive peace based on a two-State settlement
and to contribute to the stability, security and
prosperity of the region.

