Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): My delegation is
grateful to the Dutch presidency for initiating this
thought-provoking debate and for preparing an
excellent theoretical framework for discussion on the
issues of the enhancement of the Security Council's
decision-making process regarding the creation,
alteration and termination of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and on the importance of a
long-term strategy for peace operations.

Today's debate is a logical continuation of past
and ongoing efforts aimed at bringing genuine reform
to the existing United Nations peacekeeping
mechanism, at ensuring that the multifaceted peace
operations of the United Nations are in line with new
realities and challenges and at filling certain lacunae in
the theoretical and practical foundations, thus
strengthening the authority of the Security Council in
the field of its primary responsibility.

In that regard, let me recall that just two months
ago heads of State or Government, at the Millennium
Summit and at the Security Council Summit, adopted
two historically important documents, in which they
demonstrated their resolve to make the United Nations
more effective in maintaining peace and security. As
some of my colleagues have recalled, it is only two
days ago that the Security Council adopted its
resolution 1327 (2000), which set out a number of
decisions and recommendations based on the
conclusions of the report (S/2000/809) of the Panel on
United Nations Peace Operations chaired by Mr.
Lakhdar Brahimi. All of this adds additional
importance to our current deliberations.

Since the topic before us is indeed comprehensive
in its scope and has a great variety of dimensions, I
will discuss only some aspects which provoke our keen
interest. In our view, the examination of exit strategies
with respect to United Nations peacekeeping should be
carried out in the wider context of the whole process of
the peaceful efforts of the United Nations to resolve
conflicts. In that regard we agree with some of the
premises of the President's paper, which states that
exit - or, as we understand it, the end of United
Nations involvement in a peace process - is an
integral part of the overall strategy of conflict
resolution. Therefore, the eventual success or failure of
this final phase of the peace process is heavily
dependent on the level of success or failure of efforts
during all previous phases.

I will not reinvent the wheel here by saying that
conflicts can and should be averted before they erupt.
The effective carrying out of the final phase of a peace
effort should derive from the timely and effective
pursuit of its initial phases, which embrace conflict
prevention. I cannot find a better saying than the one

cited by Ambassador Holbrooke earlier today: an
ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure".

We continue to believe that conflict prevention is
one of the most promising tools in the arsenal of the
United Nations. Against that background, we stand for
speedy implementation of the proposal put forward by
the President of Ukraine at the Millennium and
Security Council Summits: to develop a comprehensive
United Nations strategy for conflict prevention on the
basis of large-scale use of preventive diplomacy and
peace-building. Ukraine has always been an advocate
of further practical approaches to United Nations
preventive action, and has spoken in favour of the
creation and subsequent functioning of regional centres
for conflict prevention.

Should we fail in these initial efforts, and if and
when there is an urgent need for United Nations
peacekeeping involvement, the Security Council,
before mandating a peace operation, should develop
realistic objectives for its response to the conflict
situation. Those objectives should be based on a
realistic assessment of the circumstances on the ground
and of the resources available to achieve the objectives.
An exit strategy - or rather a strategy or objectives for
the mission - is directly linked to the clarity,
credibility and achievability of Security Council
mandates.

We entirely agree with the View that the Council
should remain engaged through all phases of peace
operations to ensure the adequacy of its reaction to the
changing situation on the ground. In those
circumstances, it is of Vital importance that United
Nations responses and strategies be formulated through
an improved mechanism for consultations among the
Security Council, the Secretariat and troop-contributing
countries, as many previous speakers have already
observed. It is our conviction that such consultations
should be held at all stages of peacekeeping operations,
including the stage of their completion, especially in
cases of the rapid deterioration of the security situation
on the ground.

We strongly believe that the safety and security of
United Nations peacekeeping personnel and of
associated and humanitarian personnel should remain
among the top priority elements of any peacekeeping
operation. Therefore, ensuring an adequate level of
security and safety for a mission's personnel should be
a decisive factor in the planning for the withdrawal of
peacekeeping contingents and civilian personnel from
the areas of deployment.

A critical point in the strategic planning for peace
operations is how to sustain success after a mission's
mandate has been fulfilled. That should not be thought
of as an exit strategy but rather as a transition strategy.
We fully endorse the View that the Security Council
should remain firmly committed to a post-conflict
peace-building process leading to a self-sustaining
peace based on good governance and the rule of law.
To achieve that end, long-term development objectives
should be pursued.

Ambassador Holbrooke has already mentioned
the role of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
I would like to draw attention to another important
aspect of the problem under discussion, from the point
of View of internal management within the
Organization. In current conditions, with the large
scope of existing operations and the need for rapid
deployment of missions upon their establishment or
enlargement by the Security Council, the necessity for
effective disposition of their assets at the liquidation
phase acquires even greater significance. We believe
that all measures should be taken to prevent unjustified
loss of valuable mission property resulting from a lack
of adequate termination procedures, as has been
experienced in the past, and to ensure the proper
disposition of assets for subsequent redeployment.

In this regard we wish to stress the need for
continuous and comprehensive implementation by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the
recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services on the evaluation of the termination phase of
peacekeeping operations. These were endorsed by the
Committee for Programme and Coordination at its
thirty-sixth session, and the review by the Office was
approved by that Committee at its thirty-ninth session.

Finally, we should openly recognize that the
United Nations can neither enter nor exit a conflict
situation without a clearly defined, far-reaching
strategy, especially when it comes to United Nations
peacekeeping.

In conclusion, let me express the hope that
today's thematic discussion will make a valuable
contribution to further strengthening the capacity of the
United Nations to maintain international peace and
security, and that it will help foster the genuine reform
of United Nations peacekeeping.

