Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): Botswana is alarmed by
developments in the occupied Arab territories. We are
dismayed by the soaring number of the casualties of the
wanton violence that is being wreaked mainly on the
innocent. These developments are the culmination of a
series of events whose common genesis is the nearly
comatose state in which the peace process has been
languishing in the past few months. The difficult
economic conditions under which the Palestinians live as
a result of the border closures have exacted a heavy toll
on their everyday lives. Work and travel restrictions, and
the slowdown in the Israeli-Palestinian peace process have
exacerbated the growing frustration among the Palestinian
people. The agreements signed between the Government
of Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization had
given the people of Palestine a profound hope that at long
last they could look forward to a peaceful future. The
policies of the Government of Israel which have had the
effect of reversing some important aspects of the peace
agreements have dashed their hopes. The Palestinians
were bound to lose their sense of purpose in the
circumstances. And, as we all know, and as history has
taught us, people in such situations resort to all manner of
desperate acts.

Israel and the Palestinian Authority have accepted
that they cannot build peace on one another's graves.
They have committed themselves to agreements aimed at
establishing a just, comprehensive and lasting peace. The
international community has warmly and wholeheartedly
welcomed the emergence of such common ground
between the two peoples. The Government of Israel and
the Palestinian Authority should focus attention on the

 

arduous task of building the foundations of durable peace
and not on the digging of graves to bury their dead. The
present situation should not be allowed to derail the peace
process and return the Middle East to the dark ages of
endless bloodletting. The agreements between the parties
provide a framework for mutual accommodation and
cooperation. The parties should not lose this window of
opportunity. This calls for mutual respect and for
understanding of the interests and concerns of both parties.
In this regard, the highly controversial decision by the
Government of Israel to open a tunnel under the third-
holiest Muslim site was an act of insensitivity to the
religious concerns of the Palestinians. It is not in the
interests of Israel to ignore these concerns.

The armed confrontation between the Israeli Defence
Force and the Palestinian Authority police is an unfortunate
and ominous development which can seriously poison the
atmosphere of cooperation between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority on important security matters. Israel
and the Palestinian Authority need each other to manage
these delicate issues. The atmosphere of trust and mutual
confidence engendered by the joint patrols of the security
forces was an important element in the implementation of
the peace process. The security forces of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority have a crucial role to play in the
peace process, and conflict between them should be avoided
as much as possible.

The Security Council has a responsibility to ensure the
reduction of tension in the area. It should help the parties
to give the necessary momentum to the peace process. In
this context, we appeal to the Government of Israel to
honour its obligations under the agreements signed with the
Palestinian Authority. The resumption of the
implementation of the Interim Agreement, in particular the
Israeli withdrawal from Hebron, is crucial to rebuilding
confidence and energizing the peace process.

Botswana acknowledges the diplomatic efforts
undertaken by a number of countries to de-escalate the
volatile situation in the area. It is our hope that the efforts
undertaken by these countries will complement those of the
Security Council. The international community is
unanimous on the need for an urgent and permanent
solution to the problems of the Middle East. It is crucial
that the parties receive the same message from today's
debate. It must be made abundantly clear that the backward
policies of war are not acceptable. Common sense and
civilized conduct must prevail.

The Israelis and the Palestinians need to be
constantly reminded that their destinies are permanently
and inextricably interlinked by reason of geography and
history. They cannot wish one another away. They have
battled and killed each other's children generation after
generation, but this has not resolved their differences.
They must try another route - jointly and not
separately - to reach the lofty goals of their national
dreams. Peace is their imperative. The one cannot have
peace without the peace of the other. Equally, the sense
of safety and security for the self-preservation of one side
would be meaningless if it were not anchored on similar
conditions for the safety and security of the other side for
its own self-preservation.

