Mr. Taula (New Zealand): There has been no
shortage of warnings to the Security Council regarding
the risk of conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The failure to undertake timely preparations for
the electoral list were apparent a year ago. And in July,
the Deputy Secretary-General warned the Security
Council (see S/PV.7732) that violence and instability
associated with a political crisis could still preventable
if an inclusive political agreement could be reached. We
saw early signs of that instability and violence manifest
itself, with dozens killed on 19 and 20 September.
But a slow, burning situation can be among the most
challenging for the Security Council to address when we
are confronted with so many emergencies at the same
time. And influencing the parties in a situation that has
been on the Security Council's agenda for so long is not
easy. Visiting missions, like the one we undertook last
month, is important in order to engage directly with
the Governments and other stakeholders, listen to them
and deliver messages from Council members directly
to the parties.

We are pleased that we have now agreed on
a common set of messages in today's presidential
statement S/PRST/2016/18. That is an important
outcome, although ideally it would have been preferable
to issue the statement closer to the time of the visit.
There are a few points that deserve particular emphasis.

First, the Congolese political leadership - both
in Government and opposition - must heed the calls
from the Council to act with a spirit of compromise to
achieve a consensus political agreement on the path
ahead, building on the 18 October agreement and before
the scheduled end of the President's current term at the
end of December.

Secondly, political leaders on all sides need
to encourage a political environment in which the
Congolese can freely engage, with freedom of assembly
and the media, while avoiding incitement of violence.

Thirdly, as was underscored by our visit and
meetings in Luanda, the region is among those first
to face the implications of conflict, and it has a key
role to play in building support for an inclusive
political agreement.

The Congolese continue to suffer from insecurity
in the eastern parts of the country. When we were in
Beni last month, we saw the fear and anger felt by
Congolese who are suffering from appalling human
rights abuses. While addressing the immediate political
crisis in Kinshasa, we must also remain engaged on
the imperative of stabilizing the security situation
in the east, protecting civilians, neutralizing armed
groups, such as Allied Democratic Force and the
Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda, and
establishing accountability for the human rights abuses
that have taken place. The Congolese authorities have
the lead role to play in achieving that, supported by the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
At the same time, MONUSCO must devote resources
and be well prepared for conflict risks associated with
the political crisis. The missions ongoing contingency-
planning efforts are particularly important in that
regard, as outlined by Mr. Sidikou.

Finally, we would have seen real value in Assistant
Secretary-General Andrew Gilmour participating
in this briefing to share his observations on his
recent visit to the Democratic Republic of Congo and
the work of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights inside the country.
Indeed, the linkage between human rights abuses as a

potential driver of conflict could not be clearer than the
present circumstances.

