The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Germany.

The civil war in Liberia has been a matter of deep
concern for all of us since 1990. Since then, 13 peace
agreements between the warring factions have been
concluded and later broken. Our assessment of the
situation in Liberia has always been clear: the
responsibility for disrupting the peace process lies solely
with the leaders of the various factions, who have shown
no regard for the rights and lives of their people.

Since the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Summit of 17 August 1996 in Abuja,
there is new hope that the peace process can be resumed
successfully in Liberia. The ECOWAS States have
decided to give the factions one last chance. The
Committee of the Nine Heads of State and Government
agreed on a strict timetable for the implementation of the

 

Abuja Agreement, commencing with the restoration of the
cease-fire by 31 August 1996 and concluding with the
holding of free and fair elections on 30 May 1997. Why do
we think that there is new hope?

The Committee of Nine has built into its timetable a
monitoring mechanism to ensure compliance with the Abuja
Agreement. The five major stages of the timetable -
cease-fire, disengagement of factions, disarmament,
preparations for elections and, finally, elections - will be
verified by international observers. They will monitor
whether the peace process is developing in a correct and
stable direction.

Moreover, the Committee of Nine agreed in Abuja that
any person or group obstructing the implementation of the
Agreement will be subject to the imposition of sanctions.
These sanctions will have a direct effect on this very person
or group.
Finally, ECOWAS has underlined its commitment to
remain engaged in Liberia until the new government is
installed.

We have learned from the Secretary-General's latest
report on Liberia, as well as from Ambassador James Jonah
in his briefing in the Security Council, that the Abuja
Agreement was also reached because of the insistence of
various Liberian civilian groups present at the Abuja
meeting. We hope that this can be regarded as the first
nucleus of a democratic process that will allow the people
of Liberia to decide their fate for themselves in a
democratic manner.

The extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) and the
deployment of an additional 24 military observers, in
accordance with the resolution which we have just adopted,
is a first appropriate response of the United Nations to the
new developments in Liberia. We agree that the
ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) has to be
provided with adequate financial and logistic resources to
carry out its task. We also believe that future assistance
will have to be more closely coordinated than in the past.

It should, however, be clear that the missions of
ECOMOG and UNOMIL can only be continued in a
meaningful way if conditions in Liberia allow them to
fulfil their mandates. We therefore strongly urge the
warring parties to seize this opportunity, which may be
their very last.

International humanitarian assistance is also
necessary to sustain the peace process and is an additional
stabilizing factor. After the recent fighting in April and
May of this year alone Germany has provided
humanitarian aid and medicine worth about DM600,000.

The international community and, in particular, the
Economic Community of West African States have not
given up on Liberia. Our support and best wishes go the
new Chairperson of the Liberian State Council, Ms. Ruth
Perry, and there was consensus in our consultations that
the United Nations should make another effort in support
of the Liberian peace process.

On the basis of these considerations, Germany voted
in favour of the resolution, which was initiated and
introduced by the delegation of the United States, to
which we wish to express our thanks.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

There are no further speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 1.40 pm.
