Mr. Ojeda: I thank you, Mr. President, for giving
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
the opportunity to contribute to this important debate.
We commend the debate's emphasis on Africa's global
importance. Forty per cent of ICRC resources are
invested in Africa, and we place great value on our
partnerships with African Governments.

We will focus on two key drivers of peace and
security in Africa: an end to the violence, which
damages development, and the significance of basic
services, which make development possible.

The median age in Africa today is 19. Urbanization
is expanding and land is still plentiful. The African
Union (AU) is achieving increasing traction as a
regional organization with clear development vision and
capacity. Africa's opportunity must not be undermined
by the destruction brought by armed conflict. Peace and
security is the first priority of African development.
We urge the Council to make every effort to support
African States to end African conflicts.

But where there is no peace there must be greater
respect for international humanitarian law. Changing
the behaviour of many parties to conflict in Africa
is essential if African people are to keep hold of the
land, health, resources, businesses and education they
need to achieve the AU's Agenda 2063. International
humanitarian law is increasingly prioritized in Africa.
Every day we work as partners with African authorities
in individual States and at the AU, enhancing their
capacities to respect and ensure greater respect for
international humanitarian law.

Progress is clear in the development of African
armed forces, and in the commitment of the AU and its
member States to high standards in the mandates, rules
of engagement and conduct ofAfrican peace operations.
Putting these policies into action in Africa's complex
operational environments is always a challenge. Africa
and its military partners need to cooperate continuously

to solve problems on the ground and ensure compliance
with international humanitarian law.
Meeting people's need for basic services is also key
to peace and security. Infrastructure and services are
vital to deliver African development. Too often, schools,
health facilities, water sources and power facilities are
destroyed or rendered unsafe in armed conflicts across
the continent. These services must be kept safe and
functioning for Africa's people. We work constantly
with authorities in Africa to ensure the protection
and continuity of basic services but humanitarian aid
cannot do this alone. This is why we are pleased to be
working with the World Bank in Somalia.

Development actors must find ways to enhance
State capacity to maintain basic services during
conflict. Here, the Chinese Government often sets
an important example. The Kampala Convention is a
model for supporting internally displaced persons.

I hope our two suggestions add value. They are
particularly important today, when millions of Africans
face the double vulnerability of armed conflict
and drought.

