The President (interpretation from Spanish): I now
put to the vote the draft resolution contained in document
S/1996/866.

 
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Botswana, Chile, Egypt, France, Germany,
Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy,
Poland, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America

Against:
None

Abstaining:
China

The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
result of the voting is as follows: 14 in favour, none against
and 1 abstention. The draft resolution has been adopted as
resolution 1077 (1996).

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General concerning the situation in
Abkhazia, Georgia, of 10 October 1996 (8/1996/843).
It has also taken note of the letter from the Permanent
Representative of Georgia to the President of the
Security Council of 8 October 1996 (S/1996/835).

"The Security Council notes with deep concern
that no significant progress has yet been achieved
towards a comprehensive political settlement of the
conflict, including on the political status of Abkhazia,
respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Georgia within its internationally recognized borders.

"The Security Council reaffirms its full support
for an active role of the United Nations, with the
assistance of the Russian Federation as facilitator,
aimed at achieving a comprehensive political
settlement. In the context of the recent visit to the
region of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
the Council requests the Secretary-General to
undertake further efforts and make proposals to
reinvigorate the stalled peace process. The Security
Council stresses that the primary responsibility for
achieving such reinvigoration of the peace process
rests upon the parties themselves and calls on them, in
particular the Abkhaz side, to resume discussions and
to reach substantive progress in the negotiations.

 

"The Security Council is deeply concerned by
the deterioration of the situation in the Gali region
and its negative impact on the ability of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) to
meet its mandated tasks. The Council condemns
mine-laying and other threats referred to in the
Secretary-General' s report against UNOMIG and the
collective peacekeeping forces of the Commonwealth
of Independent States (CIS peacekeeping force). The
Council calls on both parties to take all the
necessary steps to prevent all such acts.

"The Security Council calls on both parties to
respect the Moscow Agreement of 14 May 1994 on
a Cease-Fire and Separation of Forces (S/1994/583, annex I) and expresses its concern at the violations
referred to in the Secretary-General's report, in
particular the serious Violations which recently
occurred in the restricted weapons zone.

"The Security Council stresses that the
international community's ability to assist depends
on the full cooperation of the parties, especially the
fulfilment of their obligations regarding the safety
and freedom of movement of international personnel.

"The Security Council is deeply concerned at
the announcement made by the Abkhaz side that so-
called parliamentary elections would be held on 23
November 1996. The holding of such elections
would only be possible after the determination
through negotiations of the political status of
Abkhazia respecting the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Georgia within its internationally
recognized borders, within the framework of a
comprehensive political settlement, and with the
guaranteed possibility of full participation for all
refugees and displaced persons. The Council notes
that conditions for holding such elections are not
met at present. It calls on the Abkhaz side to call off
these elections and further calls on both sides to
refrain from any action that could heighten tension.

"The Security Council remains deeply
concerned at the continued obstruction of the return
of the refugees and displaced persons by the Abkhaz
authorities, which is totally unacceptable.

"The Security Council welcomes the good
cooperation between UNOMIG and the CIS
peacekeeping force and their efforts to promote
stabilization of the situation in the zone of conflict.
 

"The Security Council requests the Secretary?
General to continue to keep it closely informed of the
situation."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1996/43.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12 noon.

