Mr. Taula (New Zealand): I thank Under-Secretaries-
General Feltman and O'Brien for their first-hand
engagement and insights on the Lake Chad Basin.

As we have heard, the region faces a range of very
serious challenges, including the environmental and
economic effects of climate change, lack of development,
youth populations that aspire to greater economic and
political participation, low commodity prices, and the
presence of groups promoting an extremist ideology. We
are deeply concerned by the displacement of millions
of people across the region, many of whom are women
and children, due to the actions of Boko Haram. This
has been further exacerbated by the growing number
of attacks in the southern Diffa region of the Niger.
The large-scale displacement risks fuelling further
regional instability, and we agree that a concerted
effort is required on resettlement and recovery for
those affected.

Mr. O'Brien outlined that there are over 9 million
people in need across the Lake Chad Basin region.
Boko Haram's continued actions are exacerbating an
already difficult humanitarian situation. The disruption
of farming and herding activities is contributing to a
looming food crisis in north-east Nigeria. Today's
meeting is therefore important in highlighting to the
Security Council and the international community the
sheer scale of the problems.

We welcome the gains made by the Multinational
Joint Task Force (MNJTF) and the Nigerian army
against Boko Haram, including the rescue of over 2,000
abductees and the arrest of key Boko Haram members.
We are also encouraged by the enhanced coordination
by Governments in the Lake Chad Basin area, including
on intelligence-sharing with the establishment of an
intelligence fusion cell in N'Djamena in April.

New Zealand supports and encourages regional
solutions to regional issues. The MNTJF represents a
practical example of a collective, coordinated regional
response to a threat that is inherently regional and
cross-border in nature.

Ensuring that the MNJTF is adequately financed
is critical. It also speaks to a deeper ongoing problem
in the international community's approach to funding
regionally led counter-terrorism and peace operations.
New Zealand is strongly supportive of African calls for
a long-term solution to these financing questions that
would provide regional organizations with more stable
and predictable funding, recognizing that there also
needs to be flexibility in specific cases.

As our briefers have said, this is not just a security
issue, and a military response is only part of the
solution to defeating Boko Haram. It is necessary to
address the conditions that have allowed extremism
to take hold in the region, including political and
economic marginalization, limited access to education,
scarce employment and economic opportunities, and
food insecurity.

