Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): An analysis of the situation with regard to
the protection of civilians in various hotspots and of
our experience in implementing Security Council
resolutions that include this component lead us to the
discomfiting conclusion that, even with a serious
international legal basis and increasing efforts by the
international community, civilians continue to suffer
and to become casualties of conflict.

We are particularly concerned about the fact that
women, children and older persons account for the
majority of civilian casualties - in other words, those
who are normally deemed to be the most vulnerable
groups in a population. It therefore follows that the
most effective way to address the protection of
civilians is by not allowing armed conflict itself to
occur or very promptly ceasing confrontation where it
exists. Otherwise, an approach that exacerbates conflict
inevitably leads to new suffering for civilian
populations.

We vigorously condemn both premeditated
attacks on civilians and their demise as the result of the
indiscriminate or disproportionate use of force, which
is a gross violation of international humanitarian law.
All parties to an armed conflict, including international
troops, must promote the peaceful resolution of
conflicts and bear the corresponding obligations under
international humanitarian law. Those guilty of
violations, State and non-State actors alike, must not
evade responsibility for crimes committed. In our view,
the Brazilian conception of the responsibility to protect
is very interesting. We will participate constructively in
developing that idea.

The Russian Federation believes that the
international community's adoption of any reactive
measures, especially those involving the use of force,
are possible only if they are sanctioned by the Security
Council and if they comply strictly with the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations. It is therefore
important to consider the economic, social, historical,
religious, cultural and other specificities of countries
and regions, including the nature of each conflict, its
underlying causes and ways of resolving it. Efforts to
protect civilians must be based on a clearly established
Security Council mandate, which must be strictly
complied with by all who undertake to discharge the
corresponding duties. Attempts to manipulate Council
mandates are unacceptable, even when proclaiming the
noblest of goals. Not only do such acts discredit the
very purpose of protecting civilians. Above all, such a
policy undermines the prestige of those who carry it
out. It also places the Security Council in an
ambiguous position and undermines the potential for
joint action by the international community in similar
situations.

Let us not be under any misconceptions when it
comes to so-called high-precision weapons in the
context of the protection of civilians. They are painless
only for those who fire them. On the ground, they
bring about destruction and death, including to
civilians and civilian infrastructure. The events of the
very recent past require an honest analysis and in-depth
and honest conclusions. Only that will fully restore the
capacity of the international community and the
Security Council to expeditiously and effectively react
to emerging conflicts, including in the context of the
challenge to protect civilians.
