Mr. Abdullah (Malaysia): First and foremost,
I wish to congratulate you, Madam, and Pakistan on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I wish to welcome you back to New York
to attend to this open debate on a subject that is truly
important to all Member States, especially Pakistan,
which witnessed horrific terrorist attacks last week.
Our condolences go to the families of the victims.

At this juncture, I wish to align my statement with
that to be delivered by the representatives of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and of Egypt on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

Like all nations represented here today, Malaysia
hopes to see a world free from terrorism. In order
for that day to become a reality, terrorism must be
addressed and countered in all its hideous forms and
manifestations, as well as at all levels. Therefore,
Malaysia cannot agree enough that terrorism must be
countered in a comprehensive manner.

In the wake of 11 September, 2001 and subsequent
terrorist attacks across the world, the international
community reinvigorated its resolve and efforts to
counter terrorism. The international community
introduced innovative measures to target the financing
of terrorism. However, as demonstrated by terrorist
attacks and bombings thereafter, only minimal
sums are required to cause disproportional harm
to people. Furthermore, terrorists have managed
to leverage lower-risk, higher-margin sources of
revenue through kidnapping and hostage-taking
for ransom. Thus, measures to curb the financing of
terrorism have managed to achieve only qualified
success. In fact, despite all the outreach and capacity-
building programmes proffered, despite enforcement
and legislative measures that have led to countless
prosecutions around the world, and despite resorting to
the use of armed force, we continue to face this deadly
scourge, which shows no sign of abating.

Our efforts to prevent individuals or groups that
are intent on committing terrorist attacks from slipping
through the cracks are simply not enough. In reality,
if we are sincere in eradicating terrorism, we must
nip the problem in the bud. For one thing, there is a
need to undertake inclusive political and economic
development efforts that address social and economic
needs. In short, we need to win the hearts and minds of
the people to counter terrorism effectively.

Malaysia also strongly believes in the need to
maintain human rights standards when countering
terrorism, which is why Malaysia repealed the Internal
Security Act of1960 last year and introduced the Security
Offences Act of 2012. That decision demonstrates that,
while the Government remains committed to ensuring
that security is constantly safeguarded, the rights ofthe
people also need to be upheld.
It is also equally, if not more, important to make
efforts to resolve conflicts and repression. Those
living under occupation must be accorded their most
fundamental right to life and liberty with dignity and
hope. The failure to acknowledge and take measures
to address that is simply to turn a blind eye to a
fundamental cause of terrorism.

Malaysia is supportive of interfaith and
intercivilizational initiatives such as the United
Nations Alliance of Civilizations. Without a doubt,
such initiatives promote greater understanding among
all religions and civilizations in the world. However,
while greater interaction and understanding is pivotal
in building trust, we believe that the real problem
that exists today is not between peoples of different
faiths and cultures. Rather, it is between moderates
and extremists of all faiths and cultures. It is due to
that that Malaysia calls for the establishment of a
Global Movement of Moderates. That is essentially
a call on the majority of moderate people, who have
remained relatively silent despite being appalled by the
despicable acts of extremists and terrorists, to drown
out the voices of extremism. Malaysia believes that
moderates must be the only dominant voice to occupy
the mainstream. That would strongly contribute to our
effort to eradicate terrorism. Likewise, moderation
is also the best response in countering incitement
to violence and extremism. We must not let extreme
voices dominate world headlines and instil fear in the
peoples of the world, but must speak out to ensure that
the voices of moderation prevail.

Overcoming terrorism requires clear thinking
based on an objective assessment of the situation. It
also requires comprehensive action based on common
effort. Certainly, there will remain places and issues
that provide a wellspring of support for terrorism. We
must therefore constantly remain vigilant. But let us not
overstate the case ofthe dangers posed by terrorism, nor
underestimate the length and breadth of the challenge.
Let us take on the threat head-on so that we may usher
in a renewed period of global peace and prosperity for
all.

