Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to express my
sincere condolences to my dear friend and colleague the
Ambassador of the Russian Federation for yesterday's
victims martyred as a result of the Israeli aggression
against the city of Latakia. The martyrs of Russia in
Syria are our martyrs. Their blood is our blood. We
share the same enemy and the same victory against the
same kind of terrorism. We, together with our allies,
are partners in the counter-terrorism strategy in Syria,
the region and the world in word and in deed.

We condemn Israel's most recent aggression
against my country, which was carried out last night.
It is part of Israel's aggressive policy and desperate
attempt to provide moral support to terrorist groups
following their defeat at the hands of the Syrian Arab
Army and after cleansing the Syrian territories from
their abomination. That comes after the repeated
and continued provocative Israeli violations of the
disengagement agreement of 1974 and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, especially resolution
350 (1974). My country calls on the Security Council
once again to assume its responsibility in maintaining
international peace and security and to immediately
take the necessary and decisive measures to hold Israel
accountable for its terrorism and its crimes, which
constitute a flagrant violation of the Charter of the
United Nations and the provisions of international law.

I was deeply disappointed, but not surprised, to
note that there was no mention of two elements in the
briefings on the humanitarian and the political situation
in Syria provided by the Under-Secretary-General and
the Special Envoy. Neither of them mentioned the
subversive Israeli role in Syria or the terrorist groups
operating in my country. That was despite the fact
that my dear friend, Mr. De Mistura, knows well that
we agreed in Geneva on four baskets that constitute
our agenda, one of them is terrorism. Therefore, it is
unacceptable that Mr. De Mistura and Mr. Lowcock do
not mention either foreign or domestic terrorism, which
is operative in my country. As Council members know,
Israel attacked my country twice this week. However,
it seems that some members of the Council were not
aware of those two acts of Israeli aggression.

Some permanent Council members continue
to disregard the information that we have been
providing to the Council for more than seven and a
half years. They continue to distort the facts. That is
unprecedented. I will not do what the representatives
of those States are doing. I will not fabricate stories. I
will not make arbitrary accusations. And I will not use
illegal ,desperate and miserable expressions. Rather, I
will use the words of their officials and members of
their Governments against them.

I would like to remind my colleague the
representative of France of a statement made by
Mr. Roland Dumas, former Minister for Foreign Affairs
of France, on the French television channel La Chaine
Parlementaire in June 2013:

"Just about two years ago, before the hostilities in
Syria began, I happened to be in England where
I met with British officials, some of them friends
of mine, who had sought me out and told me that
something was being planned for Syria that the
United Kingdom was preparing a rebel invasion of
Syria The operation was long in the making. It was
arranged, conceived and organized with the very
plain goal of removing the Syrian Government."

Mr. Dumas also said,

"It is important to know, when it comes to this
region, that the Syrian regime has anti-Israeli
intentions. Consequently, everything that happens
in the region [hinges on that]. The Prime Minister
of Israel told me, 'We are trying to get along with
the countries around us, but those with which we
can't we will bring down'."

That happened in 2010, before the Arab Spring, the
African Autumn and the Asian Summer.

(spoke in French)
That was another France. It was the France of
Francois Mitterrand. It was the France ofDominique de
Villepin. It was the France of J ean-Pierre Chevenement.
And it was the France of Roland Dumas.

(spoke in Arabic)

That is one testimony. I will give the Council
another one that is equally important. It is a statement
made by Colonel Lawrence Wilkerson, former Chief of
Staffto United States Secretary of State Colin Powell. In
a statement to the Real News Network on 11 September,
just a couple of days ago, he stated,

"Those who are calling for aggression against
Syria are looking for any kind of excuse to justify
such aggression. Syria will be their next target,
after Iraq. Their ultimate goal would be to topple
the Iranian Government."

Colonel Wilkerson went on to say,

"My country, along with Britain and France, does
not have any evidence that the Syrian Government
used chemical weapons at any time in the past.
Moreover, the United States intelligence officers,
including those working illegally in Syria, were not
able to provide any evidence to substantiate their
allegations. To the contrary, all available evidence
points to the fact that terrorist groups were those
that used chemical weapons and carried out
such attacks."

That is yet another testimony.
(spoke in English)

Once again, it was a different America - that of
Colin Powell and Colonel Wilkerson.

(spoke in Arabic)

Those Governments sought to start a war against
my country, Syria, to force its Government to change
its positions, policies and national identity in service
of a new Middle East. According to that plan, new and
warring countries will be established on religious,
faith-based, sectarian and ethnic grounds, just like the
Zionist project ofa Jewish Israel, in order to deprive the
Palestinian people of their right to creating their own
independent State. After all, only Israel matters.

In order to protect the lives of Syrians, there
must be cooperation with the Syrian Government
and support to counter terrorism, instead of allowing
Western intelligence officers to support terrorist
groups through the use of deceptive terms, including,
for example, "moderate armed Syrian opposition",
"non-State armed groups", "the Islamic Caliphate
State" or "jihadist groups". None of those terms include
the word "terrorist", as if there were no terrorism in
Syria, only genetically modified moderate armed
Syrian opposition. We have those from Uzbekistan,
Turkistan, China, Chechnya, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia,
Egypt and Europe. However, they are all genetically
modified armed Syrian opposition.

Let me read out a statement made last week by the
French Foreign Minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, on the
news channel BFM. TV.

"The attack by the Syrian army against Idlib might
have direct implications for the security of Europe."

That statement was also confirmed by the representative
of France a while ago. The Foreign Minister continued,

"This threat might be the result of terrorists
spreading out across the region and moving to
Europe. This security threat will remain as long as
there are many terrorists from Al-Qaida operating
in this region. They number between 10,000 and
15,000 and might be a direct threat to the security
of our region in the future."

I ask my colleague the representative of France: Why
has the French Government continued to provide
political cover for terrorist groups in Syria, despite the
fact that such groups carried out attacks in Paris at the
Bataclan theatre and in Nice?

I will provide another example, which might be
of interest to my colleague the representative of the
Netherlands. As my colleagues in the Council know, a
few days ago our delegation provided them with some
serious information that was published by the Dutch
media. The Dutch Government has provided support,
funding and logistical assistance to a number of
terrorist groups in Syria, despite the fact that the Dutch
Public Prosecutor designated them as terrorist groups
affiliated withjihadist and Salafist groups. It seems that
there is some disagreement between the Government
and the Public Prosecutor of the Netherlands on that
issue. I ask the representative of the Netherlands: Does
such action by the Dutch Government not violate its
responsibilities as a member of the Security Council,
especially when it pertains to maintaining international
peace and security?

To those who continue to boast about interfering
in my country, I reiterate that we will keep working
seriously to achieve a political solution through a
Syrian-led dialogue, without foreign interference. Our
priority throughout the political process will remain
counter-terrorism, ensuring the return of Syrian
refugees and internally displaced persons, the start of
the reconstruction and recovery process and liberating
all remaining Syrian territories from terrorists and
illegal occupying Powers.

In that regard, I would like to ask Mr. Lowcock, who
strangely stated that he would need the approval of the
Syrian Government to deliver humanitarian assistance
to the Rukban camp: Why did he not mention that the
United States occupying Power at the Al-Tanaf camp
refused to allow humanitarian convoys to reach the
Rukban camp and stipulated that aid convoys should be
unloaded 10 kilometres away from the camp? Why did
he not say that?

Pertaining to the constitutional committee, the
Syrian Government has fulfilled its commitment, as
stated by Mr. De Mistura that we have provided a list
of participants.

The Syrian Government would like to thank Russia
and Iran for the efforts of their Presidents during
the most recent summit in Tehran. The Syrian Arab
Republic welcomes the agreement reached on Idlib
province, announced yesterday in the Russian city
of Sochi. The Syrian Government underscores that
the agreement was the result of intense consultations
between the Syrian Arab Republic and the Russian
Federation, with full coordination between the two
countries. The Syrian Government is never the last to be
consulted. No one can sidestep the Syrian Government
in that regard.

The Syrian Arab Republic continues to welcome all
initiatives to stop the bloodshed and restore stability
and security in all areas affected by terrorism. We will
continue our war against terrorism until we liberate all
Syrian territories, whether through military action or
local reconciliation agreements. Such agreements have
proved to be successful in stopping the bloodshed and
restoring stability and security in the areas concerned,
while allowing refugees to return to their homes.

In response to the statement made by my colleague
the British Ambassador, the agreement announced
yesterday is time-bound with clear deadlines.
The agreement is a part of previous agreements
on de-escalation zones, established by the Astana
process since the beginning of 2017. The Astana
process has always been committed to respecting
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of the
Syrian Arab Republic, while liberating all Syrian
territories from terrorism, terrorists and illegal foreign
military presence.

In conclusion, I would like to respond to my
colleague the Permanent Representative of Britain,
who asked what action "the Syrian regime" was taking
to ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance. What
kind of question is that? There is no representative of
the Syrian regime in the Security Council, or at the
United Nations. I am the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic. I would ask the representative of the
United Kingdom not to address a question to a fictitious
person. I do not know such a person, to whom I referred
to as Godot the last time (see S/PV.8344). There is no
representative of Syrian regime at the United Nations,
there is a representative of the Syrian Arab Republic
and there is the delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic.

