The President (Azerbaijan): I shall now make a
statement in my capacity as the representative of
Azerbaijan.

Azerbaijan voted in favour of resolution 2046
(2012), with the understanding that it would contribute
to a ceasing of all hostilities, easing the current tension
between the Sudan and South Sudan, facilitating the
resumption of negotiations between the two States on
the outstanding issues from the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement and normalizing their relations. We take
note of the Security Council's deep commitment to
seeing the Sudan and South Sudan become two
economically prosperous States living side by side in
peace, security and stability.

Azerbaijan supports the efforts of the African
Union and its High-level Implementation Panel. It is
essential that the resolution just adopted is mostly
based on the decision of the African Union Peace and
Security Council of 24 April 2012. It is important that
the resolution reaffirms the strong commitment of the
Security Council to the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of the Sudan and South
Sudan, and that it recalls the importance of the
principles of the peaceful settlement of international

disputes, good-neighbourliness, non-interference and
regional cooperation.

By condemning the repeated incidents of cross-
border violence between the two States, in particular
the seizure and military occupation of Heglig in the
Sudan and the support of proxy forces and armed
groups, the Security Council reaffirmed, inter alia, the
well-established principle of the inadmissibility of the
use of force for the acquisition of territory and made it
clear that such actions are illegal, unacceptable and
cannot be justified under any circumstances.

Azerbaijan welcomes the developments that
resulted in putting an end to the occupation of Heglig
and stressed the importance of addressing all of the
consequences of that internationally wrongful act. In
that context, additional steps should be taken to
address the call of the Council for an impartial fact-
finding effort to assess the losses and the economic and
humanitarian damage, including to oil facilities and
other key infrastructure, in and around Heglig.

The Security Council stresses that there can be no
military solution to the conflict in Southern Kordofan
and Blue Nile states. That clear message, inter alia,
discourages the activity of rebel groups in those states
and any external support for them. Such measures and
the increased attention supported by the Security
Council under the resolution it has just adopted acquire
particular significance with a view to ending the
violence and preventing serious violations of the
principles and purposes of the United Nations Charter.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of South
Sudan.

