Mr. Vilovic' (Croatia): Let me extend our
welcome to Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and thank him for his
briefing and his report (see S/2012/307). Croatia aligns
itself with the statement of the European Union (EU),
but I would like to deliver a statement in my national
capacity as well.

Reflecting on the past six months since the last
report of the High Representative (see S/2011/682), our
general conclusion is that while there are still reasons
for concern with the pace of progress of important
political and economic processes in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, there have also been important and
encouraging developments.

The meeting of six political parties in Banja Luka
on 9 March yielded tangible political results regarding
the distribution of defence and State property. Croatia
reads the successful agreement on the principles to be
used in resolving the property distribution issue as a
demonstration of political will and commitment to the
processes of Euro-Atlantic integration. We welcome
this breakthrough as an encouraging message to the
North-Atlantic Alliance in view of the forthcoming
Chicago summit. Croatia is convinced that a clear
perspective on NATO membership is of the highest
importance to the further strengthening of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. At the same time, the positive or negative
impact of Bosnia and Herzegovina's stability on the
region of South-East Europe and beyond should not be
underestimated.

The six parties of the State-level governing
coalition also discussed on 9 March the constitutional
changes that need to be undertaken for compliance
with the verdict of the European Court of Human
Rights in the Sejdic-Finci case. Despite the current
absence of concrete results, we can acknowledge that
the leaders recognized the importance of that issue and
that they succeeded in agreeing on the basic principles
that would have to be respected. We are hoping for
concrete results at tomorrow's meeting in Mostar. An
agreement on constitutional changes that would
substantially address the identified weaknesses of the
election system would make a major contribution to the
political stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The progress of 9 March, however limited,
creates momentum, and the international community
should strongly encourage Bosnia and Herzegovina to
maintain its level of demonstrated effort and
commitment. It is our strong belief that this
encouragement should take the form of constant
attention and support, especially in the Euro-Atlantic
integration process, as that path provides the best
framework for strengthening institutions, the rule of
law and democratic life itself. The integration process
should take into account all the specificities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and respect the basic principle of the
country's political existence, namely, the equality of
the three constitutive peoples and all its citizens.
Politicians in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as
representatives of the international community, have
acknowledged that Croats, as one of the three
constitutive peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina, do not
enjoy the same level of institutional rights as the other
two, and have expressed their willingness to work
towards solutions that would remedy that situation.

We strongly support all developments that would
ensure that every citizen of Bosnia and Herzegovina
feels equally protected and respected throughout the
country's territory. We particularly encourage further
energizing the process of the return of refugees to their
pre-war homes. Unfortunately, there is still ground for
concern when it comes to the atmosphere and language
in the public space, especially calls for separatism or
any kind of extremism. Such language should not be
tolerated, and the international community should send
that message very clearly.

We are also concerned by the lack of full
functionality of institutions and of coordination
between the two entities, which are prerequisites for
the advancement of the European Union (EU)
integration process. Croatia strongly supports a more
robust presence of the European Union mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as all efforts that
contribute to the further harmonization of laws and
practices within Bosnia and Herzegovina and with the
European Union.

Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina are two
neighbouring and friendly countries with significant
trade relations and a long common border that will
soon become the longest external border of the
European Union. In recent months, we have witnessed
increased dynamics in political contacts, ranging from
meetings by Croatian President Ivo Josipovic' with his
counterparts to the first official visit to Bosnia and
Herzegovina by the new Croatian Prime Minister
Zoran Milanovie in February, which was followed by
direct working meetings at the line ministry level. In
all bilateral exchanges, Croatian officials encouraged
greater coordination and support of EU efforts to assist
Bosnia and Herzegovina in reaching European
standards and, in a constructive spirit of cooperation,
in finding ways of mitigating any possible negative
consequences of Croatia's future membership in the
EU on Bosnia and Herzegovina's economy and society.

Our own experience tells us that the process of
European integration goes hand in hand with the
process of institution-building, and we are confident
that it will enhance Bosnia and Herzegovina's stability
and cohesion. Croatia has already started to share its
unique know-how with the leadership, State
administration and citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
For that reason, we proposed to Bosnia and
Herzegovina a treaty on Euro-Atlantic partnership,
covering many areas of cooperation. For many of the
activities involved, Croatia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina will seek wider support and collaboration.
Let me conclude by stressing that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a country with a burdened history and a
complex political system. Admittedly, it requires the
ongoing attention and support of the international
community. However, Croatia intends not to assume a
mentoring role, but rather to encourage the democratic
process to develop from within, as that is the only way
to reach long-lasting stability and prosperity for Bosnia
and Herzegovina and for the region of South-Eastern
Europe as well.

