The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Argentina,
Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Estonia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Guatemala, Hungary, India, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan,
Kenya, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Maldives, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, New
Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Portugal,
Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda,
Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Slovakia, South Africa, Spain,
the Sudan, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates,
Uruguay, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Viet
Nam and Yemen to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Mr. Yves Daccord,
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, and Ms. Hanaa Edwar, Secretary-General of
the Iraqi Al-Amal Association.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite Her
Excellency Ms. Joanne Adamson, Charge d'affaires ad
interim of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations, and Her Excellency Ms. Fatima Kyari
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations.

I propose that the Council invite the observer of the
Observer State of the Holy See to the United Nations
to participate in the meeting, in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and the previous practice
in this regard.

I propose that the Council invite the observer of
the Observer State of Palestine to the United Nations
to participate in the meeting, in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and the previous practice
in this regard.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/444, which contains the text ofa letter
dated 9 May 2018 from the Permanent Representative
of Poland to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

I wish to also draw the attention of Council
members to document 8/2018/462, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres.

