Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank all of our briefers.
I really want to echo the point made by my United
Kingdom colleague about what a powerful message
they have passed on to us again today. I thank them
and their colleagues on the ground for all the work they
are doing - and that includes Ms. Rasha Jarum - to
alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people and bring
an end to that war.

During the most recent Council meeting on
Yemen on 23 October (see S/PV.8379), Mr. Lowcock
warned that 14 million people - half of the Yemeni
population - could risk famine if the military
escalation and economic crisis continued. Should we
reach that point, he added, most ofthe innocent civilians
losing their lives would be women and children. Since
then, and despite those warnings, the situation has
deteriorated further, as we have just heard. The armed
conflict has intensified, with dramatic increases in air
strikes, shelling, attacks and fighting in residential
areas. I want to express our huge appreciation for the
work of all the humanitarian agencies that are operating
under those terribly difficult circumstances. With
civilians getting caught in the crossfire and civilian
infrastructure coming under attack, there have been
scores of civilian casualties. Hundreds of thousands of
Yemen's most vulnerable citizens are now trapped in
active conflict zones, and in Al-Hudaydah more than
half of them are children. There have also been further
disruptions to the life-saving distribution network of
humanitarian and commercial goods.

To the extent that there is a certain lull in the attacks,
it must be sustained. A continued offensive would only
prolong the suffering of the Yemeni people and move
us further from a negotiated political settlement. As
we have heard, we have a window of opportunity right
now, and our focus must be on ending the fighting and
getting the parties to the table. Political consultations,
led by the Special Envoy, represent our best chance of
reaching a turning point in the conflict, moving towards
a political solution and alleviating the suffering. We
must focus on thatjoint objective immediately.

Today, our briefers from the United Nations have
again put the ongoing tragedy on our desks, as well as
presenting us with the immediate steps needed to save
lives, improve the humanitarian situation and create
the conditions necessary for a political solution. As
stated before, we fully support the five interventions
outlined by Mark Lowcock and their individual and
collective endorsement. We look forward to working
with everyone to translate that commitment into a
Security Council resolution and we stand ready in that
regard. We believe that there is strong unity in the
Council around such requests. We now need to rally
behind the following.

The first step is a cessation of hostilities around
infrastructure and facilities for humanitarian aid and
commercial imports. All parties have the responsibility
to protect civilians and civilian objects and to take all
feasible steps to prevent and minimize harm, particularly
to schools, medical care and humanitarian personnel.

Secondly, the parties must be called upon to engage
in good faith with the political consultations brought
about by Martin Griffiths. It will be important to
ensure the representation and effective participation of
women in that process from the start for all the reasons
mentioned by Ms. Jarhum today.

Thirdly, it is important to ensure humanitarian
and commercial access. Yemen's ports and roads
must be kept open and safe. All parties are obliged to
respect international humanitarian law and to ensure
humanitarian access.

Fourthly, it is necessary to pursue
confidence-building measures, including those relating
to Sana'a airport, the Central Bank of Yemen and other
economic measures, as well as prisoners. Mr. Griffiths
also has our strong support in all that he is doing in
that regard.

The futile war in Yemen has been going on for far
too long, leading to immense suffering and thousands
dead. The recent developments provide a window of
opportunity that must now be seized. A united and
active Security Council can make a difference. Our
focus should be on supporting the United Nations efforts
to immediately address the dire humanitarian situation
and on ensuring that the political consultations get off
to a good start.

