Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I also want to express my
condolences to Russia for the recent loss of life, which
adds to the list of immeasurable losses of life in Syria
and highlights the need for an urgent political solution.

I speak on behalf of Sweden and Kuwait.

I would first like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock for his briefing on the humanitarian
situation and the humanitarian assistance provided by
the United Nations in very difficult circumstances. We
reiterate our call for safe, sustained and unimpeded
humanitarian access to all in need across Syria,
including to areas that have recently changed control.
The reports of the Secretary-General continue to be
clear that all methods of delivery, including cross-
border aid, are essential to the effective provision of
humanitarian assistance and to ensuring a needs-based
response. We also reiterate our calls on all donors to
contribute generously to the underfunded Syria appeals.

We would like to focus our remarks yet again on
Idlib, and thank Staffan De Mistura and Mr. Lowcock
for keeping us up to date on the different aspects of the
extremely serious situation there, and of the intensive
work of the United Nations to prevent what we have been
warned could be the biggest humanitarian catastrophe
of this century.

We received reports that there were days without
airstrikes last week, which shows that, when there is
political will, a cessation of hostilities can be achieved.
We are encouraged by the statements from the meeting
in Sochi yesterday, and we hope that a cessation of
hostilities in Idlib will now ensue and be respected by
all and that dialogue rather than military escalation
will prevail. That is also required in order to succeed
with efforts to separate terrorist groups as designated
by the Security Council from armed opposition groups.
We would appreciate receiving more information
on the agreement made in Sochi today, including on
the implementation of a demilitarized zone to be
established by 15 October and reassurances of an
immediate cessation of hostilities. We also welcome
Special Envoy De Mistura's work in that regard, and
we encourage coordination between ongoing efforts
where relevant.

Counter-terrorism measures in no way relieve the
parties of their very clear obligations under international
law, which are applicable throughout Idlib and Syria.
The Secretary-General last week called on the Astana
guarantors

"to find a way to isolate terrorist groups and create

a situation in which civilians will not be the price
paid to solve the problem of Idlib".
That is as true for Idlib as it is true across Syria.

Over the past few weeks, in meeting after meeting,
Sweden and Kuwait, together with the vast majority of
Security Council members, have consistently called
on the Astana guarantors to implement their own
de-escalation agreement in Idlib. We will continue that
preventative diplomacy, and we repeat our calls today
that Syria and its allies must refrain from escalating
violence in Idlib, ensure humanitarian access and full
freedom of movement for all persons and abide by all
their obligations under international law. Civilians
and civilian objects must be protected, and all parties
are obliged to apply the principles of distinction,
proportionality and precaution. All those obligations
apply across Idlib and in all of Syria, inside and outside
any demilitarized zone. The very clear demands on the
parties to the conflict in resolution 2401 (2018) likewise
remain in place.

We also express our grave concern over new reports
of attacks on medical facilities despite deconfliction,
for example, the case of the 6 September bombing of the
medical facility in Kafar Zita. Such attacks may amount
to war crimes. There can be no impunity for violations
and abuses of international law, and we reaffirm our
strong support for the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism and the Commission of
Inquiry in that regard. We also support the call by
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock to all parties to
abide by deconfliction protocols.

We also appreciate the update by Special Envoy De
Mistura on the United Nations-led political process and
his tireless efforts in that regard. We agree with him
on how resolution 2254 (2015) is intrinsically linked
to how to solve the situation in Idlib. Incentives are
needed for the day after separation, both for armed
groups and for the civilian population. Such incentives
can come only from a genuine diplomatic effort on the
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).

It is therefore urgent to make progress on the
political process in parallel. We lend our full support
to the United Nations mandate to establish the
constitutional committee and prerogative to ensure its
credibility and international legitimacy. Women's full
and effective participation in the work of the committee
must be ensured. We call on all involved to respect the
independent middle list created by the United Nations,
and we encourage the Special Envoy to convene the
committee as soon as possible, as he indicated.

Let us all be clear: a full-scale military operation in
Idlib would risk any remaining hope for a sustainable
and peaceful settlement in Syria. Only once a credible
political transition is firmly under way, and when
conditions for safe, voluntary and dignified return of
refugees and internally displaced persons are in place,
will the international donor community be ready to
assist in the reconstruction of Syria.

The responsibility - and ability - to avoid a
catastrophe and allow time for dialogue still lies with
Syria and the Astana guarantors. As co-penholders
for the Syria humanitarian file, Kuwait and Sweden
will continue to ensure that the Council follows
developments in Idlib very closely. We continue to be
actively exploring all options for the Security Council.
We stand ready to work with all Council members and
the relevant actors on the best way forward. Enough
blood has been shed. All efforts should now be political
and diplomatic.

