Mr. Lowcock: This is the fifth humanitarian
briefing on Syria we have provided the Security
Council in the past eight weeks. Week after week, we
have highlighted the impact of the hostilities in the
north-west. I do not want to repeat everything we have
so often told the Council. Let me simply quote the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Michelle Bachelet, as
she summarized the situation yesterday. She said her
Office had

"received reports of hundreds of ongoing civilian
casualties and destruction to civilian infrastructure,
including hospitals and schools, mainly caused by
air strikes by the Government of Syria and its allies,
but also, to a lesser extent, ground-based attacks by
armed groups".

We have repeatedly asked the Council to make that
stop. It has not stopped, or even slowed. Despite efforts
to introduce a ceasefire in the north-west, hostilities
continue unabated. Fighting among Syrian Government
forces and their allies, armed opposition forces and the
Security Council-listed terrorist organization Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham continues to impact civilians every day.

Over the weekend of 21 to 23 June, we received
reports ofair strikes affecting more than 55 communities
and artillery shelling affecting more than 21
communities in Idlib, Hama and Aleppo governorates.
At least 32 civilians, including women and children,
reportedly died, and others were wounded, in air strikes
and artillery shelling in southern Idlib. Over the same
period, a further seven people, including a child, were
reportedly killed and others were injured as a result of
air strikes and artillery shelling in northern rural Hama
governorate. Hundreds of thousands of people have
been displaced.

One of the areas coming under regular attack is
Maarat Al-Numan, in southern Idlib. Humanitarian
partners working in the health sector have been
warning that they are particularly worried about Maarat
National Hospital. It has reportedly been hit before
in previous years. At peak times, the hospital treated
about 20,000 people a month. It is now operating
under emergency conditions. But it remains the main
referral hospital in southern Idlib. While operating in
a conflict zone and in an area under the control of a
Security Council-listed terrorist organization, they
keep their life-saving services going with the support
of humanitarian organizations.

There is serious reason to worry. On 20 June, an
ambulance transporting an injured woman in Maarat
Al-Numan was hit, killing the woman and three medical
workers. Two paramedics were seriously injured. We
must see an end to such attacks on medical workers,
transport and facilities. We must see hospitals like
Maarat National Hospital protected.

Last week I told the Council (see S/PV.8553) that I
would update it today on the conclusions I had reached
on the impact of recent events on the de-confliction
system in Idlib. I briefed the Council in detail on
17 May (see S/PV.8527) about the de-confliction system
and how it works. Let me remind the Council of the
purpose of that system. All parties to conflict - States
and armed groups - are obliged under international
humanitarian law to protect medical facilities and other
humanitarian sites in the conduct of hostilities. That
means not directing attacks against them and avoiding
incidental harm to them.

The de-confliction system aims to help parties
to the conflict fulfil those obligations. It provides
the parties, including the Russian Federation * and,
through it, the Government of Syria - as well as
Turkey, the United States and other members of the
international coalition forces with the coordinates of
medical facilities and other humanitarian sites to help
those parties take precautions to spare them. I have
briefed the Council, including in detail on 17 May and
again last week on 18 June, on how medical facilities and
other civilian objects inside Idlib have been impacted
by the conflict. In the light of that, I have written to the
Russian Federation to request information as to how the
details provided through the de-confliction mechanism
are used.

We have also consulted with humanitarian
organizations operating inside Idlib that are running
medical facilities there. At their request, we will
continue to run the de-confliction system in Idlib for
the organizations that want to report their coordinates
to us. But I want to make clear that this does not mean
that it is our judgment that the de-confliction system
in Idlib is, in practice, protecting medical facilities. I
am not sure that it is. More can be done to strengthen
the system. But the critical question is what those
receiving information on the location of medical
facilities are doing with that information. I will keep
the Council informed.

In addition to the north-west, we are also following
the humanitarian situation in other parts of the country
with concern. In Rukban, along the Syrian-Jordanian
border, some 27,000 people remain in desperate need of
humanitarian assistance. Inadequate basic services are
costing lives, as attested by the widely reported death
of a young woman and her child while giving birth in
the camp on 5 June. Deaths like those are preventable
if the proper care can be provided. We continue to call
for humanitarian access to Rukban in order to be able
to deliver life-saving aid and to assist those who would
like to leave the camp The last request for access to
Rukban, sent to the Government of Syria on 9 May,
was not approved. Another request is being prepared.
In the meantime, the United Nations is working with
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent on an operational plan
for another convoy immediately, should authorization
be given.

We also continue to provide assistance to the more
than 14,800 civilians who have left the camp over the
past months and are now at transit centres or places of
destination. The Syrian Government approved a third
United Nations visit to the shelters at transit centres,
which occurred on 18 June. Conditions in the shelters
remain adequate, and the process for moving on from
the transit centres is relatively swift. Most people have
left the transit centres for southern and eastern Homs,
and those originally from Palmyra are also starting to
receive authorizations to return there. While aid is being
delivered by humanitarian organizations to areas that
people coming out of Rukban are returning to, we have
also requested approval to visit them in the areas where
they are currently residing, and while access to the
shelters has been a welcome development, the request
of 30 May for such visits is still awaiting approval.

In Al-Hol camp, in north-eastern Syria,
humanitarian agencies continue to respond to the
needs of the nearly 73,000 people in the camp, which
continue to be considerable in the areas of health, water,
sanitation and hygiene, among others. At the same
time, we continue to be concerned about restricted
humanitarian access to the annex, where 11,000 foreign
nationals are living. In recent weeks, we have received
numerous reports of women giving birth alone in their
tents at night. No woman or newborn should be left alone
without the support of specialized health practitioners,
especially during childbirth. While there have been
some positive reports of children of foreign nationality
being repatriated, thousands more foreign nationals in
the camps still face an uncertain future. I call on all
Member States to take the measures necessary to ensure
that their nationals are repatriated for rehabilitation
and reintegration, or prosecution, as appropriate, in
line with international law and standards. I also call
on the parties on the ground to facilitate the voluntary
return or resettlement of internally displaced Syrians
at the camp.

I am increasingly concerned about the situation
in southern Syria, where, following reports of rising
tensions between Government forces and local groups
since May, conflict threatens to reignite.

The humanitarian response continues to face
access challenges across the country. During the
period covered by the Secretary-General's latest report
(S/2019/508), access was limited in Raqqa city and
east of the Euphrates river in Deir-ez-Zor, including
in the Hajin enclave, mostly due to widespread
explosive-hazard contamination, and some areas in the
south of the country, as well as in eastern Ghouta, were
not sustainably accessible, owing to administrative
restrictions. We have seen a few positive developments
in access from Damascus, with a recent mission to
Al-Hol in the north-east, and recent approvals to deploy
to areas of Dara'a in the south and Abu Thohur and
Sinjar in south-east Idlib. But I continue to call on all
parties to allow safe, sustained and unimpeded access
to all locations in need at all times throughout Syria.

Week after week, month after month, year after
year, the Council has been briefed on the humanitarian
suffering in Syria. We have repeatedly pleaded for the
protection of civilians in order to ensure humanitarian
access and the parties' full compliance with their
obligation to respect international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. We have come back
to the Council again and again to tell members about
the latest horror facing civilians and the failure of the
parties to implement their basic obligations. I repeat
our call again today. Ease the suffering. Save lives. End
the fighting. Obey the law.

