Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
1 thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate.
I also thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his
briefing.

Often in the corridors of this Organization, there is
talk of being weary of the issue of Ukraine because of
the many meetings that have been held on the subject,
both in the Security Council and the General Assembly.
I would like to state very clearly here that Spain will
never tire of defending the unity and territorial integrity
of Ukraine. That is why we feel that it is important that
the Security Council continue to very closely follow
developments in the situation.
We heard with great concern the briefing by Under-
Secretary-General Feltman, who qualified the situation
on the ground as alarming. That alarm isjustified, asjust
yesterday the Permanent Council of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) met
and made the same observation about the situation on
the ground.

Spain of course supports the OSCE activities and
the efforts of the trilateral contact group aimed at
bringing about an effective ceasefire and implementing
the pending elements of the Minsk agreements. The
Minsk protocol and memorandum continue to be the
fundamental reference points; they should not be
reinterpreted. All efforts aimed at a return to the path
laid out by the Minsk agreements would be welcome.
We therefore hope that the efforts undertaken in recent
days in the Normandy format and within the trilateral
contact group will continue to make progress.

As I said, we are extremely concerned by the
escalation of the situation on the ground. We believe
that it is essetnail that all signatories to the Minsk
agreements reaffirm the ceasefire's validity.

With regard to the civilian population, I would
say that preventing their suffering is an indispensable
and urgent task. We need to guarantee an effective
distribution of humanitarian aid. The European Union
has shown and will continue to demonstrate itself to
be an asset in that regard. We have thus far provided
€76 million in aid and are working to increase that
amount. Of that, 40 per cent has been allocated to
the inhabitants of the conflict areas controlled by the
rebels. I would also like to say that there is a clear risk
of humanitarian assistance being used for the wrong
reasons, and we need to work together to establish
a mechanism, perhaps within the trilateral contact
group, which would seek to facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to its rightful recipients.

Finally, we would stress that any lasting and
sustainable solution must include respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine. That is
the crux of General Assembly resolution 68/262 and the
essential message that the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of Spain, Mr. Garcia Margallo, will
convey to the Kyiv authorities when he travels to the
region on 8 and 9 February. That will be one of his
first trips since the start of Spain's non-permanent
membership in the Security Council.

