Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset, I would like
to thank the presidency of Brazil for organizing this
open debate on this important issue.

I wish to also commend Ambassador Viotti,
Permanent Representative of Brazil, and her team for
preparing the comprehensive concept note (S/2011/50)
and the presidential statement (S/PRST/2OIl/4), which
highlight the issues and challenges that require greater
attention by the United Nations and other actors
involved in security and development.

I shall dwell upon only a few points that I believe
are of particular importance.

In the past couple of years, the Security Council
has been very much preoccupied with how to improve
its response to conflict situations. In that context, it has
grappled with the need to establish the right
connections between peacekeeping and peacebuilding
and, in that regard, between security and development.
This suggests that there is an ever growing recognition
that sustainable peace cannot be solely based on
security or development and that both should go hand
in hand so as to form a coherent whole.

There is no doubt that conflict stalls development
and the lack of development breeds further instability
and strife. There is a vicious circle between conflict
and underdevelopment, which needs to be broken
through coherent, inclusive and holistic strategies. We
have to be cautious not to adopt simplistic approaches
and generalizations, since the relationship between
peace, security and development depends on a complex
web of issues and every conflict situation has its own
specific dynamics and conditions that need to be taken
into account in calibrating our policies.

A unique mix of factors influences the interplay
between security and development in each country. In
that regard, we need to pay particular attention to the
context-specific political dynamics and institutional
features in each country to ensure an environment
where lasting security and development can be made
possible.

To achieve durable security and development, we
should ensure the active engagement of all local
stakeholders. It is of critical importance to work
closely with the local people. National ownership and
national responsibility are key factors for sustainable
peace.

As the Secretary-General underlined in his
statement, fragile countries facing stark inequality and
weak institutions are at increased risk of conflict. For
this reason, it is important to build and strengthen
national institutions. In our efforts, we should give due
consideration to production capacity and job creation
as well.

A regional approach is also necessary for our
efforts to succeed. In many cases, both security and
development have regional implications. In our view,
effective cooperation at the regional level, an active
role played by subregional and regional organizations
and close coordination and partnership among various
United Nations entities, the World Bank and other
financial and regional organizations are of particular
importance.
On the other hand, the linkage between security
and development is also changing. There is therefore a
need for a new and fresh assessment to better cope with
evolving challenges.
We should also pay due attention to the need to
improve the effectiveness and impact of ongoing
peacebuilding programmes and activities, which,
among other things, require the deployment of staff
with a better understanding of the interlinkages
between security and development.

We should also place special emphasis on the role
of women in all phases of our efforts in peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development. We should further try
to ensure increased participation by women.

Rethinking development policies, investing in
preventive diplomacy, building capacities and
integrating peacekeeping and peacebuilding are all
priority issues for Turkey. As an emerging donor
country, we will continue to actively pursue these
issues within the United Nations and other forums.

With this understanding, Turkey will host the
fourth United Nations Conference on the Least-
Developed Countries next may in Istanbul. We expect
that the Conference will bring fresh impetus to the
process of development cooperation in assisting least
developed countries move towards sustainable
economic growth and development. In that regard, we
hope that the crucial interrelationship between
development and security will be an important part of
our discussions in Istanbul.

