Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to express Argentina's condemnation of
the recent terrorist acts in Mumbai and its solidarity
with the Government and people of India.

I wish to express our appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate. The
subject is, I wish to stress, of the utmost importance for
all States and for my country. I also wish to recognize
Croatia for preparing the concept paper before us. It is
very useful for today's debate in the Security Council.

The Argentine Republic believes that
international terrorist acts constitute a threat to peace
and international security, to life and human dignity

and to peaceful and civilized coexistence. They also
endanger stability, democracy and the socio-economic
development of nations. In recent years, my country
suffered two brutal terrorist attacks, and we will not
cease to seek and punish the perpetrators.

An effective fight against terrorism necessarily
entails the commitment of the whole international
community, participating together organically and
permanently, legitimized by the fact that that
commitment is based on respect for general
international law, international humanitarian law and
international human rights law and the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Such
organic and institutionalized participation to prevent
and eliminate terrorism implies the direct involvement
of the United Nations, in particular the General
Assembly and the Security Council and its subsidiary
organs, but also regional organizations. It also entails a
two-fold commitment by individual States. On the one
hand, they should become parties to the international
instruments negotiated to confront terrorism, among
which we emphasize the importance of the United
Nations conventions. On the other hand, they should
adopt domestic laws necessary to fully comply with
such instruments.

I wish to report that my country has ratified the
12 United Nations conventions on terrorism and has
enacted the domestic measures stipulated by those
instruments. It has also ratified the Inter-American
Convention Against Terrorism and signed the
International Convention for the Suppression of
Nuclear Terrorism.

At the national level, the Argentine Penal Code
was amended in 2007 so as to incorporate the crime of
illicit terrorist association. We have also amended Law
25.246, which created the Unit for Financial
Information, and entrusted that Unit with the
examination, treatment and transmission of information
related to the laundering of the assets produced by the
activities of an illicit terrorist group and the financing
of terrorism. In the context of Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001), my country adopted the
National Agenda for the Fight against Money
Laundering and the Financing of Terrorism.
My country gives priority to the fight against
terrorism also at the regional level, in the Organization
of American States (OAS) and MERCOSUR. In the
case of MERCOSUR, Argentina actively participates in

its working groups on terrorism. As regards to the
OAS, we participate in the activities of its Inter-
American Committee against Terrorism. We also
participate in the informal mechanism of the 3+1
Group on Tri-Border Area Security, composed of
Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and the United States.

As stated in the draft presidential statement to be
adopted at the end of this debate, Argentina believes
that Member States must work together urgently to
prevent and suppress terrorist acts, while at the same
time it emphasizes the central role of the United
Nations in the global fight against terrorism. We
reaffirm the importance of all Security Council
resolutions and those of the General Assembly.

Finally, Argentina reiterates its call, already
expressed, and as the President of the Security Council
will do on this occasion, to States to become parties, as
soon as possible, to all international instruments
dealing with terrorism and to implement those to which
they are party. Likewise, we join in firmly condemning
the incitement to commit terrorist acts and repudiate
any attempt to justify such acts, as that could incite the
commission of other terrorist acts.

