The Secretary-General: Peacekeeping is a
remarkable exercise in global solidarity. United Nations
peacekeepers are ready to pay the ultimate price for
peace, and we are all in their debt. Last week, eight
of our peacekeepers - all from the African countries
Malawi and Tanzania - were killed in the line of duty.
Most were trying to prevent an attack on the town of
Beni in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to
create a safe environment for those working to end the
Ebola outbreak there. I send my deepest condolences
to their families and to the families of all peacekeepers
killed in the line of duty. Let us stand and observe a
moment of silence for the fallen.

The members of the Council observed a minute
ofsilence.

The Secretary-General: I thank the Chinese
presidency for convening this open debate on
strengtheningpeacekeeping operations in Africa, and for
China's contributions to United Nations peacekeeping
operations in Africa and around the world. Some 2,500
uniformed Chinese personnel, including well-trained
and equipped individual and formed police units,
are making an important contribution to multilateral
efforts for peace.

I welcome President Xi's pledge to establish a
peacekeeping standby force and hope to build on the
13 units that have already been registered. The African
continent hosts seven of the fourteen United Nations
peacekeeping missions and more than 80 per cent
of United Nations peacekeepers. African countries
provide nearly half of United Nations Blue Helmets
deployed around the world, including almost two-thirds
of all women peacekeepers, and the majority of United
Nations police officers.

(spoke in French)

Our peacekeeping missions on the African
continent have made encouraging progress in recent
years. Our mandates were completed in cote d'Ivoire
and Liberia and our missions were able to withdraw.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali, the
Central African Republic and Darfur, the African
Union and the United Nations have worked closely
together to support the political processes, national
dialogues and mediation efforts in the region, which
has defused tensions and paved the way for peace
agreements and elections.

In South Sudan, we worked with the African
Union in support of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development to bring about the signing of the
revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan. Over the past 10 years,
the African Peace and Security Architecture has
been considerably bolstered, and one of its essential
pillars - the Peace Fund - is currently being
implemented. To date, States members of the African
Union have contributed $60 million of the $400 million
required by the end of 2021. This is very encouraging,
and I congratulate the Chairperson of the African
Union, President Kagame, as well as the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki Mahamat,
on all their efforts.

(spoke in English)

Peacekeeping in Africa continues to present
some of our greatest challenges. United Nations
missions are carrying out complex operations with
multidimensional mandates in extremely dangerous
environments. Transnational crime, non-State armed
groups and terrorist groups pose serious challenges,
sometimes targeting our peacekeepers directly. Against
this backdrop, our partnership with the African Union
and African Member States is vital to our collective
efforts for peace, and we must continue working to
strengthen it.

There is excellent cooperation at the highest levels.
African Union Commission Chairperson Moussa Faki
Mahamat and I have signed two Joint United Nations-
African Union Frameworks: the Joint United Nations-
African Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security, and the Joint Framework for the
Implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. These Frameworks
are already promoting coherence, efficiency and
effectiveness in our common action.

The Deputy Secretary-General and senior officials
of the African Union have undertaken several joint
visits to the continent. The Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations and the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, who is here with

us today, have conducted joint visits to the Central
African Republic, the Sudan and South Sudan. The role
ofwomen in peace and security was at the heart of their
recent visit to South Sudan.

I am also encouraged by African support for
my Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which aims
to mobilize all partners and stakeholders to, first,
refocus peacekeeping around more realistic mandates;
secondly, to make our missions stronger and safer;
and, thirdly, to mobilize greater collective support
for political solutions and for well-equipped and well-
trained troops. More than 150 Governments have
signed the Declaration of Shared Commitments in
support of Action for Peacekeeping, including 42 on the
African continent.

Partnerships with troop-contributing countries;
with regional organizations, particularly the African
Union; and with host Governments are critical
to the success of this initiative, which is already
showing results.

The Action for Peacekeeping initiative was also
informed by the recommendations of the Dos Santos
Cruz report on improving the safety and security of our
peacekeepers. This also led to the development of an
action plan to address the performance and security of
United Nations peacekeepers.

Our operations are now taking a more proactive
posture to make these improvements. We are adopting
innovative measures to train and equip our troops,
and we have undertaken independent reviews of our
missions to determine how we can better fulfil our
mandates. We will remain vigilant and review the
results of these steps.

At the same time, our reforms of the United
Nations peace and security architecture will improve
performance by providing more integrated analyses
and stronger country and regional strategies. Closer
integration of conflict prevention, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding will allow us to put sustainable
development at the heart of our work.

Increasing the numbers of women in peacekeeping
at all levels is another way to improve the effectiveness
of our operations. I am taking steps to ensure that my
gender-parity strategy is implemented across all our
peacekeeping missions, and to increase the numbers of

female troops and police.

We are also mobilizing to tackle sexual exploitation
and abuse in our ranks, including our peacekeeping
missions, putting the rights and dignity of victims front
and centre. We are providing more support to victims,
and we have a greater and more effective capacity
in seeking justice. We have stepped up training and
improved investigations.

Dozens of world leaders have joined the Circle
of Leadership in support of measures to implement a
zero-tolerance policy, and 100 countries have signed
voluntary compacts with the United Nations to tackle
the issue. The era of silence and taboos around this
issue is over, and the era of accountability has begun.

The United Nations and the African Union are
cooperating more closely than ever before. African
peace operations, including those mandated by the
African Union, have played a key role in maintaining
peace and security on the continent and deserve
predictable systems of support.

Chairperson Faki and I will soon sign a joint
communique guiding the work of the Secretariat and
the African Union Commission in strengthening
United Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa and
paving the way for more adequately supported African
peace operations. We are working closely with the
African Union on joint planning for the mandating of
its peace-support operations and on legal and human
rights compliance frameworks.

As I have told the Council before, we need to
understand that United Nations peacekeeping has
limits. We face more and more situations in which
we need peace enforcement and counter-terrorism
operations that can be carried out only by our
partners - namely, the African Union and various
subregional organizations.

It is essential that African-led peace operations
acting under the Security Council's authority be provided
with strong mandates and predictable, sustainable and
flexible financing, including through United Nations-
assessed contributions where appropriate.

I have appealed to the international community to
support the regional Group of Five for the Sahel Joint
Force in combating terrorism and organized crime. I
am grateful to the European Union and other donors
that have pledged to the Force, but so far almost halfthe
pledges have not been earmarked, let alone disbursed.

There has been progress over the past year. The
Joint Force has reached initial operational capacity. But
we are far from what is needed to meet the security
challenges of the Sahel. An adequate level of funding
would enable the Force to fill equipment shortfalls and
capability gaps, and to better address the serious threats
facing the region.

In our interconnected age, security challenges on
one continent pose a risk to the whole world. The factors
that drive conflict in Africa - including poverty,
youth unemployment, climate change, competition for
resources and transnational crime - threaten global
security. Improving the impact and effectiveness of
peacekeeping in Africa is a collective responsibility,
and we will continue to tackle it with our African
partners, across the continent and around the world.


