Mr. Espinoza (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
congratulate the Republic of Korea on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February and for convening this important debate. We
welcome the participation this morning by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Korea and the
ministers from Azerbaijan, Brazil and Rwanda. Their
presence highlights the importance of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. We would also like
to express our gratitude for the statements made
by the Secretary-General, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the representative
of the International Committee of the Red Cross.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
distributed by the Permanent Representative of Jordan
on behalf of the Human Security Network, of which
Chile is a member.

The protection of civilians is a responsibility of
the international community that is based on respect
for human rights and international humanitarian law.
My country believes that all States and all parties
involved in a conflict should comply with it and fully
respect it without questioning it, bearing in mind that
the primary responsibility always falls to the State
affected by the conflict situation, which must take all
the necessary measures to ensure the protection of the
civilian population.

My country acknowledges the progress that
has been made in terms of the formal recognition of
standards for the protection of civilians. However,
we reiterate that we are seriously concerned by the
facts that we must face on a daily basis and the tragic
circumstances of thousands of people around the world.
The principles of distinction and proportionality, which
inspired the concept of the protection of civilians, seem
to have been forgotten by many and subjected to the
sole political will of the parties to a conflict. In that
respect, we reiterate our call on parties to a conflict,
regardless of where it may be occurring, to comply
with international humanitarian law and human rights,
in particular by allowing and facilitating access for
humanitarian missions and organizations, providing
for the protection of the most vulnerable groups, such
as women and children, and refraining from attacks on
medical facilities and their staff, which is one of the
most complex humanitarian issues, as noted in the 2011
study by the International Committee of the Red Cross.

We also urge parties to a conflict to refrain from
using explosive weapons in densely populated areas,
given both the number of victims they cause and their
indiscriminate nature and because we believe that that
is a significant factor in the displacement of persons
and the serious consequences that arise from that.

We support the decision of the Council to provide
peacekeeping missions with a mandate to protect
civilians. However, that important responsibility
requires clarity and precision in terms of the tasks
assigned, sufficient logistical and economic resources
to meet the challenge and coordinated efforts with
other entities on the ground. We would also like to
stress the importance of mandates including early-
warning systems and the capacity to assist an affected
State in complying with its obligations and duties in
protecting civilians. We recognize such missions'
potential to contribute to the establishment or gradual
strengthening of an environment that protects civilians
by supporting the rule of law and local institutions.

My country believes that any violation of the
responsibility to protect civilians in armed conflict is
something that should be prosecuted and tried, and that
those responsible for such violations must be brought
before justice, either at the national or international
level. In that regard, we highlight the importance
of, and support the establishment of, international
investigative commissions and fact-finding missions.
That tool has demonstrated its usefulness when it
comes to encouraging national authorities to take the
necessary measures to put an end to violations and
promote accountability.

We support the call by the Secretary-General to
provide assistance to States in establishing national
mechanisms to ensure transparency and accountability
for breaches of international humanitarian law or
international human rights law.

With the same insistence, we recognize the
fundamental role of the International Criminal Court
in preventing impunity for such acts, above all as an
important element in deterring such violations. We call
upon the Security Council to use the tools available
to it and to refer cases to the International Criminal
Court when the protection of civilians is not being
ensured by the parties to the conflict. We would also
like to recall the letter sent to the Security Council
dated 14 January 2013 (S/2013/l9, annex), in which 57
countries, including Chile, requested that the situation
in Syrian Arab Republic, where there have been over
60,000 deaths to date, most ofthem civilian, be referred
to the Court.

In conclusion, I reiterate my country's commitment
to full respect for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. We urge support for the recommendations
of the Secretary-General in his report of May 2012
(S/2012/376) as logical and useful guidelines in this
area.

