Mr. Puri (India): I wish to make a few brief
comments in my national capacity. I am not sure
whether they are informed by my position as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) or are purely national, but I
suspect there is a great deal of fusion here.

To start with, as far as the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) is concerned, the death of Osama Bin Laden is a
significant milestone in the global war against
terrorism. However, it does not signify the end of
Al-Qaida or of terrorism. Without the elimination of
terrorists' safe havens and sanctuaries, there can be no
end to the global war on terror.

For the security and stabilization of Afghanistan,
it is important to isolate and root out the syndicate of
terrorism that includes elements of Al-Qaida, the
Taliban, Lashkar-e-Taiba and other terrorist and
extremist groups operating from within and outside
Afghanistan's borders. Attempts to differentiate
between Al-Qaida and the Taliban and other terrorist
groups are fraught with difficulty, since those groups
are operationally and ideologically fused.

We support measures to strengthen the review
process of the listings in the Consolidated List of the
1267 Committee through the Office of the
Ombudsperson, as per Security Council resolution
1904 (2009). At the same time, we are concerned that
the process of listing and de-listing in the Consolidated
List continues to be subjected to political will and
pressure - a scenario that we can ill afford in our
united fight against terrorism.

India supports the efforts of the Government of
Afghanistan to reintegrate those individuals who abjure
violence, give up armed struggle, do not have links
with terrorist groups and are willing to abide by the
values of democracy, pluralism and human rights as
enshrined in the Afghan Constitution. At the same
time, it is important that the red lines on the
reintegration process as laid down at the London
Conference and later reaffirmed at the Kabul
Conference are not diluted. Otherwise, we risk
Afghanistan sliding back to becoming a safe haven for
terrorists and extremist groups.

On the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), India has expressed
its unwavering commitment to global efforts to prevent
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDS) and their means of delivery. India recognizes
that proliferation of WMDs and their means of delivery
is a major challenge facing the international
community. As a victim of terrorism for more than
three decades, we are fully cognizant of the
catastrophic dangers that transfers of WMDs to
non-State actors and terrorists could entail. Clandestine
proliferation networks have led to insecurity for all and
must not be allowed to reappear. The international
community must join hands to eliminate the risks
relating to sensitive materials and technologies falling
into the hands of terrorists and non-State actors.

The focus on non-State actors should in no way
diminish State accountability in combating terrorism
and dismantling its support infrastructure or in linkages
with WMDS.

It is important to bear in mind that the successful
implementation of counter-terrorism measures requires
not only the fullest collective effort of the entire
membership but also their fullest participation in
processes that affect the collective security of all
nations equally. Our collective endeavour should be to
enhance coherence and synergy among different
counter-terrorism structures that are dealing with the
issue of terrorism within the United Nations.

