Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): Slovenia welcomes today's
open meeting of the Security Council, which is devoted
to the situation concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We consider that situation as one requiring the
urgent attention of the Security Council and of the
international community at large. Moreover, we consider
the meeting today an opportunity for a genuine open
orientation debate. The Security Council has already heard
the Views of the delegation of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which we welcome at this meeting. We look
forward to hearing the views of all those Members of the
United Nations that have chosen to speak today. The
Security Council needs the input of the United Nations
Members that are currently not members of the Security
Council.

The situation in and around the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is a situation of an armed conflict with far-
reaching consequences. It is a situation characterized by
human suffering and humanitarian problems which have
reached dramatic proportions. It is a situation involving
important, indeed, fundamental principles of international
law and one affecting the long-term stability of a large
part of Africa. For all these reasons, it needs to be
considered most seriously and with the highest possible
degree of intellectual and moral accuracy. All of us
speaking today bear a heavy responsibility to ensure that
the debate is serious, honest and productive.

The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is not new. Quite to the contrary, it is a situation

 

on which the recent history of the Great Lakes region of
Africa has cast some of its longest and darkest shadows. It
is necessary to discern which among the causes of the
current conflict need to be identified in the effort to grasp
the situation with the necessary accuracy.

Some of those causes stem from the genocide in
Rwanda in 1994 and the subsequent developments which
have affected the Democratic Republic of the Congo, then
Zaire. In the aftermath of the defeat of the forces
responsible for the genocide in Rwanda, the winds of
change brought a new Government to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Government established in
1997 offered a promise of transition to democracy, the rule
of law and political stability. These were positive
developments. Those of us who had the opportunity to
attend the Organization of African Unity (OAU) Summit in
Harare, Zimbabwe, in May 1997, will never forget the
atmosphere of promise and hope which resulted from the
change in the Great Lakes region at that time and which
generated the atmosphere of optimism in Africa.

However, much of that promise has remained
unfulfilled to date. The allegations regarding crimes against
humanity and massive human rights violations allegedly
committed in 1996 and 1997 were not thoroughly
investigated, and the cooperation of the new Government in
that regard was not forthcoming. The political processes
necessary to create conditions for power-sharing, for proper
treatment of minorities and for democracy were not started.
Much precious time was wasted and many opportunities
were missed at that time. The resulting instability was
bound to affect security in the region. All these
developments were unfortunate, and one can legitimately
ask whether a more vigorous and committed attitude of the
international community in 1996 and in 1997 could have
made a difference.

The situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
deteriorated seriously in 1998. The developments since
August last year have been especially disturbing. The
rebellion grew to large proportions. Military interference by
two neighbouring States, while motivated by seemingly
genuine security concerns, transformed the crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo into a regional threat to
international peace and security. The subsequent military
assistance of some other countries from the region to the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
not brought a solution. Indeed, a military solution is very
unlikely. A protracted military conflict in a vast area in the
heart of Africa has the potential to become a long-term
crisis and a breeding ground of widespread instability.

The military action of the two neighbouring States
against the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo represents a serious challenge to the basic
principles of international law concerning the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of States.
The entire international community has to express its
concern and reject such practices, which undermine the
fundamentals of the international order and of stability in
Africa.

Speakers before me have addressed the issues related
to the search for peace. I agree with what was said. It is
imperative that a ceasefire be agreed to immediately and
that provision be made for an orderly withdrawal of all
foreign troops and for the re-establishment of the
authority of the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo throughout its territory. All States must be
called upon to respect the territorial integrity and the
sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.

We encourage the African leaders, with the
assistance of the Organization of African Unity and the
Secretary-General, to redouble their efforts to achieve an
early agreement on a ceasefire, which will open the way
to addressing all the other problems. The United Nations
should be ready to assist, when a ceasefire is reached, in
the maintenance of the ceasefire and in stabilizing the
security situation in the region.

I wish to turn now to the humanitarian issues and to
the problems of human rights.

Slovenia strongly condemns violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law committed
during the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We condemn massacres of the civilian population
which have taken place mostly in the South Kivu
province since the outbreak of the conflict in August
1998.

In August we learned about the massacre in Kasika.
Later, in November 1998, as we learned from reports,
more than 1,300 civilians were killed in the towns of
Samba, in the Maniema province, and Aketi, in the
Orientale province. From 30 December to 1 January, 500
civilians were massacred in the area of Makobola, in the
south-east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. And
very recently, on 5 March, more than 100 civilians were
massacred around the town of Kamituga in the province
of South Kivu. Most often the victims are innocent
civilians, children, women and elderly. The spread of the

 

practice of genocide in the region must not be tolerated.
Such violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law against the civilian population require
specific action to bring those responsible to justice.

It is encouraging that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has already
demonstrated its readiness to act. We noticed with
appreciation that a Ministry of Human Rights has been
established in order to promote the much-needed respect for
human rights in the country. We welcome today the
presence among us of Minister Leonard She Okitundu, who
spoke at the beginning of this meeting. We also welcome
the cooperation of the Government with the Special
Rapporteur Roberto Garreton, and we hope that this
cooperation will continue and lead to satisfactory results.
We wish also to express our strong hope that the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
other parties to the conflict will allow the relevant
international agencies unhindered access to all persons
detained within the territory of the country. Furthermore,
we wish to stress that all the military forces are responsible,
in accordance with international law, for the humanitarian
situation in the territories under their effective control.
Furthermore, restrictions on the work of non-governmental
organizations, media personnel and human rights
organizations have to be eliminated so that assistance can
be provided to the people in need.

We believe that, notwithstanding the military conflict,
steps for creating a normal democratic environment should
be taken very soon. The Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo should create conditions that will
allow a democratization process that is genuine and
inclusive and that fully reflects the aspirations of all the
citizens. The international community needs to stress the
importance of internal political dialogue among all political
and civil-society actors in the country. The process of
democratization should be carried out through the
establishment of democratic institutions and the holding of
free and fair and democratic elections as soon as conditions
permit.

A country's internal political situation of course is an
internal affair of each sovereign State, but certain principles
are of general importance and can be implemented. We
would like to draw attention especially to the principle of
power-sharing. Efforts aiming at the establishment of good
governance and power-sharing merit full international support.

The international community should strongly
encourage the dialogue among the leaders of the countries
in the Great Lakes region. Through the dialogue regional
leaders should honestly address problems and face them.
In this regard, Slovenia has supported and continues to
support the idea proposed by France of an international
conference for the Great Lakes region. We also agree that
such a conference should not be a single event but a
process that would include and address all the critical
issues faced by the countries in the region. Such a process
would include but would not be limited to the issues of
security and power-sharing.

Let me make a general concluding remark. Action is
needed to end the war and to create an environment for
the development, in all fields, of public life and of the
lives of Congolese citizens. Allow me to quote in this
context an American politician, William Jennings Bryan,
who, at the turn of the century, said,

"Destiny is not a matter of chance; it is a matter of
choice. It is not a thing to be waited for; it is a thing
to be achieved."

Today's open debate in the Security Council is the
first concrete step taken here in the Security Council, but
the final solution to the problem lies with the Congolese
people themselves and with the other countries in the
region, in particular the parties to the conflict. Support for
the regional efforts for a peaceful solution to the conflict
has to be rendered by the international community as a
whole. The Security Council needs to play an active role
now and at later stages. However, the final and lasting
solution to the problems lies with the Congolese people
and the peoples of other countries in the region.

