Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Mr. President, we
appreciate your swift reaction and that of your team and
the convening of this briefing at such short notice, at the
request of our delegation.

I thank the members of the Security Council who
condemned the illegitimate decree of the Russian
President. I could wish the briefers had focused more
on that specific issue, which is the main purpose of
today's meeting, but I will try to fill that gap. I ask the

indulgence ofthe Council because I will probably take a
little more time than the sand in the hourglass permits.

The Council has already heard the Russian
attempt to sell the decree to the wider United Nations
membership. As you have already mentioned,
Mr. President, it is the usual Russian-style subversive
diplomacy that the Council is accustomed to by
now - cynical misinterpretation, manipulation, lies
and disinformation. I am once again fascinated by
the talented foresight of Mr. Nebenzia, who knows
in advance what I am going to say. Just consider this.
Only yesterday, when Putin was signing the decree, his
Minister for Foreign Affairs was delivering a statement
at - just imagine ~ the Moscow Conference on
International Security. That is such a nice title. He said:
"We hope the new Ukrainian leadership will
realize its responsibility and will contribute to the
settlement of the crisis by fully implementing the
Minsk package of measures within the Trilateral
Contact Group and the Normandy format, in full
accordance with Security Council resolution 2202
(2015). Germany and France will have to play an
important role not to allow any attempts to review
the Minsk agreements."

Shall we take it that the left hand does not know what
the right hand is doing? I doubt it. That is the usual
behaviour of Russia - double-speak and putting the
blame on others.

On 26 November 2018, when speaking before
the Council (see S/PV.8410), I compared the Russian
aggression in Ukraine to the Soviet dirty war against
its neighbour in 1939. Unfortunately, history seems to
be repeating itself. The Russian Federation is steadily
embarking on the same road that led to the expulsion
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics from the
League of Nations. Like the Russian representative
today, the Soviet diplomats at the time would stop at
nothing to offer excuses for Moscow's flagrant violation
of international law. For example, when Soviet planes
were bombing a neighbouring country, then Minister for
Foreign Affairs Molotov insisted that the bombers were
not dropping bombs but rather food for the starving.

It looks like our Russian colleagues are making
their arguments with exactly the same logic. In the
distorted reality of hybrid war, the Kremlin seems to
be bringing to life George Orwell's satire, in which war
is peace, freedom is slavery and ignorance is strength.
It is impossible to explain otherwise how a transparent

and cynical passport gambit could be made to look like
a humanitarian act.

Yesterday's decree is yet another appalling episode
in a chain of events designed to grab the Russian-
occupied territories from Ukraine. The fake elections
in 2014 and 2018, organized by the Kremlin in breach
of its obligations under the Minsk agreements, the
introduction of the ruble zone, the expropriation of
Ukrainian enterprises, the official recognition of
documents issued by illegal bodies, the incidents of
piracy, the capture of Ukrainian sailors in Ukrainian
territorial waters and now the decree are all different
pieces of one puzzle - Russia's creeping occupation
of Ukraine.

As stressed by the President okaraine, the signing
of the decree is yet another example of interference
by the Russian Federation in the internal affairs of
an independent State. It is a brutal violation of the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of Ukraine. It
is also a wholesale dismissal by Russia ofits obligations
in the framework of the Minsk agreements. The
agreements clearly state Russia's commitments - stop
the shelling, withdraw Russian troops and armaments,
free Ukrainian hostages and return the control of
the State border to Ukraine. In that regard, Russia's
categorical refusal to support the initiative of Ukraine
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe to launch an Easter armistice starting on
26 April is not accidental.

In addition, the Kremlin has deliberately and
cynically violated international humanitarian law,
which prohibits the occupation's authorities from
changing the citizenship of the inhabitants of the
occupied territories. Why? Because the Russian
Federation cannot hide any more the presence of its
regular military and mercenaries in Donbas or conceal
its lead role in the armed conflict there. That is why it
decided to switch from the five-year-old mantra "they
are not there" to the revanchist slogan "our citizens are
there". We heard that before the Second World War,
we heard that in Georgia and we all know where that
slogan leads.

The provocative and destabilizing nature of the
decision of the Russian side becomes obvious after
even a cursory glance at the Russian-Georgian conflict
in South Ossetia. Here are some facts. In 2006, more
than 90 per cent of the residents of the Georgian region
of South Ossetia held Russian citizenship. On 8 August
2008, with the beginning ofhostilities in South Ossetia,
the Russian President made the following statement at
the meeting of the country's Security Council. It is
worth recalling:

"NowinSouthOssetia,peacefulpeople-women,
children, elderly - are dying. Most of them are
citizens of the Russian Federation. In accordance
with the Constitution and federal laws [of Russia],
as the President ofthe Russian Federation, I have to
defend the lives and dignity of Russian citizens, no
matter where they are. The logic of our actions now
is defined by these circumstances. We will not allow
the death of our compatriots to go unpunished.
Those responsible will be brought to account."

Council members know the rest. More than 10 years
after the conflict, Georgia's territorial integrity has yet
to be restored and the Geneva International Discussions,
launched in 2008 with participation of the United
Nations, the OSCE and the European Union, have yet
to bear fruit.

Now let us return to the situation in the Ukrainian
Donbas. Distributing Russian passports en masse
in that region can easily be used by the Kremlin to
legitimize its military presence in Ukrainian territory
in the name of protecting would-be Russian citizens.
The Kremlin's decision is clear proof that Moscow is
choosing that scenario.

It is nothing but a thinly veiled attempt to justify
the ongoing occupation of those territories, to wrest
them from Ukraine and dismember my country. It is
nothing but an artificial pretext to continue sending
Russian troops to Ukraine and sustain the undisguised
military aggression against my country. It is nothing
but a premeditated and concerted effort to undercut
prospects for a peace settlement on the basis of the full
and proper implementation of the Minsk agreements.
Indeed, the illegitimate decree of the Russian President
completely undermines the logic of the Minsk
agreements and, in fact, makes their implementation
practically impossible.

Council members must judge for themselves. The
purpose of the Minsk agreements is the reintegration
of the temporarily occupied areas of the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions into the legal, political and economic
space of Ukraine. In contrast, the logic of the Russian
President's decree is disintegration and consolidation of
total Russian control over the occupied territories. Are
those not clear signs of a creeping annexation?

Importantly, distributing Russian passports
in the occupied territories will make it practically
impossible to conduct legitimate local elections there
in accordance with the Ukrainian legislation and
relevant OSCE standards under the OSCE Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights monitoring,
as envisaged by the Minsk agreements.

I also have a specific question for
Ambassador Nebenzia.

(spoke in Russian)

Would he also find nothing unusual about a
situation in which the citizens of border areas in Russia
were systematically given passports en masse by
other States?

This is, instead, a story about how difficult life has
become for people in Donbas.

(spoke in English)

Does the Russian leadership not realize that its
actions totally disrupt the Minsk agreements? Does
Russia not realize what kind of ticking time bomb it is
planting? Does Russia not realize that it is responsible
for undermining the peaceful settlement process in the
eastern part of Ukrainian Donbas?

I think the Kremlin realizes all of that very well
but is doing it on purpose. Implementation of the Minsk
agreements was never the intention of the Russian side.
Destabilization and fragmentation of Ukraine has been
the crystal-clear intent behind its every move during
the last five years. But Russia will bear responsibility
for its actions. That is why reinforcing international
pressure on the Kremlin, including new targeted
sanctions against the aggressor State, should be our
shared endeavour. That is the way to bring Russia back
onto the path of implementation of its obligations under
the Minsk agreements. That is the way to peaceful
settlement in eastern Donbas.

Council members will recall the meeting less than
three months ago, on 12 February (see S/PV.8461),
when the Russian representative was going out of his
way to convince everybody that the Ukrainian side
was sabotaging the implementation of the agreements.
We were accused of - and I quote the Russian
representative - "venturing new provocations that
threaten only to worsen the situation and ruin the peace
process" (ibid., p. 10).
It is indeed true that actions speak louder than
words. Are there any doubts in anyone's mind as to
who is responsible for stalling the implementation of
the Minsk agreements? The answer should be obvious.
Russia's purpose is clear - to destabilize Ukraine,
even more so in this post-electoral period, and ruin the
Minsk agreements, all of which is in direct defiance
of the consistent calls by the international community
demanding that the parties refrain from taking any
unilateral steps that might undermine the Minsk process.

The illegal issuance of passports to Ukrainian
citizens also means that the Kremlin recognizes its
occupation of Ukrainian territories in the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions and is in fact making another step
towards the annexation of that occupied territory. By
its decision, Russia once again debunks the narrative
of its own propaganda that this is a so-called internal
conflict in Ukraine.

Russia's neighbours know all too well how skilfully
the country is using a humanitarian pretext to interfere
in internal affairs and to invade. We learned this not
from the Finns, the Poles or the Georgians but from
our own experience. While we were under Soviet
domination, Moscow applied forced Russification and
moved Russian settlers to non-Russian areas. Now,
under the pretext of protecting ethnic Russians and
all Russian-speakers, Moscow is trying to restore its
domination by meddling in the internal affairs of other
countries and annexing territories.

We know all too well in Donbas and in South Ossetia
and Abkhazia that Russian tanks and rocket launchers
are Moscow's favourite tools for protecting Russian-
speakers. We also know that the purely humanitarian
action of passport distribution is usually a prelude to
further aggression and annexation, as was stressed in
the appeal to the United Nations and other international
organizations adopted yesterday by the Parliament of
my country.

Ukraine will do everything possible to protect,
provide adequate assistance to, and ensure respect for,
the rights of its citizens residing in the temporarily
occupied territories, including those who may be forced
by the Russian occupation authorities into acquiring
Russian citizenship. Yesterday's decree by the Russian
President is simply illegal. It is a blatant breach of
Russia's obligations and commitments under bilateral
and multilateral agreements and documents.

Ukraine does not recognize any consequences
of that act. The Security Council should consider it
null and void. Ukraine urges Russia to immediately
cancel that presidential decree as well as decree No.
74, of 18 February 2017, relating to the recognition of
documents and license plates issued in the occupied
part of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions.

I call on the Security Council to prevent the worst-
case scenario and resolutely condemn the destructive
and illegal actions of the Russian authorities and to
restore respect for the Charter of the United Nations.
The members of the Security Council sitting around
this table have a single choice to make - to wrap up
this meeting without taking a decision or turn once
again to expressing serious concerns and calling on
both sides to respect the Minsk agreements. But let
us be honest - unless the majority of this Council is
ready to come up with real action, even if it is to be
challenged by Russia, the aggressive behaviour of our
neighbour will never be stopped. History knows that
appeasement of aggressors never stops them.

Finally, since we have representatives of the OSCE
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs here with us, I would like to ask them some
questions. I would like to ask Ambassadors Apakan
and Sajdik whether, in their assessment, the Russian
decision on citizenship contributes to implementation
of the Minsk agreements or complicates it.

I would like to ask Assistant Secretary-General
Mueller, from whom we heard about the difficult
humanitarian situation in the occupied territories of
the Donbas - and her report is accurate - whether,
in her assessment, the Russian President's decree is
a warranted and justified response to the difficult
humanitarian situation, and in what ways the Russian
side can truly contribute to alleviating the humanitarian
crisis that it itself has created.

