Mr. Heinbecker (Canada): The recent report of
the Monitoring Mechanism is, in our opinion, a very
important continuation of the work of the United
Nations in Angola. We commend it for its attention to
detail and for its consistency. The distinguished
members of the Mechanism, under Ambassador
Larrain's leadership, have once again successfully
completed extraordinarily difficult work with
dedication and professionalism. We are all indebted to
them. We also salute the presence here of the Adviser
for Special Assignments in Africa, Mr. Ibrahim
Gambari. We call on the Government of Angola to
cooperate fully with him. He carries the support of the
international community in his work. We commend as
well the astute leadership on this issue of Ambassador
Ryan. His stewardship of this issue has been insightful,
effective and exemplary.
We are particularly encouraged that more and
more Member States are providing the Mechanism with
the assistance it needs. Such cooperation in the
implementation of Security Council decisions is
welcome. I would also remind colleagues that it is not
discretionary; it is a condition of membership in this
Organization. It is important that Member States
recognize and act on this obligation. The Mechanism
has identified Member States that have allowed the
blatant continuation of UNITA's activities. We call
upon the Member States that are named in the report to
end these violations.

It is, after all, this Council's authority that is
being flouted. And that should be of concern to this
Council and a stimulus to act. We urge the Council to
take more resolute action towards Member States that
continue such violations by, for example, imposing
secondary sanctions.

Canada welcomes the progress made by the
Mechanism in examining the financial component of
the sanctions regime. Information on such transactions
will ultimately make the sanctions imposed on UNITA
more effective.

(spoke in French)

We encourage the States that host the bank
accounts, residential property and the businesses of the
high authorities of UNITA to cooperate with the
Mechanism and freeze their assets. These measures
will play an important role in limiting the possibilities
for UNITA to buy arms and logistical equipment to
enable it to continue this tragic civil war.

(spoke in English)

The Mechanism's analysis of UNITA's continuing
use of electronic technology for communication and
the dissemination of propaganda worldwide is
especially troubling. The international community must
look closely at this technology and find ways of
limiting or preventing its use. We hope that a more
concerted effort will be made in this regard, because,
sadly, despite the positive steps taken to tighten
sanctions, UNITA has intensified its terrorist attacks.
Horrific attacks on schools and children and innocent
civilians are a deliberate attempt to compound the
already grave humanitarian situation. These atrocities
put Savimbi in the same category of a lengthening list
of terrorist criminals that the world must bring to
justice.

(spoke in French)
War, destruction and devastation continue to
characterize the grim picture before us in regard to
Angolan children, of whom one out of every three will
never reach the age of five. More than 3 million
persons need humanitarian assistance, and 1.5 million
of them have been displaced inside their own country.

(spoke in English)

Terrorism and civil war account for much of
the suffering a in fact, the great majority of the
suffering - but not for all of it. With the vast
resources available to the Government of Angola, from
diamonds and oil revenues, we believe more can be
done to provide basic services to the people of Angola.
Like Ireland, we, too, are encouraged by the
undertakings of the Government of Angola in this
Chamber.

We do applaud the steps taken by the Government
to implement a national diamond certification
programme. We hope that the Government can also
find an effective means to address the new problem of
diamond smugglers that have moved into territory
previously occupied by UNITA.

With the United Nations itself, there is a need to
reform the manner in which sanctions are made to
work. Canada fully supports the Mechanism's
recommendations. We call for a renewed commitment
to the implementation of sanctions by all Member
States and for permanent monitoring and stringent
enforcement. It is important in this case, too, as it is
with respect to Bin Laden and Al Qaeda, that the
Security Council monitor whether its decisions are
implemented and act when they are not, because,
frankly, if Council resolutions are not monitored and
not enforced, then we would be better off if they were
not passed in the first place.

