Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): It is my honour to make this statement on behalf of the Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa and Tunisia (A3+1). We would like to thank Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, Mr. Smail Chergui and Mr. Koen Vervaeke for their briefings. The year 2020 represents a crucially important stage for the people of the Central African Republic, who will, in the general elections to be held in December after several years of crisis, exercise their right to choose their own leaders. The holding of the elections will constitute a major step towards the normalization of the security situation in the country and, in turn, contribute to positive momentum in the subregion. We therefore commend the efforts of the authorities of the Central African Republic, with the assistance of partners, in making progress in restoring State authority in some areas and in professionalizing and redeploying the security apparatus, territorial administration and judicial institutions, despite the significant difficulties the ground. We commend the efforts deployed through the National Electoral Authority in registering a large number of voters, despite the many technical and logistical challenges, as well as the difficulty in reaching certain areas due to insecurity. We note that recent revisions to the electoral code do not allow for the registration of a considerable number of persons of voting age because they have been displaced to neighbouring countries. The A3+1 welcomes the efforts of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), the United Nations Development Programme and UN- Women in helping to register women to voters and encouraging their full participation in the democratic process, as voters and candidates alike. Those efforts will undoubtedly help to attain the goal of a minimum of 30 per cent of elected offices being occupied by women. In the light of those positive developments, it is vital that all political actors and armed groups refrain from hampering in any way the electoral process that is under way. We thus call on them to seize the opportunity presented by the reviving of the consultative framework in order to overcome any difficulties through dialogue and consensus. We welcome the support of the United Nations Development Programme for the basket fund and the electoral assistance projects, and we encourage all partners of the Central African Republic and the international community to support the electoral process in order to avoid any possible problem in terms of the process or of respect for constitutional timelines. We note with regret that the security situation remains precarious in the north-eastern part of the country, with ongoing attacks against civilians, peacekeepers and clashes among armed groups. We remain convinced that inclusive dialogue among the people of the Central African Republic is key in order to put an end to the crisis. We welcome also in that respect the initiatives undertaken by the authorities of the Central African Republic aimed at promoting peace and reconciliation at the local level, in cooperation with MINUSCA. We join the Secretary-General's call on armed groups to halt their expansionist activities and to join the democratic process under way through mediation and reconciliation, and we also call for the speeding up of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process as a whole as well as security-sector reform. given the need to quickly fill the strategic gaps in the implementation of special mixed units. The A3+l commend the authorization by the African Union's Peace and Security Council of the deployment of the African Union military observation mission in Central African Republic in July. Those initiatives will no doubt bolster the country's security capacity. We commend also the efforts of humanitarian workers, especially in helping women and children with a view to alleviating the inequalities exacerbated by the coronavirus disease crisis and to bringing a measure of comfort to that vulnerable segment. We call upon the donor community to provide greater support for their efforts in order to fill the $272.4 million funding gap in the humanitarian response plan. We commend the efforts of the African Union and the Economic Community of Central African States, in their capacity as guarantors of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, in the quest for a way out of the crisis, and we call on non-signatory armed groups to commit to the political process as a whole and cease their acts of violence and intimidation throughout the territory. We welcome also the efforts undertaken by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of MINUSCA for his good offices and his support for the process of reconciliation in the Central African Republic, and we support MINUSCA's ongoing presence in the country through the renewal of its mandate for an additional year. In conclusion, we welcome the holding on 1 October of the high- level meeting on the Central African Republic and echo the joint call on actors to engage in a political dialogue geared at credible and peaceful elections, with respect for constitutional timelines, and we reiterate our support for the Government and the people of Central African Republic in their quest to achieve peace and stability.
