Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to welcome your presiding over
this meeting, Sir, and thank you for having organized it.
We are also grateful for the concept note (S/2019/87l, annex) provided. We also thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing, as well as Mr. Ozerdem and Ms. Elman
for their remarks.

The Security Council has held many thematic
debates over the past 10 years on the importance of
preventive diplomacy tools such as mediation in conflict
resolution. Today we are focusing on reconciliation,
which is a vital element in achieving the peaceful
coexistence of communities, especially in post-conflict
situations. There are a number of prerequisites for
reconciliaton to succeed, as detailed by the Secretary-
General and the two briefers in their statements. The
Security Council must pay more attention to this topic
in order to prevent relapse into conflict. That should be
done not only through holding discussions on the issue
but also by taking measures to ensure implementation
on the ground.

Reconciliation is one of the most important
elements and phases of the comprehensive approach
to peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and it is a key and
vital factor to ensure sustainable peace. The success
of reconciliation is contingent upon several other
accompanying elements, including accountability and
transitional justice, namely, to ensure that those who
are guilty do not enjoy impunity and to ensure respect
for human rights and international humanitarian law;
and rehabilitation, reintegration and disarmament.
With regard to victims, we must provide the
necessary support to ensure their full rehabilitation.
We reaffirm the importance of national ownership
of any reconciliation process. We must establish
integrated strategies of reconciliation supported by
confidence-building measures among all relevant
parties. Dialogue requires sacrifices, compromise and
flexibility, as well as leaving the past behind, healing
wounds and making progress in a spirit of optimism
and serious political will.
The United Nations has many tools at its disposal
that enable it to play an important role in reconciliation
processes. Peacekeeping operations are among the most
important tools and have been playing such an essential
role since 1948. Peacekeeping operations have enjoyed
successes in a number of States and encountered
challenges in others. Moreover, the Special Envoys and
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General bear
the responsibility for paving the way towards launching
a dialogue that would lead to a successful reconciliation

We must also highlight the role ofthe Peacebuilding
Commission, which often plays a key and vital part
in such processes by providing advice and integrated
strategic recommendations for peacebuilding and post-
conflict recovery, in particular in the case of country-
specific configurations. In addition, we must help to
ensure reliable funding for early recovery activities
and sustainable financial resources in the medium
and long terms, especially through the Commission's
close cooperation with the Peacebuilding Fund. We
should not forget that some States play an important
role in laying the foundation for reconciliation. It
is very important that the United Nations establish
partnerships with those States and cooperate with
regional and subregional organizations that sponsor
specific reconciliation process.

Reconciliation must be inclusive. In negotiations,
we must not ignore the needs and concerns of women,
young people, refugees and internally displaced
persons. We must also bear in mind the significant role
that women can play in all stages of peacebuilding and
their contributions to putting forward and implementing
reconciliation strategies. In addition, we must
acknowledge that there is not one reconciliation model.
Rather, every situation has its own characteristics
depending on the nature of the conflict in question and
the historic, cultural, social and economic dimensions
related to the outbreak of that conflict.

In conclusion, we reaffirm that reconciliation is a
complex and long-term process. However, if successful,
it can put an end to bloodshed and prevent further
destruction and loss. Such reconciliation processes
require the ongoing support of the United Nations
and the international community and the participation
of civil society and the mass media. We emphasize
the importance of establishing an awareness-raising
media strategy that encourages members of society to
overcome conflict and to achieve peaceful coexistence.
That is indispensable in today's world. As we discuss
the process of reconciliation, we look forward to the
signing of national reconciliation and peace agreements
in all hotbeds of conflict on the agenda of the Security
Council - Syria, Yemen, Afghanistan and other
conflict areas - and to putting an end to the tragic
conflict phase, offering hope for reconstruction and the
building of a better future for our peoples.

