Mr. Mohamed (Sudan): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate you, Madam, on your country's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, which has witnessed the review of the
Secretary-General's report on Abyei (S/2015/870) and
the consultations on the renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA). I would like also to thank Mr. Herve
Ladsous and his Office for their relentless efforts in
this regard, and to acknowledge with appreciation the
positive role being played by UNISFA.

Resolution 2251 (2015), adopted today, stresses
throughout its provisions the importance of the
implementation of the 20 June Agreement between
the Government of the Sudan and the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement on Temporary Arrangements for
the Administration and Security of the Abyei Area. It also
stresses that the final status of Abyei can be determined
only through dialogue between the two parties. The
resolution also emphasizes the importance of the full
implementation of other relevant agreements, namely,
the 29 June 2011 Agreement between the Government
of the Sudan and the Government of South Sudan on
Border Security and the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism; the 30 July 2011 Agreement on the Border
Monitoring Support Mission between the Government
of the Sudan and the Government of South Sudan; and
the 27 September 2012 Agreements on Cooperation and
Security Arrangements. All of these agreements are
mutually reinforcing and complementary, and should
be implemented as one package without selectivity.

It is worth mentioning that the implementation of the
agreed Implementation Matrix for the aforementioned
agreements is crucial. For that reason, the Matrix has
been issued as an official Security Council document
(S/2015/654, appendix III). We reiterate our commitment
to implementing the agreements, and we believe that
the best way to create an atmosphere conducive to
paving the way for the settlement of the final status of
Abyei is the establishment of the three focal temporary
mechanisms: the Temporary Administration, the Abyei
Police Service and the Abyei Legislative Council. Such
mechanisms, if put in place, will fill any security or
administrative vacuum and help in boosting peaceful
coexistence between communities, namely, the
Misseriya and Ngok Dinka.

With regard to the reference made to the latest
national elections that took place in Abyei, we draw the
Council's kind attention to the provisions of the Abyei
Protocol and the relevant agreements, which all affirm
that until the final status of Abyei is determined, the
Area remains part and parcel of Sudanese territory.
Accordingly, Abyei was an electoral constituency like
all other constituencies in the Sudan. The elections
in no way affected or influenced the implementation
of Abyei Protocol and the subsequent arrangements
agreed for final statement.
The reference to the name of the UNISFA civilian
Head ofMission, contained in paragraph 15 ofresolution
2251 (2015), is in stark contradiction to the content and
spirit of paragraph 41 of the Secretary-General's latest
report on Abyei (S/2015/870) dated 13 November 2015,
which states that

"[w]hile discussions between the Government of
the Sudan and the United Nations on this matter
are ongoing, I urge the Governments of the Sudan
and South Sudan to focus on how to move forward
with the implementation of all provisions of the
Agreement of 20 June 2011".

The aforementioned reference in resolution
resolution 2251 (2015) reflects neither the intention
of the United Nations, as expressed by the Secretary-
General in his report, nor the intention of the parties
concerned. It is therefore categorically rejected by
my Government, and we call upon the members of
the Council to further reconsider this issue. We also
register our reservations over the new phrase that
has been added to the seventh preambular paragraph
of the resolution, regarding human rights monitoring
and reporting, because the mandate of UNISFA is well
defined in resolution 1990 (2011), which established the
Mission and does not contain such reference.

We note with appreciation that the resolution again
stresses concern regarding the unilateral referendum
held by the Ngok Dinka as a rejected unilateral action.
In this regard, we reaffirm the commitment of the
Government of the Sudan to the negotiated settlement
of the final status of Abyei, and we recall that when
the Sudanese army withdrew from Abyei, it did so in
accordance with our commitment pursuant to the road
map adopted by the African Union and endorsed by the
Security Council in it is resolution 2046 (2012).

Finally, we are happy to stress that the prevalent
positive and excellent relations existing between the
two sisterly countries of the Sudan and South Sudan,
which are interwoven by deep historical bonds, augur
well for addressing any ensuing differences.

The meeting rose at 10.20 am.
