Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to begin by thanking Special Envoy De
Mistura for his briefing. I am very glad to see him
in New York. China commends and will continue to
support Mr. De Mistura's efforts to promote the political
process in Syria.

Recently, positive momentum has emerged in the
quest for a political solution to the Syrian issue. Major
progress has been made at the Syrian National Dialogue
Congress meeting held in Sochi. The meeting has
played a positive role in advancing the political process
in Syria, and provided new impetus for the resumption
of the talks in Geneva. China commends the Russian
Federation and other countries for their efforts to hold
that dialogue. We support the United Nations in its
work as the main channel of mediation for a political
solution to the question of Syria.

A political settlement remains the only way forward
on the Syrian issue. The international community should
support the Geneva peace talks in making substantive
progress at an early date, as well as the Astana dialogue
in steadily consolidating the momentum for a ceasefire
in Syria, thereby pushing all parties in Syria back to
the negotiating table through a Syrian-led and Syrian-
owned approach to reach a solution that is acceptable
to all parties - one that accommodates all concerns.
During that process, the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria should be upheld
and respected.

Fighting terrorism is a major aspect in finding
a solution to the Syrian issue. The international
community should step up counter-terrorism efforts in
collaboration, uphold uniform standards and resolutely
combat all terrorist organizations designated as such by
the Security Council.

China has been striving to play a positive and
constructive role in bolstering the quest for a political
solution to this issue. China's special envoy for Syria,

Mr. Xie Xiaoyan, attended the most recent round of
Geneva talks as part of the Syrian National Dialogue
Congress in Sochi, holding extensive communication
with all parties with a view to promoting reconciliation
and facilitating dialogue.

Recently, there have been outbreaks of conflict
in many parts of Syria, about which China is gravely
concerned. China follows closely the humanitarian
situation and the refugee issue in Syria. We are ready
to continue providing assistance to the greatest extent
possible. We stand ready to work with the international
community in pushing for an early, comprehensive, just
and appropriate solution to the Syrian issue.

