Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would first like to thank our Indonesian
colleagues for their active and productive work in the
month of May, and to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency and to wish you
every success and hopefully a more or less calm month
of June, politically speaking.

We are grateful to Mr. Francois Lounceny Fall,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his assessment of the situation in the Central African
subregion. Russia supports the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
as an important tool for implementing preventive
diplomacy. We share the view that the challenges facing
the countries of the subregion are complex ones. In that
context, it is especially important to ensure that the
regions themselves take the leading role in preventing
crises and resolving conflicts. For our part, we are
ready to support their efforts.

We consider the Central African region key to
combating the spread of terrorism on the continent as a
whole. The penetration of radical and terrorist elements
into Central Africa has been accompanied by illegal
trafficking in weapons and drugs and income from the
exploitation of minerals. We appreciate all regional
efforts to develop coherent approaches to combating
any manifestations of terrorism, of which the activities
of the regional multilateral armed forces are a good
example. It will be crucial to ensure that it is adequately
funded in order to enable the States of the Lake Chad
basin to continue their joint operations aimed at
pursuing and eliminating militants in transborder areas.

We note that there has been a certain amount of
success in combating Boko Haram, with the support
of the international community. However, Boko
Haram still has fighting potential and is capable
of conducting serious attacks. Its fighters are still
active in Chad, including in the border areas with
the Niger, Nigeria and Cameroon, where extremists
have been attacking civilians, United Nations and
non-governmental organizations' personnel, and
Chadian military roadblocks.

We are seriously concerned about the substantial
influx into Boko Haram of foreign terrorists, including
fighters from the Islamic State. According to some
estimates, it added around 2,000 new recruits to its
ranks in 2018. We are ready to continue working actively
in various platforms in order to eliminate the terrorist
threat on the African continent. We are focusing in
particular on identifying local terrorists' sources of
financing for local terrorists and their contacts with
other international radical groups.

Russia is closely monitoring the situation in
the Central African Republic. We support President
Touadera's efforts to start an inclusive political dialogue,
launch security-sector reform as soon as possible
and build the armed forces' capacity. The Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, signed on 6 February, represents an
important starting point for a future settlement of the
country's situation. For our part, we will continue our
firm support to the process of national reconciliation,
coordinating our efforts with everyone involved in the
quest to find pathways to normalizing the situation
without hidden agendas.

Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea is one of the other
factors creating instability in the Central African
region. Regrettably, the armed-robbery attacks on
foreign vessels have continued, and among others
Russian sailors have been taken hostage. We have had
a positive experience in participating in international
efforts to fight piracy in the north-western Indian
Ocean as part of the Contact Group on Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia. We hope that experience can be
useful in resolving similar problems in the Gulf of
Guinea, including in the context of possibly expanding
the geographic mandate of the Contact Group to include
the Gulf of Guinea.

We are concerned about the continuing activities
of the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). While it has
been marginalized in the past few years thanks to the
successful efforts of armed forces ofthe region, it is still
plundering and robbing in various areas of the Central
African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and the States of Central Africa should keep
the fight against the LRA in their sights. We hope that
the concept for eradicating this threat, developed under
the auspices of the Economic Community of Central
African States, will bear fruit.

We are following the development of events in
Cameroon. The problem of the Anglophone provinces is
not new. The division of former colonies without regard
for their religious, linguistic and ethnic differences has
resulted in a number of hotbeds of tension in Africa,
including Cameroon. We urge all the Cameroonian
parties to show maximum restraint. Resolving the
country's internal problems will be possible only at the
negotiating table through substantive national dialogue,
with respect for human rights and the rule of law.

In conclusion, I want to point out that the
challenges and threats that the Central African region
is facing today are inextricably linked, as are the States
themselves. The destabilization of the situation in one
country is capable of disturbing the entire subregion
and undermining its neighbours' security, and it is
therefore very important not to cross the line between
prevention and meddling in domestic affairs.

