Mr. Jurica (Croatia): Croatia is a responsible
member of all international organizations dealing with
issues of international security cooperation, relating to
both global and comparative security. For instance, as
an active member of the Nuclear Suppliers Group and
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Board
of Governors, Croatia attaches the greatest importance
to the implementation of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). In that
context, we are following closely the developments in
connection with the Iranian nuclear programme. We
fully share the concerns of the wider international
community in that regard. With regard to the resolution
adopted a short time ago, we had several points as
guiding principles.

Every State has the right to use nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes, but it must abide by international
obligations. While some of the findings of the IAEA
report are satisfactory, taken as a whole, the report
does not paint a positive picture. On the contrary, the
report is critical in that it clearly states that Tehran had
avoided key questions regarding indications of a
possible military dimension of its nuclear activities. As
the Agency has stated, the failure of Iran to provide a
clear response leaves no confidence in the exclusively
peaceful nature of the programme. The IAEA has also
stated that these are matters of serious concern that are
critical to an assessment of a possible military
dimension to Iran's nuclear programme. Moreover, Iran
has also failed to implement the relevant provisions of
resolution 1737 (2006) and 1747 (2007), and it has not
suspended its enrichment-related activities and has
started to develop new-generation centrifuges and
related projects.

Therefore, in the light of the foregoing, the
delegation of Croatia voted in favour of the draft
resolution. We welcome its adoption. In addition,
Croatia also welcomes the commitment of the Foreign
Ministers of the six countries to continue all diplomatic
efforts to resolve the issue.

