Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Once again, Sir, we would like to
congratulation you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
to assure you of our full and constructive cooperation.
We would also like to express our high appreciation to
Mr. Jorge Urbina and his staff for their exemplary
conduct of the Council's work in November.

We thank Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), for his
briefing, although we have some criticisms of it. We
believe that peace and justice are inseparable
objectives and are necessary for the settlement of any
conflict, whether in Darfur or elsewhere. We believe
that judicial justice can be achieved only in an
environment of security and political stability. The
establishment of peace and stability is thus an objective
prerequisite for upholding justice. We therefore always
attempt to avoid any measures that could have a
negative impact on efforts to the establish security and
achieve a political settlement.
Regrettably, the recent step taken by the
Prosecutor regarding an arrest warrant against the
President of the Sudan, Mr. Omar Al-Bashir, raises
legitimate questions and concerns. That step comes at
an extremely sensitive time when the deployment of
the hybrid force has begun and when further regional
and international efforts are being made to move the
political process ahead. This is precisely the time at
which the Prosecutor has taken this step.

The report of the Prosecutor speaks of all the
measures taken in accordance with the mandate
accorded by resolution 1593 (2005). We hope that that
mandate will be complied with objectively and
professionally, in order to ensure justice, and with a
comprehensive understanding of this extremely
complicated subject.

Many claims and accusations have been made,
foremost among which is the 14 July 2008 request that
the ICC to issue an arrest warrant against the President
of the Republic of the Sudan, Mr. Omar Hassan
Al-Bashir, within the context of accusations of crimes
of genocide. This request was made in a manner that
gave the impression that we are dealing with a
Government whose sole concern is to obliterate its
most important components, namely, its people and its
social fabric.

Experience and a concern for justice have taught
us that strong words - and here I am referring to
resolution 1593 (2005) - are not conducive to finding
solutions or to creating an environment of cooperation
and assistance with the Government of the Sudan, as
called for by both the resolution and the report before
us. To the contrary, strong words endanger the growing
cooperation between the Government of the Sudan and
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur. All of us understand that, by its very nature,
cooperation is a dynamic process that can only be
successful through calm dialogue and mutual trust,
however differently we may interpret the
complementary nature of the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court or the Sudan's
commitment to resolution 1593 (2005).

Although the report indicates that the Prosecutor
has been actively involved with the United Nations, the
African Union, the League of Arab States and other
organizations, it does not address the apprehensions
and concerns expressed by those bodies in many
resolutions and statements with regard to the negative
impact of the latest measure taken against the President
of the Republic of the Sudan. For example, in its
communique of 21 July 2008, the African Union Peace
and Security Council expressed its conviction that,

"in view of the delicate nature of the process
under way in the Sudan, approval by the Pre-Trial
Chamber of the application by the ICC
Prosecutor could seriously undermine the
ongoing efforts aimed at facilitating the early
resolution of the conflict in Darfur and the
promotion of long-lasting peace and
reconciliation in the Sudan as a whole and, as a
result, may lead to further suffering for the
people of the Sudan and greater destabilization
with far-reaching consequences for the country
and the region" (S/2008/48], annex, para. 9).

Should not all those considerations be taken into
account by everyone who is truly concerned about
ensuring justice and ending the humanitarian suffering
in the region?

In the same communique, the African Union
Peace and Security Council requested the United
Nations Security Council, in accordance with article 16
of the Rome Statute, to defer the process initiated by
the International Criminal Court. Undoubtedly, the
motive of the African Union Peace and Security
Council is to establish peace and end human suffering,
which are prerequisites for ensuring justice.

In addition to that example and the position of the
African Union, which is the main partner of the United
Nations in the Hybrid Operation in Darfur, other
regional organizations such as the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and the League of Arab States have
expressed similar positions in statements and decisions
that they have adopted. We therefore call on the
international community, as represented in the Security
Council, to take the initiative to respond to the
concerns expressed and requests made by those
organizations stemming from their interest in
maintaining international peace and security.

We have recently seen great momentum in the
Sudan in favour of establishing peace in Darfur.
Decisions have been taken by the Sudan People's
Initiative, with the participation of all political entities
and stakeholders in Darfur and the Sudan. These
decisions have been widely welcomed at the national,
regional and international levels and have engendered
hope for the chances of achieving peace in Darfur.
Ensuring justice and combating impunity have been at
the centre of those recommendations and decisions.
In conclusion, Libya would like to reiterate its
strong commitment to the principles of peace and
justice and to not permitting impunity. We should also
like to express our ongoing readiness to take part in
every effort aimed at establishing peace and ensuring
justice in Darfur. We call upon the international
community, the African Union and the Arab League to
pursue their joint efforts to find a resolution to that
bloody conflict, so as to create the conditions
necessary to ensure justice.

