Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to extend my thanks to the Member
States of the group of five small countries (SS) for their
initiative to request the convening of a special meeting
of the Security Council to discuss the progress
achieved in the implementation of the measures set out
in the annex to the note of the President of the Security
Council contained in document S/2006/507 of 19 July
2006. I would like also to thank you, Mr. President, for
preparing the concept paper dated 4 August 2008
which helps direct the discussion towards a purposeful
evaluation that might lead to the adoption of specific
measures. I would like in this regard to express our
support for the statement made by Cuba on behalf of
the Member States of the Non-Aligned Movement.

There is no doubt whatsoever that the central
starting point in any effort to promote the efficiency of
the Security Council is to enhance the transparency and
accountability of its work, with a view to guaranteeing
that the Council carry out the mandates given to it by
2
the Member States of this Organization and to treating
permanent and non-permanent members equally, as
they have been elected not to protect their national
interests but to protect the international and regional
interests of the general membership of the
Organization as a whole.

There is also no doubt that today's debate is
inextricably linked to the work of the Open-ended
Working Group on the Question of Equitable
Representation on and Increase in the Membership of
the Security Council and Other Matters Related to the
Security Council. The subject of reform of the
Council's working methods is a main part of the Open-
ended Working Group's activities, along with the
expansion in the permanent and non-permanent
categories of membership in the Council, guaranteeing
that the new permanent members are accorded the veto
right on an equal footing with current permanent
members.

While we welcome the series of notes issued by
the Security Council Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, we
must candidly admit that the measures contained
therein do not meet the expectations of Member States,
as those measures constitute compromises agreed to by
non-permanent Member States in order to show what
can be called Council unity. Therefore, the revision of
these measures, as proposed in the report under
discussion today, does not convince us that such a
revision constitutes the final word in the institutional
handling of the issue. Rather, the proposed revision
stands as an insufficient preliminary step that needs
further evaluation and strengthening.

Reform of the working methods of the Security
Council should be based on the inevitability of
achieving real balance in power among Council
members, particularly between the permanent and
non-permanent members. Furthermore, the time has
come for an agreement on permanent rules of
procedure to replace the current provisional rules,
which have been in force for more than 60 years,
namely, since the establishment of the Organization.

Furthermore, the Informal Working Group
dealing with this important subject in the Council
should be transformed into a formal working group that
would adopt official bold procedures to consolidate the
concepts of equality among countries and of justice in
dealing with their issues, enhance transparency,
08-49242
increase interaction and promote efficiency. There is no
doubt that the Open-ended Working Group of the
General Assembly will remain the most appropriate
forum to deal with this matter in a democratic manner,
as the Assembly encompasses all Members of the
Organization.

Egypt is convinced that the starting point in
reforming the Council's working methods is for the
Council to refrain from exceeding the mandates
entrusted to it under the Charter of the United Nations.
The Council should stop encroaching on subjects
falling squarely within the core competence of the
Organization's other main organs, particularly the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, under the pretext of dealing with the security
aspects of those subjects or by attempting to give a
false impression that the subject matter under
consideration gives rise to a threat to international
peace and security. This issue stresses the importance
of revisiting the relationship between the Security
Council and the other principal organs of the
Organization for the purposes of restoring the
institutional balance between them that is clearly
outlined in the Charter. In this regard, the International
Court of Justice has a major role to play in settling any
dispute that might arise between organs with respect to
their mandates.

Moreover, Security Council respect for
objectivity, as well as its obligation to avoid selectivity,
double standards or politicization, constitutes some of
the main keys to achieving real reform in the working
methods of the Council. This notion could find its
practical application in giving concerned countries the
opportunity to attend informal Council consultations
on the same footing as that afforded representatives of
the Secretary General, and giving them and the
regional organizations the chance to participate in
Council negotiations that might have an impact on
them. Concerned countries should also be allowed to
participate in the evaluation of the implementation of
Council resolutions that affect them as well as in the
examination of reasons why that implementation might
be hindered. Such an assessment should be included in
the annual report prepared by the Council and
submitted to the General Assembly. That report, which
is currently of a narrative character, must be made
more analytical and explanatory as regards positions on
the various issues being dealt with by the Council. It
must also include the reasons for the Council's
refraining from certain actions and for its inability to
take decisive action in certain situations, in particular
those related to the maintenance of international peace
and security. Moreover, the report must include
explanations for the Council's various responses vis-a-
vis its resolutions, presidential and press statements
and reports, including the criteria followed by the
Council in deciding how to respond.

The working methods of the Council will not be
reformed unless we effectively address the misuse of
the right of veto and take the necessary measures to
restrict and rationalize its use until it is eliminated
altogether. That should be done in order to halt its
misuse, putting pressure on concerned countries to
accept specific solutions and preventing the Council
from acting in certain cases. It should also be done in
order to prevent the veto from being used in cases of
proven genocide, crimes against humanity and grave
violations of international humanitarian law, as well as
in efforts to halt hostilities between warring parties.
Pending its elimination, all new permanent members in
an expanded Security Council must enjoy the right of
veto, in particular new members from the African
continent. Those countries have experienced historical
injustice owing to the fact that they have not been
represented in the permanent category.

Past experience has shown the growing role that
can be played by regional groups and organizations -
especially the African Union, the League of Arab
States and the Organization of Islamic Conference -
in support of the Security Council in carrying out its
duties. During its presidency of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union in December 2006, Egypt
put forward an initiative to establish a coordination and
consultation mechanism between the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council.
That important initiative, which was welcomed and is
currently being implemented, could serve as a
groundbreaking model to widen the scope of
coordination so as to include other regional groups and
organizations that play an important role in
maintaining international peace and security.

In conclusion, our debate today is an important step
towards reaching agreement on measures needed to
reform the working methods of the Security Council.
There have been several worthwhile efforts in that regard.
The most recent of those was General Assembly draft
resolution A/60/L.49, which was submitted by the group
of five small nations in March 2006. That was a good
attempt, despite the fact that the draft resolution did not
fully meet the aspirations of Member States with regard to
this issue. In addition to the draft resolution, hundreds of
other proposals have been put forward on the same
subject. What is missing is not additional proposals or
evaluations, but more political will on the part of
permanent and non-permanent members of the Council
alike to achieve real reform of the Security Council. That
reform must also encompass the five main areas being
dealt with by the Open-ended Working Group - namely,
membership, the right of veto, regional representation, the
size of an enlarged Security Council and the reform of the
working methods of the Council - so as to be able to
achieve a comprehensive agreement on all aspects of the
Council's reform in order to make it more effective,
transparent and capable of achieving the aspirations of
Member States in a world that is stable and peaceful.

