Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I first
wish to thank the delegation of Guatemala for having
organized the debate on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). Allow me to express
my thanks to Guatemala for presiding over the Security
Council this month.

I also wish to acknowledge the presence of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Haiti, Mr. Mariano Fernandez Amunategui, who
has given us a very comprehensive view of what
is happening on the ground. We also appreciate
the comprehensive report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/678), which we are studying. We agaree that
the conditions for political stabilization in Haiti have
been making progress. That would not have taken
place without MINUSTAH's valuable contribution to
improving the security situation in the country and to
promoting political dialogue.

We take note of the process of the peaceful
transition of power, as well as the recent publication
of constitutional reforms to establish the Permanent
Electoral Council. Those are significant steps towards
strengthening democratic life in Haiti. We also welcome
the launching of a development plan that is intended to
attact foreign investment, help combat corruption and
smuggling, and promote industrial projects as the basis
for the country's sustainable development. However, we
acknowldege that there are still challenges to which we
should respond and that it is essential for MINUSTAH
to have the necessary resources to respond to them.
We must continue supporting the strengthening of
security institutions, especially the Haitian National
Police, which still does not have the ability to take full
responsibility for internal security in Haiti.

Therefore a MINUSTAH troop and police presence
continues to be necessary, in terms of both coverage
and training.

It is likewise important that the Haitian Government,
with the support of the international community and
of countries in the region in particular, continue with
its efforts to fight unemployment and poverty in Haiti,
which have a direct impact on the living conditions of
the Haitian people.

The international aid coordination mechanism
announced by the Haitian authorities during the
general debate of the General Assembly some days ago
will contribute to ensuring that such aid is channelled
towards meeting the priorities identified by the Haitian
Government.

It is true that ifthose efforts fail, Haiti will continue
to suffer conditions which promote instability and
which could worsen due to its vulnerability to natural
disasters.

Mexico is firmly committed to efforts aimed at
promoting stability and sustainable development in
Haiti. We therefore support the renewal of the mandate
of MINUSTAH for another year and its reconfiguration.
We firmly believe that the men and women deployed in
Haiti will continue working in close cooperation with
the Haitian Government to lay the foundations of a
prosperous and peaceful Haiti.

