Mr. Rubadiri (Malawi): We extend to you, Sir, our
most sincere congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February. We congratulate equally your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Japan, who served as
President for the month of January.

 

The Malawi delegation has read with keen interest the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III), as contained
in document S/1997/115 of 7 February 1997. We have also
monitored developments in that country, which has suffered
for too long, and whose people's longing for peace and
tranquility cannot be denied any longer.

We are very disappointed that today, on the eve of the
day on which we were supposed to be celebrating the
completion of the mandate of UNAVEM. III, we are, alas,
in no mood for joyful ululation. We are most concerned
that UNITA has once again seen fit to delay the formation
of the Government of National Unity and Reconciliation,
contrary to the letter and spirit of the Lusaka Protocol, and
against a whole wave of international public opinion. From
the Southern African Development Community (SADC),
from the rest of Africa, and from the international
community at large come prayers for peace in this
cherished African land that fed foreign explorers and was
a way-station as they journeyed to the Far East.

We are concerned that there are other remaining
political and military aspects of the whole process which,
if delayed further, would bring about a major setback to the
peace process. Questions relating to the selection of UN ITA
soldiers and their incorporation into the armed forces, as
well as to general demobilization, need to be addressed
more resolutely.

Once again, we appeal to all the parties concerned,
particularly to UNITA, to exert extra efforts to take the
necessary action that will meaningfully translate into
practical results the aspirations of the Angolan people -
and of all of us here, and everywhere, who believe that
peace and the process of reconstruction and development in
Angola cannot be delayed any longer. The African vision,
during Africa's tenure of leadership of the United Nations
into the twenty-first century, holds clear the resolution of
this bloody conflict in historic Angola.

The international community will continue, as it has in
the past, to play a critical role in the successful outcome of
developments in Angola. We welcome the useful analysis
and recommendations set out by the Secretary-General in
his report. The international community, however, cannot,
with a clear conscience, abandon Angola now. Many
challenges still lie ahead. We are most gratified that the
Security Council is today ready to meet this challenge. We
support the extension of the mandate of UNAVEM. III, as
agreed by the Council this afternoon. We also support the
activation of the relevant provision of resolution 864 (1993)
of 15 September 1993, should UNITA continue its
intransigent ways. We are therefore happy that the
resolution before the Security Council has been
unanimously adopted by all the member countries.

Let me conclude by acknowledging, as we have
done previously, the untiring efforts of the
Secretary-General, his Special Representative, Mr.
Alioune Blondin Beye, and all UNAVEM. III personnel
and humanitarian workers, whose work in very difficult
circumstances has made it abundantly clear that the
service for peace is a godly endeavour. We pay particular
tribute to those whose lives have been lost to this noble
cause. For them, and for the concern of us all, we must
send a strong message to the leadership of UNITA that it
is a living Angola that must be born, not the carcass of a
mutilated citizenry of orphaned children, women and old
men.

We pray that the next time the Council meets on this
issue it will be to take on the duty of rebuilding lives and
rebuilding a nation.

