At the outset, I would like to welcome Minister Maas, who is joining us for this important meeting. I would also like to congratulate you, Sir, on your country's assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing, and Ms. Stephanie Williams for her efforts in leading the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). I also take this opportunity to thank Germany and Mrs. Angela Merkel for her efforts to reach international consensus and find a peaceful solution to the Libyan crisis. Today's meeting comes at an important time and provides an opportunity, in the presence of all the countries represented here, to officially announce the failure of the adventure led by the aggressor, which it named "the Jihad and the Open Conquest". I also confirm the fulfilment of our previous promise that the invader would never enter Tripoli, and he did not. Thanks to our national army and our valiant armed forces, we affirm the triumph of Operation Burkan Al-Ghadab, a victory for those who call for a civil and democratic State over the defeated scheme of State militarization. The resilience of Tripoli is a symbol of resilience against all counter-revolution plots and those who support them, not only for Libya but on behalf of the entire region. As I have said previously, since 2011 my country has witnessed attempts by several States to extend their control over Libya, plunder its wealth and tear apart its national and social fabric. Those States benefited from interventions to create chaos and settle scores on our land. They took advantage of opportunists in order to achieve their agendas by suppressing the dream of a democratic transformation, to which the Libyans aspire. Today, as they listen to today's briefers and speakers, Libyans are wondering why they are now talking about a political settlement and dialogue. Where were they more than a year ago when bombs were falling on innocent people and thousands of civilians, including women and children, were killed? Where were they when our civilian infrastructure was being bombed and hundreds of thousands were displaced? All those violations and war crimes occurred before their eyes. What did they do to stop them? And what have we gained from the bloody adventure launched by a rebel obsessed with power? Today we are hearing calls for reason, wisdom and dialogue, but by whom? By States that - either secretly or publicly - are still supporting the aggressor. We are hearing calls for reason by States that deliberately disrupted United Nations dialogue and the efforts of its former Special Envoy Ghassan Salame, who spoke in an interview a few days ago. Now free from the restrictions of United Nations bureaucracy, Mr. Salame expressed his anger and pointed out the hypocrisy of some States, saying that he was stabbed in the back by the majority of the members of the Council, and that they no longer had any role when Haftar launched his attack on Tripoli. He further said that Haftar got the support of most, while they were being criticized in Libya because they did not stop him. He concluded that some major States not only supported Haftar, but deliberately colluded against holding a national conference in Ghadames. We also heard today from some who still say there can be no military solution in Libya. In the light of the words of the sixth Special Envoy for Libya, how can we trust the international community's stated intentions of reaching a peaceful solution, or its credibility in future? The people of Libya and the people of the world are tired of double standards. Unfortunately, the United Nations, which is 75 years-old, has become strained and helpless, and the Security Council has become nothing but an arena for arguments and empty statements. Real and fundamental reform is therefore inevitable. What more evidence of crimes and violations by the aggressor and its supporters, as documented in the Council's own reports and in the reports of the International Criminal Court (ICC), is the Council waiting for? What about the mass graves recently revealed in the city of Tarhouna? Up to 220 bodies of children, women and young people have been discovered so far, some of whom were buried alive. What about the explosives and mines planted in the homes of citizens south of Tripoli, resulting thus far in the death of 80 innocent victims, according to the Mission? That was nothing but a cowardly act carried out by Haftar's militias and mercenaries, evoking other atrocities committed in Sirte by terrorists of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Shams (ISIS). And yet some still consider this war criminal to be a partner for peace. In that regard, we thank the ICC and the Human Rights Council for accepting our request to investigate those violations, and we hope they will help bring the perpetrators to justice. What other evidence and proof is the Council waiting for to see that there is an international presence of mercenaries - whether affiliated with the Russian Wagner Group or Sudanese, Chadian or Syrian - working under the command of the war criminal and his agents? The Libyan people and the entire world saw them on television fleeing their positions south of Tripoli. We all saw how the mercenaries were hurriedly evacuated from Bani Walid Airport after realizing that their defeat was inevitable. Today we find them stationed in the east, hiding in broad daylight and hijacking oil fields and ports. We therefore reiterate our request to the States concerned to withdraw their citizens and hold them and those who finance them accountable. Otherwise, they are complicit in those violations and crimes and the Security Council should impose immediate sanctions on these entities and individuals. In that regard, I would like to thank the Sudanese Government for arresting, a few days ago, more than 120 mercenaries, who were trying to infiltrate the borders to fight in Libya. In response to the Russian representative's objection that there are no Russian military soldiers in Libya, I note the presence of the Russian Wagner Group, which recruits multinationals, including Russian citizens. We ask Russia, therefore, to act and withdraw them. The Libyan people are wondering about the reasons behind the presence of some States that have no ties to Libya participating in international forums on Libya. For instance, why was the United Arab Emirates involved in discussing the future of Libya? Is it a neighbouring country? A Mediterranean country? Or a member of the Security Council? If the United Arab Emirates is not interfering in our affairs, as it claims, why do they rush to take a seat at every meeting? Why do they welcome war criminals and give them a platform to hold press conferences to incite war, and provide them with funding and weapons? Why were Emirati officers recently featured in video recordings training Haftar militias on Russian Pantsir-S1 missile systems. Does Libya pose a threat to the national security of the United Arab Emirates? The United Arab Emirates is undoubtedly involved in supporting the unsuccessful coup attempt in Libya and in threatening international peace and security in several parts of the world, as indicated in various United Nations reports. It has not been able to defend itself with regard to what was stated against them. For all of those reasons, we no longer accept its engagement in our political dialogues. In that regard, we call upon the United Nations and the international community to limit future Libyan talks to concerned Member States from neighbouring countries, Mediterranean countries and the Security Council. If not, then we will demand adding other important countries to assure proper balance when discussing the Libyan matter. In the same context, we are astonished to hear some countries today saying that they are against foreign interference, calling for the preservation of Libya's sovereignty over its territories and presenting unrealistic and unilateral political initiatives in the absence of relevant players - as we have been hearing today regarding the so called Cairo declaration. At the same time, we see statements and threats of direct intervention, as announced by the Egyptian Government, the drawing of red lines inside our lands, as stated by its President, and threatening to arm the youth of our tribes to fight their brothers inside Libya under the excuse of national security. We totally condemn and reject those threats and remind everyone that their support for Haftar is what threatened international peace and security and regional stability, and what has brought us to where we are today. We will face any aggression with firmness and strength. We can understand that Libya's national security falls within Egypt's national security, but Libya cannot be reduced to a region on any country's border. We did not interfere in the political affairs of others, as Egypt has chosen to do, but no one can impose their system on us. Moreover, Libya is not being governed by a tribal group, as is being falsely claimed. Instead, our tribes are our cultural and social foundation. We value and cherish them, and any attempts to divide us will not succeed. We remind the Foreign Minister of Egypt that the Government of National Accord liberated Sirte from ISIS and avenged the killing of 21 Egyptian citizens. We are the ones who recovered the bodies and sent them to their families to rest in peace, not Haftar and his forces. In fact, he was the one who allowed ISIS safe passage from Derna to Sirte. The continuation of military operations until the entire Libyan soil is free of rebels, militias and mercenaries is a sovereign issue that falls under the responsibility of the Libyan State and its Government. It is our national duty. It is therefore only the State that has the right to determine when and where it ends. That being said, Haftar's militia and mercenaries retain control over several oil fields and installations. Most recently, we witnessed the invasion by Wagner Group mercenaries of the El-Sharara oilfield in an act to engage the south in another cycle of chaos and to add to the suffering of its people, who already have been through difficult times and lived decades of crisis and marginalization. According to the National Oil Company, the recent closure of oil ports has caused an estimated financial loss of more than $6.5 billion, and some foreign actors are taking advantage of that issue as leverage to achieve their objectives in other international affairs and increase their shares in the global markets. In that regard, we emphasize that oil is the wealth of all Libyans. We will liberate all facilities from militias and mercenaries, and we will use all possible means to resume production. In that connection, my Government reserves the right to prosecute those who incited the blockage of oilfields and prevented the export of oil. The allegations put forth regarding the issue of equal distribution of wealth are nothing but flimsy justifications presented in order to control State resources. That will never happen. We affirm that solving this problem sustainably and ensuring justice for all regions of Libya can come about only through ending the transitional periods and agreeing on a constitution in which the Libyan people define the State's governing and economic systems. As noted above, I would like to emphasize the following. First, choosing our coalitions, signing security, military or other agreements with any country is a sovereign and legitimate right, and is not called foreign intervention. Some States launch interventions and violate the sovereignty of others, undermining legitimate Governments and backing coups and outlaws with money, arms and political support. If our agreements are illegal, then all of our agreements signed with other countries - whether security, economic or oil-related - are also illegal. With regard to the remark made by the Greek Minister on the interference of countries in internal affairs without the will of the State, we remind him that he is the one who violated resolution 2259 (2015) by dealing with the parallel Government in the east. Secondly, the Council's resolutions on the situation in Libya call on all States to support the Government of National Accord in extending its control over the entire Libyan territory. Furthermore, the arms embargo should apply to illegitimate actors, instead of undermining the Government and supporting the coup against it. Thirdly, we are all aware of the problem of the spread of weapons, militias and armed groups in most cities and regions. However, the solution was not, and should not have been, addressed by waging wars and fighting. A solution can be reached only through putting an end to the division of the country, achieving stability and embracing our youth and activating disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and security sector reform programmes. Furthermore, any solution must improve the economic and social situation. Over the years, our youth have been victims of conflict and a deteriorating situation. They should not all be put in one basket. Fourthly, we believe in the significance of reaching a comprehensive political solution among all Libyans, one that leads to building constitutional institutions so as push the country out of its current crisis. However, that does not include parties that have committed violations and crimes to seize power and militarize the State. Fifthly, any political initiatives presented must be nation-owned and carried out under the auspices of the United Nations and in coordination with the African Union. We reject any unilateral initiatives that do not include all Libyan parties, are custom-made for some individuals or are presented by "impartial" States that support rebels. Sixthly, we request the presidency of the Security Council to hold a special and urgent meeting of the sanctions committee this month, in the presence of representatives of all States mentioned in the reports of the Panel of Experts on Libya accused of violating the arms embargo in support of the aggression. I do not think that this request is difficult to fulfil, and it is equally as important as today's meeting. My Government reaffirms its strategic choice to adopt peaceful solutions to the Libyan crisis and to exclude foreign interference. It further reaffirms the participation of parties that believe in peace and work towards achieving it, which is in fact the approach adopted by the Libyan State on many occasions. We also call on the United Nations to deal with the issue of political dialogue among Libyans in a different manner from now on, since the circumstances have changed. There is no room to again talk about the outcomes of Paris, Palermo, Abu Dhabi or others. It must expand the base of the political dialogue stemming from the Libyan Political Agreement so as to be more inclusive and include real actors, political parties and figures from all regions. The only solution to the Libyan crisis and to stopping the fighting over legitimacy is to return to the Libyan people and end the useless transitional periods. The previous mistakes should not be repeated and the custom-made solutions to suit certain individuals, groups or countries must come to an end. The only solution must come through the Constitution, which was deliberately ignored in all political initiatives despite the work of the nationally elected Constitution Drafting Assembly. We must organize legislative and presidential elections as soon as possible, as this will provide an opportunity for those individuals aspiring to participate in the elections and prove their popularity and true legitimacy. This is the only solution to our self-determination, rather than having our destiny being determined by others. This summarizes the political vision of the Government of National Accord for those who ask, and it is supposed to be the subject of our Libyan dialogue. In conclusion, we call on all Libyans to reunite, side with the nation and work together to deny the opportunity to those who seek to divide us. The outcome of the aggressor's adventure was nothing but more killings and destruction for the benefit of other States and individuals. Throughout history our beloved people in the east have been a beacon of scholars, elites, intellectuals and revolutionaries of Libya. We cannot recall any time in the past when they sent their men under any pretext to kill and displace their Libyan brothers and sisters. They have always been the voice of truth, and the independence of Libya and its unity were due to the wisdom of their leaders at that time. We all must remember our founding fathers from all over the country, east, west, north and south, who contributed through their patriotism to establishing the State and uniting the nation, rather than destroying and dividing it. It is us who could stop all foreign interference, ambitions and conspiracies, whatever and by whoever they may be, so let us work together to build our future with our free will.
