Mr. Daou (Mali) (spoke in French): First and
foremost, I wish to extend to you, Mr. President, my
09-63874

delegation's congratulations on your initiative to hold
this open Security Council debate on a phenomenon
that is one of the priorities on the international agenda.
In convening this special meeting devoted to the
problem of drug trafficking as a threat to international
security, your country, Burkina Faso, has given us the
opportunity to hold a constructive debate on a subject
that is of major concern to the international
community, in particular West Africa and the Sahelo-
Saharan belt. These regions have regrettably become a
hub for international drug trafficking.

The scope of the phenomenon of drug trafficking
and its diversification thanks to globalization and
technological progress are of concern to us all. Indeed,
drug trafficking is now a true scourge and a real threat
to the security and stability of a good number of
countries. Illicit narcotics trafficking is today at the
forefront of organized transnational crime, and abusive
drug use leads many young people into physical and
mental decay. Official reports and studies on the issue
point to the fact that drug trafficking has grown
significantly in recent years, thereby becoming a
potential source of instability and destabilization.

In Mali we have made the fight against drugs and
psychotropic products a first-line priority, given their
negative impact on health and negative consequences
in the socio-economic and security sectors. The
Government of Mali has taken a series of steps aimed
at combating this phenomenon by, in particular,
establishing an anti-drug inter-ministerial coordination
committee. The committee is charged with
participating in the development of a national anti-drug
policy, working to coordinate the efforts of various
State services in the area of narcotics and psychotropic
substances, coordinating educational efforts and
offering advice about actions and measures planned by
the Government.

The Government of Mali fully believes that no
country today is immune from drug trafficking. Only
effective and coordinated efforts, both within States
and at the international level, will make it possible to
stamp out this scourge.

The recent incident involving the Boeing plane in
Tarkint has served to remind us of the urgency of better
coordinating and harmonizing the efforts of our
Governments to ensure an integrated and
comprehensive approach to the problems and
challenges facing the countries of the Sahelo-Saharan
region. It also served to underscore the need to further
strengthen national and regional capacities. Upon the
discovery, on 2 November, of the wreck of that plane
in a deserted and uninhabited area of northern Mali, the
Government of Mali quickly opened an investigation
that included INTERPOL, the intelligence services of
friendly countries and the relevant bodies of the United
Nations system. The investigation is continuing, in
particular with regard to tracing the origin of the
aircraft and its route, cargo and equipment and the
reason for the trip.

Press reports and information provided by the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime with regard
to the nature and size of the cargo will in no way
influence the course of the investigation. We continue
to believe that sensational statements and hasty
conclusions will not be useful in exposing the truth.
Having said that, I will say that for my country and its
Government, whose position on this matter is not to be
doubted, this is in no way about adopting a head-in-
the-sand approach.

We have known for a long time that the Sahelo-
Saharan strip, which Mali shares with many countries,
has become an area where all sorts of trafficking takes
place - trafficking in drugs, cigarettes, light weapons
and human beings. In addition, the Government of
Mali expresses its great concern at the extent of such
trafficking, which has now joined terrorism and
international organized crime to pose not just a serious
threat to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
countries of the region, but also a major impediment to
their development.

We are aware of the transnational nature of those
threats, as well as of the crucial need for improved
subregional cooperation to overcome them. That is
why His Excellency Mr. Amadou Toumani Toure',
President of the Republic of Mali, has worked
tirelessly for more than two years to hold a regional
conference in Bamako on the issues of peace, security
and development in the Sahelo-Saharan region.

The conference will provide a useful opportunity
for the countries of the region to reaffirm their joint
determination to make the region they share a zone of
peace and security and a centre of stability, growth and
development. The preparatory meeting at the level of
ministers for foreign affairs held in Bamako in
November 2008 has already laid the groundwork. We
hope that, very soon, the heads of State of the countries
concerned will meet to consider and adopt the
conference's conclusions.

We firmly believe that there is necessarily a link
between all the scourges to which I have referred and
that no single country can effectively address them all.
The multiple challenges we face today require a
collective and coherent response at the global level.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate here
Mali's commitment to working with all countries and
bodies involved in combating drug trafficking. We urge
the international community and the United Nations to
further support the initiatives and efforts made by our
countries in our common fight to halt the drug
trafficking phenomenon and create a better world.

