Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to express Egypt's appreciation for
your initiative, Mr. President, to convene this important
meeting. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
second report on small arms, which addresses the
potential contribution of the Security Council to United
Nations efforts to address the issue of the illicit traffic
in small arms and light weapons in the context of the
issues before the Security Council. We believe that that
role is based on three interdependent factors.

The first element entails imposing and enforcing
arms embargoes in areas of armed conflict. The second
pertains to mandating peacekeeping operations to assist in
the implementation of disarmament and demobilization
programmes in post-conflict situations. The third
addresses the link between the illicit trade in arms and the
illegal exploitation of natural resources in conflict-affected
regions.

Despite the increasing number of measures
adopted by the Security Council in recent years, most
notably the establishment of groups of experts and
mechanisms aimed at monitoring the implementation
of arms embargoes, such measures have produced only
limited success. In some situations, that is due to
practical difficulties in the strict monitoring of arms
embargoes, while in others it is due to a lack of
political will in the Council to enforce certain
embargoes and to ensure their implementation. We
therefore believe that the Security Council ought to
focus on evaluating the causes of successes and
failures alike in the commitment of all parties and
States to the implementation of arms embargoes
resolutions, while duly taking into consideration the

fact that the ultimate goal should not be limited solely
to enforcing arms embargoes but, rather, should
channel those embargoes towards achieving the
required degree of security and stability needed to
ensure the success of the political process in the
countries and regions under consideration.

Moreover, the Security Council has a vital role to
play in the follow-up to the implementation of
disarmament and demobilization programmes for
former combatants in the context of peacekeeping
mandates. That is essential in ensuring security and
stability, as well as in enhancing the authority of States
and their security machinery in post-conflict situations.
In that context, we believe that the General Assembly
should agree, through its Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, on certain guidelines
regarding the process of collecting, storing, securing
and destroying confiscated arms in various areas of
conflict so as to avoid the recirculation of those arms
in a given country emerging from conflict or their
transfer across its borders to neighbouring countries,
which would cause further regional instability and
could further jeopardize international peace and
security.

The Security Council must also give importance
and priority to seriously and effectively addressing the
linkage between the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons and the illegal exploitation of natural
resources in conflict-affected regions. The existence of
such a linkage has been shown by various lessons
learned and by international reports to have fuelled and
prolonged conflicts and to have diminished the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations, particularly
in Africa. The report of the Secretary-General clearly
highlights various examples and cases calling for the
creation of appropriate mechanisms to address that
linkage, which entails dangerous security and
development implications and hinders the financing
and strengthening of peacebuilding activities in
countries emerging from conflict.

To that end, the delegation of Egypt reiterates its
position on the need for coordination and cooperation
between the Security Council, the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and the relevant
regional organizations and arrangements, with a view
to introducing effective measures aimed at breaking the
linkage between the illicit trade in those arms and the
illegal exploitation of natural resources in conflict-
affected regions. We also call on the Security Council
to mobilize the necessary political will to pursue and
hold accountable those parties and individuals
implicated in activities associated with the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, particularly in Africa.

The delegation of Egypt wishes to stress that the
success of the United Nations in addressing the real
dangers posed by small arms and light weapons will
depend on its reaching consensus on the means to
enhance the review process of the 2001 United Nations
Programme of Action, which the Assembly adopted by
consensus. The Programme of Action is based on
certain principles that guarantee the legitimacy and
acceptance of its provisions, including the inherent
right of States, individually and collectively, to self-
defence and the right of self-determination of all
peoples, particularly those under foreign domination or
occupation. Thus, we must all cooperate to create an
environment conducive to the success of the
Programme of Action review conference to be held in
June and July this year.

The role of the Security Council and of other
United Nations organs must complement the texts,
principles and provisions of the Programme of Action
rather than trying to replace the Programme or to chart
a parallel course aimed at addressing the issue of illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons. The mixing of
concepts on the basis of an alleged link between the
various elements of conflict situations, as referred to in
some sections of the Secretary-General's most recent
report on small arms (S/2006/109), and the Security
Council's continued attempts, in addressing the issue,
to expand the scope of its mandate and its authority
beyond imposing and enforcing arms embargoes in
conflict situations and ensuring the success of
disarmament and demobilization programmes in post-
conflict situations will ultimately jeopardize our
collective efforts to address the various technical,
political, legal and security aspects of the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons, which shall remain
under the purview and mandate of the General
Assembly. Moreover, such attempts carry obvious
institutional risks - which we have highlighted
several times in the past - thus raising unnecessary
doubts as to the overall legitimacy, credibility and
effectiveness of United Nations decisions and
resolutions.

To emphasize that point, we recall the General
Assembly's adoption at its current session of the
International Instrument to Enable States to Identify

and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit
Small Arms and Light Weapons. That achievement
reaffirms the Assembly's central role - which is
unchallenged by any other United Nations principal
organ - and lends legitimacy and effectiveness to any
arrangement adopted by consensus in the area of
disarmament as well as in other areas of our
multilateral activities.

