Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank Mark
Lowcock once again for a clear and stark briefing, as
well as his entire team on the ground.
I would like to start by joining the representative
of Kuwait in expressing our deepest condolences to
the Government and the people of Indonesia for the
plane crash.

I also want to say that I thought the joint statement
delivered on behalf of Kuwait and Sweden earlier was
very powerful.

I should like to begin not immediately with the
humanitarian situation, but with the Istanbul summit
commitments as outlined by the French representative,
and I thank him very much for his briefing. I
completely agree with what the French Ambassador
said about the political process. The small group on
Syria is meeting now in London. As we all noted last
week (see S/PV.8373), we hope that that combination of
commitments and meetings will see some real, concrete
progress on both political and humanitarian tracks, but
I think that, concerning the political side and Idlib, I
would very much like to receive confirmation today
that the Idlib agreement between Russia and Turkey
will hold and that those 3 million civilians will be
kept safe. I would like to receive confirmation today
that the constitutional committee will indeed be set
up by the end of the year. And I would like to know
if that is something that both Syria and Russia agree
should happen. I also agree with what my United States
colleague about chemical weapons.

Turning to the humanitarian side, which is the main
purpose of the meeting today, I want to underscore what
the Under-Secretary-General said about humanitarian
principles and the aid needing to go to people in the
most need. It is very worrying that we do not have full
independent needs assessments. Proper refugee return
really cannot happen without that. I would be grateful
to know from the Syrian representative 7 but also from
the Russians - what has been done to address the United
Nations concerns on the independent needs assessment
on Rukban. I take the point that there may be a security
risk. I think it would be very good if the Council could
have more detail on what that security risk is and how
it might be overcome. I want to recall that United
Nations States Members are obliged to ensure safe and
sustained humanitarian access. As such, the Council
needs to hear that assurance today. It also needs to hear
that something will be done about security and that the
United Nations convoys will be able to get through to
those desperate people. I think we keep ducking at that
issue in the Council. We keep raising the issue and have
not yet received a satisfactory answer. It would be very
good to get clarity on that today.
I also wanted to note that, with regard to
humanitarian access and refugee return, we need to
include the issue of security, freedom from political
persecution and from arbitrary arrest if communities are
to feel safe and secure about returning to their homes.

Finally, I want to endorse the five asks that the
Under-Secretary-General set out today. I want to echo
the call for unity on renewing resolution 2165 (2014). I
think that would be a very powerful signal of progress on
the ground. I want to speak again about the importance
of movement forward on the political process.

Mark mentioned the need for more generosity from
donors in terms of funding some of the United Nations
plan. I would like to say that, in response to the crisis,
the British Government has committed $3.47 billion
to Syria since 2012, and that includes $1.25 billion
actually spent inside Syria itself. Notwithstanding
that, I would like to echo what the French Ambassador
said about reconstruction. There is a difference
between humanitarian assistance and reconstruction
money. Reconstruction money will be available from
Western Governments only in the context of a credible,
sustainable political process that redresses and
addresses some of the underlying concerns in Syrian
politics today.

