Ms. Juul (Norway): I present this statement on
behalf of the Nordic countries - Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Sweden and my own country, Norway. We
would like to thank France for its continued efforts in
preventing and combating the financing of terrorism
and for keeping this issue high on the international
agenda. We see today's meeting as an important
follow-up to the high-level International Conference
on Combating the Financing of Da'esh and Al-Qaida,
hosted by President Macron last year.

Networks such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida continue to rely on external
funding, which is essential to run their organizations,
recruit fighters, buy weapons, disseminate their
propaganda and move across borders. That financing
must be cut off. To identify and stop illicit financial
flows to terrorist organizations and criminal networks,
we must disrupt the link between organized crime
and terrorism. To that end, we believe in combining
measures targeted at the proceeds of crime and
measures targeting financial flows to terrorists.

International cooperation is crucial. All countries
must implement the relevant Security Council
resolutions. To ensure comprehensive and effective
cooperation, we must utilize regional instruments and
existing legal mechanisms to exchange information,
provide mutual legal assistance and form joint
investigative teams.

To effectively counter terrorist financing, it is vital
to strengthen the exchange of information and financial
intelligence and respond quickly to requests for
cooperation. When evidence of value to another country
is uncovered, it should be speedily shared, while paying
particular attention to the quality of the information.
By assisting each another in developing our national
counter-terrorist financing systems, we can secure
a holistic approach to international cooperation. We
need to make sure that our financial intelligence units
have the technology needed to analyse information and
recognize and uncover trends, patterns and indicators
of terrorist financing, as well as the ability to share that
information across borders.

We need to improve our partnership with civil
society and the private sector in that regard and ensure
that our efforts avoid discouraging or disrupting
legitimate civil society activities. We must also take
into consideration the concerns raised by humanitarian
actors about the unintended negative impact that
measures to prevent and counter terrorism financing
can have on their ability to address humanitarian
needs and implement programming according to
humanitarian principles.

We encourage expanding the toolbox and
developing initiatives to deal with the nexus between
terrorism and organized crime more effectively. Such
tools may include information-sharing, criminal justice
and border controls and addressing radicalization. The
different aspects of these global security challenges
are connected. They must be addressed both within
the security pillar and as part of advancing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.

