Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia) (spoke in French):
Allow me to congratulate cote d'Ivoire on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council this month. We
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's debate
on this crucial topic.

Estonia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union (EU).

Today's discussion is very timely. We are
witnessing only an increase in conflicts, and yet many
peace processes are encountering major difficulties,
ceasefire agreements are not respected and an
unprecedented number of people are displaced from
their homes. It is therefore very important to emphasize
that our collective responsibility under the Charter of
the United Nations is to do everything in our power to
prevent crises through peaceful means.

(spoke in English)

The United Nations is the foundation of today's
multilateral architecture. Estonia is an advocate of
maintaining a strong multilateral system, which we
must continue to strengthen. Peace will be sustainable
only if we address the root causes of conflict and help
create conditions for development. We see clear benefits
in a more integrated, flexible and coordinated United
Nations. Estonia supports the Secretary-General's
reform agenda. It is important to underline that reform
agendas on peace and security, management and
development should reinforce coherence and the One
United Nations and fit-for-purpose vision.

Political will is an essential component of creating
and sustaining peace. We, the international community,
need to redouble our efforts to find ways to support
and incentivize the willingness to move forward
in conflict prevention and resolution. Cooperation
and coordination with international, regional and
subregional stakeholders is crucial to achieving that.
African Union-led peace operations, the cooperation
in Mali among the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the Group
of Five for the Sahel and Operation Barkhane, and the
United Nations-EU partnership on peacekeeping are but
a few examples of how such cooperation is necessary
and how it makes a difference on the ground.

In order to advance beyond merely reacting
to ongoing conflicts, we need to step up and use all
available means to prevent them. Studies, including the
World Bank and United Nations joint study Pathways
for Peace: Inclusive Approaches to Preventing Violent
Conflict, have demonstrated that inequality and
political, social and economic exclusion are among
the most common reasons that lead to internal violent
conflict. Therefore, democratic governance, the rule
of law, protection of human rights and transparent,
accountable State institutions are essential to achieving
stability and peace. It is also crucial that we fully
recognize and support the role of women and youth in
sustaining peace.

I would also like to emphasize the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission as a central actor in conflict
prevention and peacebuilding in the United Nations
system. Estonia had the privilege of being a member
of the Peacebuilding Commission last year, and we
very much support its broader focus. Additionally,
Estonia has supported the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF)
since 2013. We believe that the PBF is an effective
peacebuilding instrument, as it provides catalytic, fast
and flexible assistance.

In conclusion, it is our collective responsibility
to ensure that the United Nations, as a whole, and
the Security Council live up to their responsibilities
for securing peace in the world, especially through
the prevention and resolution of conflicts. Estonia
is determined to make its contribution to that end.
That is also the reason why Estonia is running for a
non-permanent seat in the Security Council for the
term 2020-2021.

