Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom for having taken this initiative and the United
States delegation for convening today's important
meeting so promptly. We are grateful to Mr. Lowcock
for his briefing on the humanitarian situation in Yemen,
which we found extremely alarming.

We have a long history of friendship with the people
of Yemen, and we deeply and sincerely sympathize
with them. While we note the courageous efforts of
the humanitarian workers there, we realize that the
only possible solutions to the problem are political
ones. Like our other colleagues on the Council, we are
worried about the escalation of violence in Yemen and
have expressed our position on the issue many times.
De-escalating the situation around Al-Hudaydah and
halting offensive operations should help Special Envoy
Griffiths succeed in his efforts. We call for restraint and
for refraining from relying on force. We do not believe
that one of the parties can extract greater flexibility
from the other through violent pressure. The history of
the conflict in Yemen shows that that approach does
not work.

Mr. Lowcock quite rightly said just now that the
only losers in this conflict will be the people of Yemen,
who have endured unprecedented suffering and terrible
experiences, including a cholera epidemic - in the
twenty-first century. We must now all band together to
support the efforts of Special Envoy Griffiths, whom
we see as an objective and impartial mediator who
has held fruitful talks with the Yemeni Government's
delegation in Geneva. Productive contact was also
made recently with representatives of Ansar Allah
in Sana'a and Muscat. We are certain that a way can
still be found to reach agreements, particularly on
establishing confidence-building measures. There is
a real chance of making progress on issues regarding
the exchange of prisoners, opening the Sana'a airport,
establishing international control at the port of
Al-Hudaydah and paying Government workers' salaries
throughout Yemen.

We call on all the parties to the conflict in Yemen to
actively join Mr. Griffith's mediation efforts. Unilateral
acts such as the missile strikes on Saudi Arabian
territory, which we condemn, cannot produce effective,
long-term results and can ultimately only widen the gulf
of misunderstanding and mistrust between the opposing
sides and undermine the prospects for restoring peace.
For our part, we will continue to support the Special
Envoy's efforts through our contacts with all the parties
to the conflict in Yemen, and we urge our colleagues
to give him active assistance. We support a halt to
the violence throughout Yemen, which will enable
the country to focus on the political process and on
the urgent task of rebuilding its ruined infrastructure
immediately. Its economy lies in ruins, and any delay
threatens to make the country's already dire situation
unredeemable. Russia will continue its humanitarian
assistance to the people of Yemen in both the north
and south.

In conclusion, we would like to stress that finding
solutions to the conflict in Yemen would contribute
significantly to stabilizing the situation throughout
the subregion. We want to remind the Council of our
proposal for launching a process for drafting a package
of security- and confidence-building measures in the
Persian Gulf, and ultimately throughout the Middle
East. Establishing this kind of architecture, which all
the key countries in the region, including the Gulf
States and Iran, should participate in, would not only
help to strengthen comprehensive and indivisible
security in that part of the world but also to resolve both
long-standing and new crises, including the Yemeni
conflict. Threats and confrontation must give way to
dialogue and cooperation, and cooperation on that basis
can enable us to settle the conflict quickly.

