Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting and
thank High Representative Valentin Inzko for his
valuable presentation and for his efforts to consolidate
peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in recognition
of the importance of national ownership in this
complex process.

In effect, by reaffirming the validity of the 1995
General Framework Agreement for Peace, we recognize
the role of the Office of the High Representative in
supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina to meet the five
objectives and two conditions - the 5+2 agenda - it
seeks to bring about the conditions that will ensure its
full autonomy. In that regard, we reiterate the priority
that both the Federation and the Republika Srpska
maintain their commitment to the implementation
of the Agreement, while recognizing the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Accordingly, we welcomed the advent of more
positive economic prospects at the beginning of the
year, as well as the Government's reaffirmation of its
willingness to advance on the road towards European
integration and maintain close coordination with the
European Commission.

We continue, however, to note with concern the
limited progress in the implementation of the 5+2
agenda and the lack of commitment to support State
institutions and the enforcement of their decisions.
Given that situation, we must continue to emphasize
the need to strengthen the rule of law and build
inclusive institutions. We welcome the formation of
the Government of the Republika Srpska and call on
the Federation to take ownership of it, as well as work
together for the appointment of the Council of Ministers.

Peru believes that it is imperative that the entities
respect the Constitution and the State institutions and
their competencies at all levels. Republika Srpska must
comply with the provisions of the Agreement with
regard to the registration of military property, and
the cantons of the Federation must harmonize their
constitutions with the Federation constitution. The
rule of law also entails fostering access to justice and
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. In
particular, we are concerned about measures affecting
the freedoms of speech and the press as well association
and peaceful protest. In that regard, Peru also believes
that it is necessary to strengthen capacities to combat
organized crime and corruption. To that end, we believe
that, together with the establishment of a special
prosecutor and court department for fighting those
crimes, it is necessary to improve the legitimacy of, and
the population's trust in, their institutions.

Political leaders shoulder the responsibility to
lead the peacebuilding process and encourage political
dialogue and reconciliation. In that regard, we regret
and reject language and initiatives that foster division
and hatred, such as xenophobic, secessionist and
revisionist narratives and initiatives. Conversely, we
welcome proposals that promote reconciliation, such as
the decision to build a peace monument in Srebrenica,
and we encourage greater participation by women and
young people in those national political processes.

In conclusion, we stress the importance of the
parties' full cooperation with the High Representative
and the European Union-led Operation Althea, for
which we reiterate Peru's full support in fulfilling their
respective mandates.

