Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I wish
to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened and
for chairing this important debate, and for your clear
statement of concern at the beginning of the debate. I
should like also to thank the Secretary-General for his
earlier contribution and Mr. Fedotov for his briefing
today.

It is right that the Security Council has recently
focused on the potential threats to regional peace and
security in West Africa and the Sahel created by the
trafficking of drugs, weapons, oil, counterfeit goods
and other commodities. Those threats undermine
regional stability and economic development, and they
fuel conflict and terrorism. The United Kingdom
welcomes Togo's leadership on those issues.

We share the View that many West African
countries appear to be leaving behind a long and
troubled period of civil war. However, the Sahel region
still faces a range of complex and interlinked
challenges, including food insecurity, conflict,
terrorism, diminished State capacity and climatic
shocks. In addition to a growing humanitarian crisis in
the region, recent Tuareg insurgencies in northern Mali
and evidence of Al-Qaida's growing ambition in the
region make this a critical area for the international
community to focus on.

Defeating terrorism, disrupting organized crime
and, above all, achieving sustained peace and security
in the region are issues that should indeed be
considered in the Council.

The United Kingdom is working closely with its
international partners to ensure a coherent and focused
approach to promoting security and development in the
Sahel. One of the key vehicles in that connection is the
European Union Sahel strategy, which the United
Kingdom is pleased to support.

The year 2011 showed a significant increase in
the volume and impact of armed robbery and piracy
incidents in the Gulf of Guinea linked to illegal
fishing, oil bunkering and trafficking of narcotics,
people and weapons. Those incidents appear to be
concentrated off the coast of Nigeria and Benin,
although there have been reports of attacks further
along the coast and out to sea, some including evidence
of the use of mother ships. Such incidents threaten the
security and the economic and social stability of
countries in the region. It is therefore in all of our
interests to work together to address the threats to
maritime security to prevent further destabilization,
and, like others, I welcome the opportunity to discuss
this in more detail later in the month.

We believe that maritime security in the Gulf of
Guinea can best be addressed through a regional
response. We encourage States in the region to work
more closely together on this issue and with the United
Nations Office in West Africa. It is important that
action be taken now to prevent the situation from
deteriorating further, and we hope that West African
heads of State will be able to prioritize activities to
tackle the range of maritime security threats facing
their countries.

In that regard, the United Kingdom strongly
welcomes the leadership shown by ECOWAS and the
Economic Community of Central African States in
working together on a maritime security strategy for
West Africa.

We also warmly welcome the industry-led
initiative to create a maritime trade information-
sharing centre based on the United Kingdom's
Maritime Trade Office, which has proved very valuable
in tackling piracy off the coast of Somalia.

As with piracy, the problem of drug trafficking in
West Africa requires regional solutions alongside
specific national action. We look forward to ECOWAS
ministers implementing the regional plan against drug
trafficking agreed in 2008. Cocaine traffic through
West Africa fuels corruption and conflict. It impedes
economic development and poses a direct threat to
those countries battling illegal drug use. The United
Nations estimates that approximately 50 tons of
cocaine, worth about $1.8 billion, are passing illegally
through West Africa to Europe every year. In the last
six months alone, nearly 400 kg of cocaine, with a
United Kingdom street value of more than $30 million,
has been seized by the Togolese authorities.

This is a timely and important debate, and I am
grateful for Togo's leadership on this critical issue. We
fully support the draft presidential statement negotiated
by Togo and agreed by the Council.

