Mr. Dangue Rewaka (Gabon) (interpretation from French): Allow me to pay tribute to the Secretary-
General, whose recommendations to establish a
peacekeeping operation to take over from the Inter-
African Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the
Bangui Agreements (MISAB) have had a strong impact
on the decision that the Security Council has just taken.

It is appropriate to recall that the turmoil that has
endangered peace and security in the Central African
Republic has been considerably diminished thanks to the
Bangui Agreements of January 1997 and the
establishment of an inter-African force to monitor such
agreements. I should therefore like to commend the
efforts of MISAB as well as those of all the protagonists
who have taken part in the quest for a negotiated solution
to the Central African crisis, particularly the International
Mediation Committee and France.
By authorizing, through the resolution just adopted,
the deployment of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic (MINURCA), the Council has
demonstrated its clear intention to continue the efforts of
the international community definitively to resolve this
crisis. In this connection, we welcome the spirit of
cooperation that has prevailed throughout the negotiations,

 

making it possible to produce the consensus text that we
have just adopted. It goes without saying that this result
could not have been obtained without the cooperation of the
Central African authorities, the parties concerned and the
Central African people as a whole, who have thus shown
that they are truly imbued with the common desire to
achieve national reconciliation and to establish lasting
stability. This desire was reflected, inter alia, in the recent
signing of the reconciliation pact between all segments of
the Central African population.

Having said that, the relative climate of peace and
security that prevails in the country today needs to be
further strengthened.

To that end, my country fully supports the objectives
assigned to MINURCA to strengthen the national
reconciliation process, strictly within the framework of the
Bangui Agreements, and to establish the conditions
necessary for the future legislative elections in a climate of
transparency and with the close cooperation of MINURCA
with regional initiatives, notably those of the International
Mediation Committee, the International Follow-up
Committee and the Organization of African Unity.

We are convinced that MINURCA will play a key role
in the implementation of the provisions of the National
Reconciliation Pact to achieve a lasting peace and to launch
real economic development.

