Mr. Ouane (Mali) (interpretation from French):
Mali is pleased to see the Council working this month
under your presidency, Sir. I would like to take this
opportunity to express to Ambassador Alfredo Lopes
Cabral the great satisfaction of my delegation in the skill
and authority with which he presided over the Council
last month.

I would also like to express my gratitude to the
Secretary-General of our Organization, Mr. Boutros
Boutros-Ghali, for the quality of his report on the
question under consideration. It is a clear, exhaustive and
very instructive document.

I would also like to pay tribute to the civilian and
military personnel of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) for the substantive
results they have achieved through their efforts and their
support for the head of the Mission, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, our compatriot,
Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, who has also been
emphatically commended by previous speakers. Naturally,
these laudatory words cannot leave Mali or its people
indifferent. In this connection, I thank the Secretary-
General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, on behalf of the
Government of Mali. Without his choice and his
confidence, our compatriot would not have been able to
achieve the results that all previous speakers have
welcomed.

Finally, I wish to welcome the presence among us of
the Southern African Development Community Ministers
and to thank them for the useful information they have
provided.

Since our last meeting on this issue in July, the
situation in Angola has been dominated by a certain
degree of lethargy, a slow pace and unjustified delays.
This only heightens the importance of this meeting, which
should initiate the final phase of the peace process. We
should recall, however, that significant progress has
nevertheless been achieved. A peace accord has been
signed to which the signatories have reaffirmed their
commitment. Likewise, the ceasefire is holding, to the
credit of both parties, and Angola is no longer suffering
1,000 deaths per day.

We cannot fail to commend the praiseworthy efforts
that have made it possible to restore confidence through
a direct dialogue between Angolans at the meetings in
Lusaka, Franceville, Brussels and Libreville. We should

 

also commend the assistance extended to the people and the
return of refugees and displaced persons.

Peace, however, is not just the absence of war. With
great courage, the Secretary-General highlights in his report
the dangers that threaten the peace process and the fragile
peace.

In the View of my delegation, the signatories of the
Lusaka Protocol must all comply in good faith with the
commitments they have undertaken. They should stop
breaking their promises and trying the patience of the
international community. All necessary measures should be
taken by the Security Council in this connection to
accompany the ongoing peace process, to which the
Government of the Republic of Mali gives its full and
complete support.

