Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union. The countries of Central and Eastern Europe
associated with the European Union - Bulgaria, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - and the
associated countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey join in
this statement.

At the outset, I wish to welcome the Minister for
Social Assistance of Angola and to thank him for the
very interesting statement he made this morning.

I also wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
Gambari for his briefing on the conflict in Angola, one
of the longest conflicts experienced by Africa and in
which progress on the road to peace has, unfortunately,
been far too slow. The most recent report of the
Secretary-General has been helpful in identifying some
of the difficulties that will have to be overcome in
order for a settlement to be achieved and for the
sufferings of the Angolan people to be alleviated.

The primary responsibility for the Angolan
conflict falls to UNITA, which has failed to respect the
commitments it had undertaken to bring about a
restoration of peace. The European Union condemns
once again in the most solemn manner the military
initiatives of UNITA and its leader, Jonas Savimbi, as
well as the acts of guerrilla warfare in which his troops
are engaged.

The European Union shares the Secretary-
General's concern about the lack of significant efforts
to achieve a political settlement to the conflict. As
recalled in its Joint Position of 19 June, the European
Union is ready to support, within the framework of its
common foreign and security policy, any initiative
likely to contribute to such a political solution on the
basis of the Lusaka Protocol and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. The European
Union welcomes and encourages the commendable
initiatives taken by the churches and more generally by
civil society, as demonstrated most recently by the
meeting in Luanda of the Congress for Peace this
month.

The European Union intends to continue
supporting the international community's efforts to
strengthen the effectiveness of the measures and
sanctions against UNITA. The European Union
welcomes the recent establishment of a monitoring
mechanism, by resolution 1295 (2000), and intends to
fully support it. It calls upon all States to cooperate,
and welcomes the fact that some, particularly among
those cited in the report of the Panel of Experts
published this spring, have made known their readiness
to welcome United Nations representatives in charge of
follow-up of sanctions against UNITA. The European
Union encourages them to maintain this cooperative
approach, which also has been shown in a number of
cases by their decisions to break off all relations with
UNITA. Moreover, the Union recalls that it is ready to
provide assistance to African States, in particular the
Southern African Development Community (SADC)
States, to assist them in ensuring full implementation
of the sanctions.

It is gratifying to note that the illicit trade in
diamonds, through which UNITA finances its war
effort, is now the subject of increased awareness, to
which the tireless and very active efforts of
Ambassador Fowler have contributed. The World
Diamond Congress, which has just been held in
Antwerp, provided an encouraging illustration of this
awareness. We should observe that, for its part, the
Security Council is now making an effort to identify
the links between the exploitation of and illicit
trafficking in raw materials and the continuation of
conflicts. After Angola the Council has created groups
of experts working on the situation in the Great Lakes
region, as well as in Sierra Leone. The European Union
will support these various efforts by tackling the roots
of conflict. The proposal made during the G-8 Summit
in Okinawa to create a permanent group of independent
experts, under Security Council control and appointed
by the Secretary-General, to finalize the modalities for
banning such illicit trafficking, should be carefully
studied and implemented.

The humanitarian situation in Angola today is
disastrous. The resumption of the conflict on a vast
scale has had destructive effects on populations and
resulted in new movements of refugees and internally
displaced persons. As is stated in the Secretary-
General's report, it is estimated that today there are 2.5
million displaced persons in Angola - approximately
20 per cent of the population. We should emphasize the
efforts made by the World Food Programme (WFP), the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) to support these refugees and
displaced persons, who are in need of urgent support
from the international community.

This drastic situation is exacerbated by the
continuation of the conflict. The delivery of
humanitarian assistance is running into difficulties
linked to the absence of security on numerous key
access roads. The European Union joins in the
Secretary-General's appeal that all parties involved
facilitate the delivery of emergency relief, which must
be distributed without restrictions and with full
security, in accordance with internationally recognized
humanitarian principles.

For their part, the Angolan authorities should
implement a social and economic policy for the benefit
of the populations of the areas they have taken back
from UNITA, a prerequisite for a genuine peace
process. Moreover, it is imperative that the parties, and
UNITA in particular, cease laying mines and ensure
that such weapons are duly recorded, in such a way that
they can be eliminated.

When the Council met yesterday to deal with the
issue of children and armed conflict we were obliged to
note that the situation in Angola is, from that point of
view also, tragic. Generations of children have grown
up during the conflict, and many have never known any
other reality than conflict, whether because they have
been soldiers or because they have been orphaned,
maimed or displaced.

The European Union once again pays tribute to
the efforts made by the United Nations in the service of
peace; it has already paid a heavy price in human life
in the Angola conflict. The Union hopes that light can
be shed on the conditions in which two of the
Organization's aeroplanes crashed at the end of 1998
and the beginning of 1999. The European Union
welcomes the fact that the Angolan authorities have
been able to strengthen security and are in a position to
assist the United Nations team to visit the sites to
investigate.

The European Union believes that the United
Nations has a role to play in assisting the Government
of Angola, in particular in its efforts to strengthen
democratic institutions and practices and to ensure
respect for human rights, freedom of the media and the
norms of the rule of law. As was rightly emphasized in
the Secretary-General's report, respect for human
rights and good governance are required to end the
conflict. The European Union hails and encourages the
efforts to this end made by the United Nations Office in
Angola. We thank Ambassador Gambari for having
kindly told us that perhaps as soon as tomorrow we
will know the name of the future head of the United
Nations Office in Angola.

