Ms. Bensouda: It is just over three years since my
Office started interacting with the Security Council on
Libya following the Council's adoption of resolution
1970 (2011), referring the situation in Libya to the
International Criminal Court (ICC). The opportunity
to once again engage with the Council as I present
the seventh report regarding developments in Libya is
welcome, as always.

In March this year, Libya marked the third
anniversary of its revolution. We continue to witness
the strong determination of the Libyan people to
consolidatetheirfreedomandbuildamoderndemocratic
State that upholds the rule of law and respects human
rights. Notwithstanding those aspirations, Libya
continues to face serious security challenges and
a deep political crisis that undermine its ability to
effect much-needed meaningful judicial and other
changes. The steady decline in the security situation
has hampered my Office's investigative activities and
hindered possibilities for effective interaction with the
Government of Libya.

Strengthening Libya's ability to assume its security
responsibilities remains key to the success of our joint
endeavours to bring lasting peace to Libya. Increased,
well-coordinated international efforts to provide
support to Libya therefore remain essential. Libya
should heed the Council's call on all parties to support
the democratic transition in Libya, including agreement
on its immediate next steps, and to engage in political
dialogue and refrain from violence and actions that
challenge the stability of the State.

Reports of torture and mistreatment, as well as
deaths by torture in illegal detention centres, are
worrying. While the number of detainees requiring
transfer to proper Government-controlled detention
facilities has reportedly dropped from 8,000 to 7,000,
the process of transfer of prisoners to State-controlled
detention centres has to be speeded up. Illegal
detentions and torture should have no place in modern
Libya. Those alleged to be responsible for these crimes
must be investigated, prosecuted and face the full force
of the law. My Office stands ready to work with the
Libyan Government to bring this scourge to an end.

The time has also come for the Libyan Government
to resolve the Tawergha issue. Steps taken by the
Government of Libya, together with the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, to plan a national conference
on internal displacement and to organize meetings
with the exiled Tawergha Local Council, as well as
between the Tawergha Local Council and the Misrata
Local Council are very much welcome. The national
conference has yet to take place, however, and these
efforts have yet to bear fruit. They must be intensified.

It is important for the Government of Libya to bring
all relevant stakeholders together to address alleged
crimes in Tawergha. The participation of key partners
from the international community in these discussions
will be a clear message to the Tawerghans and
Misratans that the situation of Tawergha is of concern
to the international community. This will also bring to
bear the resources of the international community to
help resolve the situation of Tawergha once and for all.

There is no doubt that Libya needs help to succeed
in its aspirations to transition to democracy and the
rule of law. Justice is key to lasting peace, and justice
should therefore be at the forefront of international
efforts to help Libya. The key partners of Libya should
seriously consider forming a contact group on justice
issues through which material and legal support could
be provided regularly to enhance Libya's efforts to
bring justice to the victims. The Government of Libya
has repeatedly expressed its commitment to meeting its
international legal obligations and has sought help in
order to do so. That help should be forthcoming as soon
as possible.

Individuals alleged to have committed serious
crimes in Libya must be brought to justice either in
Libya or at the International Criminal Court; this is
not negotiable. It is regrettable that progress has been
slow in the case of Mr. Abdullah Al-Senussi since the
Chamber's ruling that the case was inadmissible before
the ICC and that he should be tried in Libya. We urge
the Government of Libya to ensure that the case against
him is proceeded with without undue delay and with
full respect for his due process rights.

It is even more regrettable and indeed a source of
great concern that, despite the Chamber's order for the
Government of Libya to surrender Mr. Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi to the custody of the ICC, to date he has not
been surrendered to the Court. While the admissibility
decision is currently under appeal, Libya still has a
positive legal obligation to fully cooperate with the
Court and to comply with the Chamber's orders, as
the admissibility decision and the order to surrender
Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi are not suspended by the
appeal process, as confirmed by the Appeals Chamber
in its July 2013 decision. To be absolutely clear, the
Government of Libya should immediately surrender
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the Court. National
judicial proceedings can never be an excuse for failure
to comply with the Chamber's order. It is incumbent
upon the Government of Libya to fully engage with
the judges and to provide assurances that its domestic
proceedings against Mr. Al-Qadhafi will not impede its
obligation to surrender him.

Following the conclusion of the memorandum of
understanding on burden-sharing with the Government
of Libya last year, on 29 January my Office held
fruitful and constructive discussions with Libyan
Prosecutor General Abdel Qader Radwan on practical
aspects of the implementation of this memorandum of
understanding and strategies for further investigations,
prosecutions and possible arrests. These discussions
will be continued during the next meeting with the
Attorney General's investigators, scheduled for 15 May.

The support of the Council and of all States is
critical to these joint endeavours to bring to justice,
either in Libya or at the ICC, those responsible for
serious mass crimes. In particular, and as I have said
before, such support is crucial to the colossal task of
collecting evidence to untangle the modus operandi
of the networks responsible for committing crimes.
Among other things, we will require telephone
intercepts and sustained follow-up on transfers of funds
to establish the whereabouts and movements of persons
under investigation. This is all information that we can
access only through the assistance of States.

Above all, we hope we can count on the cooperation
of States in facilitating the smooth arrest and surrender
of those against whom warrants will be issued.
This is key to sending a clear message to would-be
Libyan perpetrators, and indeed all other would-
be perpetrators, that the international community is
watching and will no longer allow impunity to reign
unchecked. I again stress that the memorandum of
understanding is intended to foster cooperation and
reinforce both parties' obligations to investigate and
prosecute crimes, and that it does not apply to or affect
the ongoing judicial proceedings in either the Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi or the Al-Senussi cases.

Let me conclude by encouraging the Government of
Libya to be fully transparent about its justice activities.
It is my Office's sincere hope that the proposal for
establishing a contact group will be followed up as
soon as possible. This will send a clear message to
the Government of Libya that its key partners intend
to follow through on their pledges to support justice
initiatives and to support the evolving relationship
between the ICC and the Government of Libya.

