Ms. Rice (United States of America): The
situation today in the Middle East is very different than
when President Bush came to office in 2001. At that
time, the Camp David effort had collapsed. Israelis and
Palestinians were in a vicious cycle of violence.
Suicide bombers were murdering innocent Israelis in
cafes and restaurants and at Passover seders, leaving
the rest of the population living in constant fear. Israeli
military incursions left scores of Palestinians dead and
wounded, neighbourhoods destroyed and the economy
in shambles. No image better captures that desperate
time than the siege of the Church of the Nativity in
Bethlehem.

Yet, in spite of those tragedies, the cycle of
violence continued. Each time a ray of hope penetrated
the darkness, it was snuffed out by intolerance.
Reforms within the Palestinian Authority in 2003
inspired hope that the Palestinians would finally have
the leadership they deserved, and yet these reforms
proved to be superficial and the hope proved to be
deceptive. Palestinian elections in January 2005 and
Israel's disengagement from Gaza later that year
offered yet another opportunity for progress. But the
victory of Hamas, the terrorist group committed to the
destruction of Israel, in the 2006 elections that
summer, and then the war in Lebanon ended that hope.

Finally, in 2007, after Hamas had usurped power
in Gaza, it was clear to all that there was no alternative
to President Bush's vision of a State of Palestine and a
State of Israel living side by side in peace and security.

Building on this new dynamic, President Bush
convened the Annapolis conference in November 2007,
08-65213

the first major Middle East peace conference in 16
years and the only one of its kind to be held on United
States soil. Representatives of over 50 countries,
including 14 Arab States, sat with the Israeli Prime
Minister, Foreign Minister and Defence Minister to
pursue a different future for the region. Since that day,
Israeli and Palestinian negotiators have bravely
demonstrated their commitment to peace through
continuous bilateral and substantial negotiations on all
the core issues. They made the strategic choice to, as
President Bush has said, defeat an ideology of hatred
with an ideology of hope.

The support of the United States and the
international community for the parties' efforts has not
been sustained by false hope or ignorance of the
challenges, but by a genuine belief in the sincerity of
the parties' commitment, in the progress they have
made and continue to make and in the prospects for
success if they continue down this path. The United
States has a national interest in the conclusion of a
final treaty, and it is in the long-term interest of Israel
to provide a more hopeful society for Palestinians. The
establishment of the State of Palestine is long overdue,
and there should be an end to the occupation that began
in 1967.

Above all, as our Egyptian friends reminded the
Quartet yesterday, this is a bilateral process, and the
two parties will have to conclude a final agreement.
But it is incumbent upon the international community
to provide support to their efforts and to create the
political context within which their negotiations can
prosper.

It is for that reason that we are gathered here
today, to consider a draft resolution sponsored by the
United States and the Russian Federation to chart the
way forward. It builds upon the work of the
international community through the Quartet, and I
commend my colleagues from the United Nations, the
European Union and the Russian Federation for their
service in the pursuit of peace.

This draft resolution describes the contours of the
negotiations and defines the role of the international
community, which will prevent a return to violence and
the hopelessness of a second intifada, when peace was
a distant dream. It has several elements.

First, it confirms the irreversibility of the
bilateral negotiations and endorses the parties' brave
efforts. Brinksmanship and dramatic last-minute
3
attempts to forge a lasting peace have not succeeded in
the past. There is no substitute for the Annapolis
process, and stagnation is not an option.

In their historic briefing for the Quartet on
9November, President Abbas and Foreign Minister
Livni described their shared vision of a Palestinian
State living side by side in peace and security with
Israel, and pledged to continue their negotiation, even
in times of political transition. They also described the
understanding that governs their negotiation and
confirmed the comprehensive nature of their effort,
which is to build peace, both from the top down and
from the bottom up.

The Annapolis process has advanced under the
leadership of President Abbas, Prime Minister Olmert
and Foreign Minister Livni, and these advances must
be preserved and built upon. The commitment to
negotiations is not a matter of lip service. It is about
genuine commitment to the two-State solution and the
necessary foundations of trust between the parties to
turn that solution into reality.

As the Quartet affirmed yesterday, lasting peace
will result from mutually reinforcing efforts on the
political track, on building the institutions of a
Palestinian State and on improving conditions on the
ground. None of those tracks can succeed in isolation.
As negotiations proceed, Israel and the Palestinians
must ensure that life improves for millions of
Palestinians. The international conferences in Paris,
Bethlehem and Berlin were critical in supporting those
efforts.

The United States has become the largest bilateral
donor to the Palestinians. We continue to support the
Palestinian Authority with direct budget assistance,
funding for high-impact projects and the promotion of
efforts to link security, governance and economic
development.

Secondly, the draft resolution reiterates the
importance of fulfilling obligations under the Road
Map. Neither party should undertake any activity that
contravenes Road Map obligations or prejudices the
final status negotiations. The views of the United
States have been made very clear in that regard,
especially in connection with settlement activity. At the
same time, the Palestinian Authority has an absolute
obligation to dismantle the infrastructure of terror in its
territories, reform its security services and end
incitement.
Progress is being made, but it is incomplete.
Sustained political will, as well as international
support, is required. The peace and economic growth
that resulted from Israeli and Palestinian security
cooperation in Jenin and from international support is
in stark contrast to the suffering that blighted that city
in 2003. In recent weeks, Palestinian security forces
have deployed to Hebron and have performed well in a
volatile environment.

Thirdly, the draft resolution underscores that
peace will be built upon mutual recognition, freedom
from violence and terror, the two-State solution and
previous agreements and obligations. It highlights the
enduring importance of the Quartet principles and
codifies the Security Council's backing of those
fundamental principles. The threat of extremism and
terrorism posed by Hamas is a threat to the Annapolis
process and to the fulfilment of legitimate Palestinian
aspirations. That is important to note.

Fourthly, the draft resolution underlines that the
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict should be
aligned with efforts towards broader regional peace.
The Arab Peace Initiative is a historic proposal in that
regard. As Arab States should reach out to Israel, so
should Israel reach out to Arab States.

The negotiations born at Annapolis and described
in the draft resolution give me confidence that the goal
of two independent and democratic States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security is
not just a vision but a commitment of the parties and of
the international community. There can be no turning
back the clock. We should only go forward from here.
We have to continue on the chosen path. That chosen
path will finally bring for the Israelis the peace and
security that can only come from living side by side in
reconciliation with a democratic neighbour of
Palestine. That path forward will finally give to the
people of Palestine the dignity and the humanity that
can only come from living in their independent and
sovereign State.

