Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
holding this meeting and for your positive response to
our request to make it open to all Member States. We
wish once again to welcome Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen,
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General in the
Middle East.

Our meeting today is characterized by the fact
that it is being held amid an irresponsible and
unprecedented escalation of bloody Israeli acts that the
occupied Arab territories have been experiencing and
continue to experience as a result of the organized and
destructive terrorist military campaign undertaken by
the Israeli occupation forces against the Palestinian
people in the occupied Palestinian territories, including
East Jerusalem.

It is worth mentioning at the outset of our
statement that Israel continues to commit these crimes
against humanity without guilt or impediments, within
the framework of a strict plan being implemented by
the Israeli Government to completely end all efforts by
the international community to revert to the path of
peace and to implement resolutions of international
legitimacy, particularly those regarding the conflict in
the Middle East.

We have repeatedly reiterated in this international
arena and before the international community the
conviction of Syria, which has devotedly and sincerely
worked for the implementation of a just and
comprehensive peace in the region, that the current
Israeli Government does not believe in peace and
utilizes every possible opportunity to destroy the
sanctity of peace and to undermine its bases. It
deliberately disregards all means, references and
initiatives that could lead to peace. This Israeli
Government is in fact a government of war and
destruction that disregards international law and the
will of the international community.

With the persistence of Israeli war crimes and the
escalation of persecution of the Palestinians, the killing
of their children and the destruction of their property,
the Israeli authorities continue to declare - and to

repeat - their intention to proceed with the
extrajudicial killings by which they wage war. The
Israeli occupation forces are carrying out destructive,
brutal and illegitimate acts that are witnessed by world
media. The greatest crime that Israel continues to
commit is represented by the expansion of the
settlements and the construction of the racist wall of
separation that once it is completed, will devour half
the Palestinian territories in the West Bank. Israel has
not ceased to destroy property, confiscate lands, detain
thousands of Palestinian youths, close roads, build
bypass roads to service the Israeli settlements, restrict
movement and all the other measures that allow
extremist Jews to enter al-Haram al-Sharif in East
Jerusalem. That will lead only to further escalation of
tension and exacerbation of this explosive situation.

It is ironic that Israel uses confronting terrorism
as a justification to violate international law at a time
when Israel itself exercises terror in all its forms and
falsely accuses others of committing it.

The unarmed Palestinian people, for whom Israel
has left no hope for the establishment of their own
State and respect for their dignity, have every right to
defend themselves with the limited means available to
them. What Israel calls self-defence in order to justify
its acts of terror is in fact defence of occupation, the
usurpation of rights, expansion at the expense of
Palestinians and other Arabs and full denial of the
international will that recognizes the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people.

In addition to all the violations it has committed,
Israel has added another threat: its intention to expel
the Palestinian President or even assassinate him. That
is true arrogance. It reveals the real Israeli objective: to
expel the Palestinian people from their land and homes,
in contempt of international law, which prohibits Israel
as the occupying Power from carrying out such acts of
expulsion. If Israel carries out that threat, it would fully
expose its devious intentions to all Palestinians and
would end all efforts to achieve a just and
comprehensive peace.

We must remember the almost daily violations by
Israel along the Blue Line in southern Lebanon, on
land, at sea and in the air, in continued defiance of
Lebanon's sovereignty over its land, waters and
airspace. Israel does not stop at those provocations but
continues to threaten Lebanon and deny that country's
right to self-defence.

In the face of all those actions by Israel, Syria,
whose Golan has been under Israeli occupation since

1967, stands by the Palestinian people to achieve their
rights. It stands, as it always has, on the side of
achieving a comprehensive and just peace in the
Middle East. We have made that a strategic objective,
as all the Arab States declared at the 2002 Beirut
Summit.

In that regard, President Bashar Al-Assad of the
Syrian Arab Republic has stressed the need for a
credible unified international vision as the basis for a
comprehensive and just peace in the Middle East, to be
achieved through dialogue and discussions with the
States of the region and through the positive
involvement of the United Nations in its role of
maintaining international peace and security. President
Al-Assad has also reaffirmed that Syria will always
stand on the side of a just and comprehensive peace
based on international legitimacy, which recognizes the
return of all occupied Arab territories to their
legitimate owners.

Finally, Syria reaffirms that it is incumbent upon
the international community - including the Security
Council, which is responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security - to take a firm stand
in the face of these illegitimate policies and actions in
order to compel Israel, the occupying Power, to refrain
from its continued violations of international law and
to commit itself to implementing the will of
international legitimacy and the provisions of
international law and justice. Only then will the
deteriorating situation in the Middle East be reversed
and will there be a return to the road to a just and
comprehensive peace based on Israel's implementation
of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), the principle of "land for peace", the Madrid
peace conference and the declaration adopted at the
Arab summit in Beirut.

