Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Like others, I would like to thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, Under- Secretary-General Mark Lowcock and Ambassador King for their important briefings. All of them have provided us with an update on the seriousness of the situation on the ground. While there has been notable progress in some areas, many issues remain unresolved and are even getting worse. Nevertheless, we extend our deepest gratitude to the Special Envoy and the humanitarian workers for their tireless efforts to make progress and deliver massive amounts of assistance despite many challenges. In response to the briefings, Indonesia would like to highlight three points. First, I would like to touch upon humanitarian assistance. We are deeply concerned about the prolonged humanitarian impediments imposed by the Houthis. Obstruction of humanitarian assistance and operations, by any side and for any cause, is completely unacceptable. That is particularly true in Yemen, where over 12 million Yemenis are desperately in need of such assistance. It is inconceivable that the Yemeni people, who are already victims of that violence, have now also become victims of bureaucracy, paperwork and other impediments. That is an unforgivable tragedy in view of the fact that humanitarian aid is a lifeline for 80 per cent of the population. In that connection, we urge Houthi officials to immediately cooperate with the United Nations Humanitarian Coordinator for Yemen in order to resolve the blockade and create a conducive environment in which humanitarian workers can perform their tasks effectively. The second topic I would like to address is the political process and security situation. We would like to reiterate our support for the Special Envoy andcommend his efforts. In our view, no progress is too little. We are encouraged to learn that there has been agreement on a detailed plan to complete the first official large-scale exchange of prisoners. We hope that the swap occurs soon so that they can finally be reunited with their families. We are also pleased to hear that the mercy flight was operationalized and able to carry more than 30 patients to receive medical care outside of Sana'a. That is one good step towards helping to build confidence. In addition, we would like to see progress in Taiz and a reduction of violence in Yemen. I share Mr. Griffiths' serious concern about the recent escalation of violence, which might hamper the political process. I would also like to echo his sentiment that peace should be nurtured. The recent escalation of violence, which has led to increasing civilian casualties, is therefore intolerable. If it continues, it will erode the confidence of both parties to implement all previous agreements. Thirdly, with regard to the FSO SAFER oil tanker, Indonesia has serious concerns that after months and months of discussion of that issue, there has been no major progress. The assessment team continues to be unable to access the decaying tanker, whose explosion would trigger an environmental catastrophe. It is the hope of my delegation that the assessment team will be permitted to at least enter the tanker, but it is also critical that all the necessary actions be taken to prevent a catastrophe. The discussion of relevant procedures and oil revenue can continue after urgent pre-emptive action has been taken. In conclusion, my delegation pleads that, at the very least, parties should work harder to avoid civilian casualties and reduce the suffering of our brothers and sisters in the country. Saving people's lives should be at the centre of our work. Furthermore, and for the sake of humankind, dialogue should continue. I would also like to underline Under-Secretary-General Lowcock's message that enough is enough. The calendar continues to change and time ticks away, yet the suffering of the people of Yemen goes on and on. When will we put a stop to all that carnage?
