The Secretary-General: I thank the Russian
Federation for organizing this very important meeting,
and I take this opportunity to express my deep thanks
to the many Foreign Ministers who are participating
in this meeting. The number of participating Foreign
Ministers is impressive. I hope that this kind of
solidarity will always be with us as we address the
many subjects with which we are seized.

The Middle East and North Africa are in the midst of
some of the deadliest conflicts and worst humanitarian
emergencies of our times. Terrorist groups, such as the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida
affiliates, are elevating the horror and complicating the
search for solutions. While each is very different, the
crises and conflicts in Iraq, Libya, Syria and Yemen
all expose similar horrors. The situation in Syria has
proven to be the most intractable. It has generated one
peril after another: the use of chemical weapons, the rise
of ISIL and other extremist groups, the worst refugee
crisis since the Second World War and the displacement
of 8 million people inside the country.

We need to take urgent measures to protect civilians
from widespread violations of international human
rights and humanitarian law. We have an obligation
to the Syrian people to help ensure accountability for
serious crimes. I appeal to the Council to strongly
support my Special Envoy's efforts to promote a
comprehensive and credible political transition based
on the Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex). Iraq,
Libya, Syria and Yemen are our common concerns and
the resolution of their crises is our shared responsibility.

Next year, Member States will mark the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. With the Strategy now
long-established as the accepted framework for action,
we must push for more concrete implementation. Those
efforts must be balanced and anchored in international
human rights law. We must also have a keen sense
of the need to avoid unintended consequences. The
United Nations is working with many partners to
expand capacity-building assistance to Member States,
including to stem the flow of foreign terrorist fighters
and to address the related ills ofillicit drug-trafficking
and cybercrime.

It is not enough to counter terrorism; we must also
prevent violent extremism, while taking care not to take
steps that only breed the resentment and alienation on
which violent extremism feeds. During the course of
this session of the General Assembly, I will present
to the Member States a comprehensive plan of action
outlining ways we can work together in this endeavour.
The plan of action will recommend ways that Member
States can address the drivers of violent extremism at
the global, regional, national and local levels. It will
also set out how the United Nations system can support
Member States through a holistic all-of-United Nations
approach encompassing peace and security, sustainable
development, human rights and humanitarian action.

The current reviews of peace operations and
peacebuilding are also underscoring the importance
of addressing root causes. The 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), with its focus on justice, inclusive institutions
and resilience, also has a strong preventive dimension.
A more sustainable world will be a safer world.

Conflicts, governance failures and systematic
Violations of human rights are affecting not only the
Middle East and North Africa, but the world at large.
Women and girls are facing systematic brutality. Young
people are having their futures taken away from them
before they have barely had a chance to dream. We must
work together to stop this downward spiral, using all
United Nations tools. The people of the Middle East
and North Africa deserve our full support in meeting
these tests and steering the region towards a path of
freedom, safety and dignity for all.

