The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United
Kingdom.

The United Kingdom associates itself fully with
the declaration made on behalf of the European Union
by the Danish Presidency. As we have often said in
discussions of this issue in recent days, we understand,
but do not share, the concerns of the United States
about the International Criminal Court (ICC). From the
beginning we have taken the view that those concerns
are fully addressed within the framework of the ICC
Statute. That is why the United Kingdom is a party to
the Statute and a strong supporter of the Court.

We have also said from the beginning that the
concerns of the United States create a potential
problem for the Security Council, and for the United
Nations generally, of considerable magnitude. This
debate today has raised equally clear concern for the
International Criminal Court and for United Nations
peacekeeping. The United Kingdom has all along taken
the view that members of the Council and Members of
the United Nations should work for, and be prepared to
support, a responsible solution that will encourage the
ICC to fulfil its functions in accordance with its Statute
while, at the same time, permitting the continuation of
the equally vital operations of the United Nations with
regard to peacekeeping and similar issues.

The United Kingdom will continue to work for
both those ends; and we will continue to work with
others to help build stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We regret the uncertainty over the future
of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia Herzegovina
and Stabilization Force mandate that has arisen in the
past days, and we call on all sides to work to find a
solution to provide a sound basis for future United
Nations engagement in Bosnia and elsewhere.

Finally, I have listened carefully to the comments
of several representatives about the powers of the
Security Council in this matter. The United Kingdom
shares the concern that actions of the Council should
remain within the scope of its powers. Article 39 of the
United Nations Charter is relevant in that respect. We
are equally firm that solutions to this problem should
be consistent with the ICC Statute.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.10pm.
