Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Since it so happens that today we have
been given the floor immediately after the Ukrainian
delegation, we would like to begin by once again
repudiating the insinuations made about Russia as
inappropriate, unfounded and perhaps even absurd.
And now let me turn to the topic of today's meeting.

We would first like to thank the Secretary-General,
the Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, the Special Rapporteur on
trafficking in persons, especially women and children,
and the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union for their substantive presentations
and assessments of the threat of human trafficking in
situations of conflict.

The topic of today's meeting is not a new one
for the Council, which has dedicated resolution 2331
(2016) and presidential statement S/PRST/2015/25,
adopted in December 2015, to it. The problems treated
in those documents remain urgent. Considering the
transnational nature of crimes related to the trafficking
of persons in conflict situations, international
cooperation in combating them is becoming more and
more essential. Such cooperation should be based on
recognizing the interrelationship between trafficking
in persons and the persistent imbalances between the
socioeconomic development of various States and
regions, the increasing illegal migration flows around
the world and the activities of international organized
criminal associations. The best way to effectively
combat human trafficking is by taking an integrated
approach to the problem that includes prevention, the
criminal prosecution of perpetrators and assistance to
their victims.

The issue of human trafficking's links to terrorism
and its financing is a specific and separate problem.
We urge everyone to work more actively to fight this
nexus, including by strengthen cooperation in exposing
and prosecuting those involved. It is important to use
all the available tools in order to suppress such activity,
and we support strengthening the mechanisms for
combating trafficking in human beings through various

United Nations platforms as well as other global and
regional formats. Our country is a party to the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children
and a member of the Group of Friends United against
Human Trafficking.

We consider the leading role of the United Nations
in consolidating international and national bodies'
efforts to combat trafficking in human beings very
important, and we welcome the measures taken in this
direction through the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, especially for giving specialized assistance
to interested States. We believe that such work deserves
support, and we plan to continue to contribute to it. We
firmly believe in the importance of further developing
the capacity of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group
against Trafficking in Persons and its member
organizations' active participation in implementing
the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Human Beings. We consider it a key
reference point for directing States' efforts in this area.

In that regard, we welcomed the General Assembly's
adoption in September of resolution 72/1, on the political
declaration on the implementation of the Global Plan of
Action. We believe that the approaches that have been
agreed on in the United Nations to combating trafficking
in human beings constitute a solid basis for cooperation
on the issue. We should therefore adopt a cautious
attitude to attempts to modify or formulate alternative
platforms in this area, so as to avoid misunderstanding
or weakening the international anti-trafficking regime.

In conclusion, we would once again like to
emphasize that in order to avoid duplicating efforts
in combating human trafficking it is crucial to
strictly follow the terms of reference established by
United Nations bodies. In that way, it is appropriate
for the Security Council to consider issues of human
trafficking only in relation to the issues on its agenda.
As we understand it, one can address that issue in the
context of specific conflict situations, each of which
has its own particular features, and of efforts to curtial
the financing of terrorism.

