Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Syria, for his comprehensive
briefing. We listened with interest to his ideas about
the methodology for facilitating a Syrian settlement.
We also listened to the statement by Ms. Rajaa Altalli.

Russia remains committed to the principle of
pursuing a peaceful settlement to the Syrian crisis
by political and diplomatic means. In the interests of
advancing that process, the Constitutional Committee
was established under the auspices of the United Nations
and began its work on 30 October in Geneva. The
creation of the Committee, with the critical assistance
of the Astana format, is an undeniable achievement for
the Syrian people. As the Special Envoy noted earlier,
no one expected the Committee's work to be easy. For
the first time, Syria's two opposing camps have come to
the negotiating table, where they will discuss the future
of their country, a future that will take into account
the interests of every sector of Syrian society. That is
a great responsibility and a difficult task. During the
second round of dialogue in Geneva, the parties tried to
reach agreement on the principal approaches for their
future efforts. We hope that the divergent views they
have expressed will enable them to better prepare for
the next meeting.

We believe it is counterproductive to overdramatize
the situation and designate guilty parties. It is important
to give Syrians an opportunity to understand how to

proceed to reach an agreement among themselves.
The pivotal principle of the work of the Constitutional
Committee is enshrined in resolution 2254 (2015) and
presupposes the facilitation ofa political process led and
owned by the Syrians themselves. The Special Envoy
should help them to do that, and we in our turn are
ready to support his efforts. We must neither pressure
the Syrians nor burden their efforts with unrealistic
time frames. They are embarking on a dialogue on
fateful issues that cannot be resolved overnight. For
our part, we will encourage a constructive approach
by all the parties. To that end, we are continuing our
collaboration within the Astana framework with our
partners from Iran and Turkey. On 10 and 11 December
in Nur-Sultan we took part in the Astana format's
fourteenth international meeting on Syria, with the
constructive participation of delegations from Iraq,
Jordan and Lebanon as observers. The meeting resulted
in the adoption of a joint statement of whose content
members may be aware. It was also stressed that all
the activities of the Astana guarantor countries will
be based on the strictest respect for the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of the
Syrian Arab Republic.

Besides the political track, the Astana discussions
cover other aspects of the situation in Syria, such as
the strengthening of confidence-building measures
and the humanitarian situation, including the delivery
of humanitarian assistance throughout Syria without
discrimination, politicization or the imposition of
preconditions. The Astana format working group is
continuing its efforts to ensure the release of forcibly
detained persons. In that connection we would like to
point to something that many have overlooked, which
is that on 21 November the Syrian authorities, with
the mediation of Russian military personnel, released
120 detainees in a significant humanitarian act also
designed to build confidence. The current turn for the
better in the work on a political settlement sets the stage
for concrete measures for providing comprehensive
humanitarian assistance and aid in Syria's post-
conflict reconstruction.

We would like to point out that representatives of
the Syrian Government and civil society, as well as the
Syrian opposition, including the part of it that controls
the armed groups, are all participating in the work ofthe
Constitutional Committee. It means that all who have a
genuine interest in the process of determining Syria's
political future have joined that peaceful process. And
yet the Syrian people continue to be threatened by
outright thugs and terrorists such as the militants from
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, which the Security Council
has designated a terrorist organization, and who have
entrenched themselves in Idlib. The terrorists in Syria
must be got rid of once and for all.
We want to emphasize once again that Syria is one
of the key States of the Middle East and an integral part
of the Arab world. It cannot be artificially wrenched
out of its overall regional context. In that connection,
we urge for restoring Damascus to the family of Arab
countries as soon as possible, which will help to rebuild
harmony among Arabs and improve the situation in the
Middle East. That is a natural and objective process that
is progressing despite external opposition. We call on
all who are genuinely interested in establishing peace
in Syria to join our efforts in a constructive spirit.

In conclusion, I would like to thank those of my
colleagues who are leaving the Security Council - for
many of whom today's meeting will be their last, or at
least their last in this cycle - for their collaboration
over the past two years. We have travelled far and
accomplished much. I would also like to thank them for
the friendship we have found and to wish them the very
best. And I wish everyone happiness for Christmas and
the New Year.

