Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): I speak on behalf of the
co-penholders on the humanitarian situation in Syria,
namely, Spain, New Zealand and Egypt, and I will
deliver my statement in English instead of my national
language.

We are deeply concerned by the continuing
deterioration of the humanitarian situation throughout
Syria, and in Aleppo in particular, which includes
attacks on hospitals, doctors and first responders, as
well as on civilian infrastructure. The Security Council
has a responsibility to ensure full compliance of any
military operations with international humanitarian
law, as well as under the provisions of resolution
2286 (2016). We also regret the fact that, despite
many endeavours to address the situation, differences
between major stakeholders are preventing the Council
from guaranteeing the protection of Syrian civilians.
Nevertheless, we hoped that there could have been a
minimum of understanding to provide a basis for our
work, assuming that good could prevail.

As co-penholders, we feel that it is of the utmost
importance to shoulder our responsibilities towards
the Syrian people as part of a neutral humanitarian
approach. We have a collective responsibility to
respond to the crisis. Our past failures may constitute
an explanation as to why we have not been able to agree
on a solution. However, such failure cannot justify a
lack of action in the coming days. Therefore we-Spain,
New Zealand and Egypt-urge all Council members
to set aside their political differences and continue to
work on the issue in order to implement the following.

A ceasefire should be established in Aleppo, first
and foremost to allow full humanitarian access to the
city, as well as an opportunity for sound proposals to be
implemented. The duration of the ceasefire should be
guided by the assessment of the United Nations on the
basis of the actual humanitarian needs on the ground.
It would also provide an opportunity to consider steps
towards the implementation of Mr. De Mistura's
proposals, namely a separation between terrorist
organizations and moderate opposition groups, which,
as far as we understand, is being studied in Switzerland.

The ceasefire must be observed by all parties.
Previous experience has proved that unilateral efforts
are not enough. All members of the International
Syria Support Group (ISSG) should do their utmost
to work with all parties on the ground in that regard.
A ceasefire must be fully coordinated with the United
Nations in order to ensure that the United Nations and
implementing partners can to deliver aid and carry out
medical evacuations.

A cessation of hostilities pursuant to resolution
2268 (2016) must be immediately and fully implemented
throughout Syria. Aleppo would come under the
cessation of hostilities regime at the end of the duration
of the ceasefire.

Finally, there has to be adequate and robust
monitoring ofa ceasefire and the cessation of hostilities
within existing mechanisms set forth by resolution
2268 (2016) and the ISSG.

Egypt, New Zealand and Spain will work with
members of the Council and do our utmost to reach an
agreement on those elements. We would like to end our
remarks with a tribute to all the humanitarian workers
who risk their lives daily for the sake of the Syrian
people

