Mr. Salgueiro (Portugal): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate. I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie
Guehenno for his very comprehensive assessment and
his extremely accurate analysis of the situation in
Timor-Leste. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Nelson Santos for his presentation and to thank
Ambassador Kumalo for his keen interest and helpful
leadership on matters related to Timor-Leste.

Portugal concurs with the statement which the
representative of Slovenia has just made on behalf of
the European Union.

Allow me, first of all, to reiterate our
condemnation of the attacks against President Jose
Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister Xanana Gusmao and
to express our best wishes for the prompt recovery of
the President of Timor-Leste. The recent events
illustrate once again, and in a dramatic way, the
vulnerability of Timor-Leste. However, despite these
regrettable actions, the situation throughout the
country, for the time being, remains quiet.

We commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Atul Khare, and all the staff of
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) for their tireless and invaluable dedication to
the overall security and stability of the country.
Effective action should be taken to capture the
perpetrators of the 11 February attacks. At the same
time, a thorough investigation of the events is urgently
required.

In the current circumstances, we encourage the
Government, the political parties and the people of
Timor-Leste to redouble their efforts to consolidate
democratic governance and the rule of law. Political
consensus is essential for resolving a number of key
issues. The situation of the estimated 100,000
internally displaced persons (IDPs) is one of those
issues. We reiterate that it is essential to ensure the
return of the IDPs and their resettlement in their
original communities. Furthermore, it is important that
the situation of the nearly 600 petitioners of the Timor-
Leste defence force be resolved in a peaceful manner.

We also believe that justice is a key element for
long-lasting national reconciliation. That is the reason
why Portugal strongly supports the ongoing efforts to
obtain accountability for the events of 1999 and of
April and May 2006, along the lines recommended in
the report of the Independent Special Commission of
Inquiry.

Portugal has a consistent standing bilateral
commitment towards Timor-Leste and is a leading
donor in a large spectrum of areas, including
governance, public administration, justice, education
and security sector reform. Additionally, we are
strongly committed to UNMIT, contributing with a
formed police unit from the Portuguese gendarmerie,
and we actively support the mandate of UNMIT in all
areas.

Since August 2006, UNMIT, in partnership with
the Government of Timor-Leste, has sought to foster
stability, promote democratic governance, political
dialogue and social cohesion. It is in this context that I
think it is worth noting that the presidential and
parliamentary elections held in 2007 were steps in the
right direction in the process of consolidating
democratic institutions in Timor-Leste.

Rebuilding the National Police of Timor-Leste, in
particular continuing the screening and mentoring
processes, is an important factor that can contribute to
the long-awaited normalization to which the people of
Timor-Leste aspire. In the meantime, a continued
UNMIT police presence is needed to ensure law
enforcement until the National Police is fully
reconstituted.

Therefore we welcome the Secretary-General's
intention to send an expert mission to UNMIT in the
near future in order to conduct a thorough assessment
of the capabilities of the National Police and to suggest
possible adjustments to the UNMIT police component.

The continued presence of the United Nations in
Timor-Leste is essential in helping to address the
challenges facing that country, in full respect for
Timorese choices. Portugal strongly supports the
extension of UNMIT's mandate for a further 12-month
period, in order that the work for the consolidation of
peace, democracy and development in Timor-Leste can
be adequately sustained.

The Chairman (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the representative of Brazil.

