Mr. Takasu (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
express my deep appreciation to the Secretary-General,
the two Under-Secretaries-General and the three heads
of very important missions for their informative
briefings and lessons learned.

I also pay tribute to France for its very important
initiative. United Nations peacekeeping operations are
sent to monitor ceasefires and assist national efforts to
restore security and stability. Our primary focus,
therefore, should be on how effectively peacekeeping
operations can achieve the objectives mandated by the
Security Council rather than on discussing how soon to
exit. Such an approach is in fact more effective in
achieving transition.

Peacekeeping operations are one of the most
valuable and indispensable tools available to the
Security Council for peace and security. I would like to
stress the importance of considering the role of a
peacekeeping mission in the much broader context of a
continuum from the end of conflict to social and
economic stability.

In launching a new mission, the Security Council
needs to exercise self-restraint in the wording of
mandates. It is important for the Council to set clear,
concrete and achievable goals from the outset, which
will help in planning a smooth transition. For instance,
complex mandates such as the protection of civilians
need to be defined more clearly for implementable,
specific tasks in mission planning. There should also
be a clear priority among a set of mandates. We also
need to set benchmarks against which progress is
monitored and adjustment made in a timely manner,
taking into account the changing situation on the
ground. Such an approach would contribute to
enhancing the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations, thereby achieving a smooth transition.

The main challenge that many operations face is
the lack of capacity of the host country to provide for
basic security and to deal with urgent issues in the
post-conflict situation. To address this challenge, it is
essential to promote the institution-building of the host
country and the training of its nationals.

The instability of the security situation and a lack
of productive economic activity are two major
impediments to transition. Transition - in other
words, the completion of the main task of
peacekeeping operations to ensure a stable security
situation - depends on the extent of the progress made
in security sector reform and the establishment of the
rule of law.

An equally serious challenge to transition is the
absence of a peace dividend and a lack of social and
economic stability after the end of a conflict. A
prerequisite for durable peace is to secure basic
services, including electricity, to every household and
to facilitate the reintegration of people affected by the
conflict and reconciliation and coexistence in isolated
communities. Above all, the reintegration of former
combatants into normal civilian life and the creation of
job opportunities for younger people are vitally
important to ending the Vicious cycle of conflict and
poverty. Thus, we need to establish a comprehensive
and integrated strategy of peacebuilding towards
transition.
Peacekeeping operations are expected to maintain
peace and security in the host country to create an
environment for peacebuilding activities. In
considering transition, there are three types of
relationships between peacekeeping operations and
peacebuilding activity. In the first type, the mandate of
a peacekeeping operation itself contains some elements
of peacebuilding activity, such as in East Timor. The
second is the type in which a peacekeeping operation
does not include a mandate for peacebuilding
activities, while other United Nations entities carry out
peacebuilding activities in the country of operation.
The third is the type in which peacebuilding activities
are carried out after a peacekeeping mission completes
its mandate. This type applies to countries taken up by
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), such as Burundi
and Sierra Leone.

We should be more sensitive to these different
types of relationship. We should consider what type of
peacebuilding activity could be implemented within the
mandate of a peacekeeping operation in the future, and
how such operations can support peacebuilding activity
when another organization is in charge of that aspect.
We believe that such considerations will help to make
transition strategies more effective.

Up to now, the PBC has been in charge mostly of
the third category of mission. We should be mindful
that peacebuilding as a whole is a broad concept
involving large-scale activities in various post-conflict
or fragile situations, and it is totally unrealistic to
expect that the PBC can be responsible for and
engaged in every peacebuilding need in the world.
However, we might consider the possibility that the
PBC should give advice on peacebuilding to the
Security Council in cases of the first type, and also of
the second type, in which peacekeeping and
peacebuilding are implemented simultaneously. At the
same time, we must all be very clear as to the kind of
advice and added value that the PBC may be able to
provide in those cases.

One can hardly overemphasize the importance of
formulating strategic goals for peacebuilding at an
early stage. The opportunity to take advantage of the
golden hour immediately after a ceasefire is very
frequently lost and never comes back. We need to
promote activities to achieve strategic goals along a
road map with a clear timeline, as well as to identify
the stakeholders responsible for each goal. An
integrated and coordinated approach is therefore key to
success.

For instance, the successful implementation of
security sector reform and the rule of law are critical to
stability and transition. Security sector reform cannot
be completed merely by strengthening the institutional
capacity of the national police or by downsizing,
disarming and demobilizing the military. It must be
accompanied by support for security personnel, the
reintegration of former combatants and the creation of
economic opportunity for young people.

Peacebuilding activities require more varied
expertise and civilian specialists than peacekeeping
operations. They are tied to diverse programmes with
differing implementation procedures and funding
sources. The United Nations may not necessarily be the
strongest player on the ground. It is therefore essential
to strengthen coordination mechanisms according to an
integrated plan and to ensure active interaction among
all stakeholders, including, of course, the Security
Council, the PBC, the host country, donor countries,
troop- and police-contributing countries, international
financial institutions and the private sector.

The Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations,
which Japan chairs, has agreed to discuss, first, key
gaps in capabilities, resources and training; and
secondly, key lessons learned from completed and
current missions about the successful implementation
of transition strategies. I would like to conclude by
reaffirming Japan's very strong interest in developing
effective transition strategies.

