Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): We thank the Chairmen
of the three counter-terrorism Committees for their
informative briefings today. Such briefings give the
wider United Nations membership the opportunity to
be informed and updated on the efforts made by the
three Committees to build on the effectiveness of the
United Nations system of targeted sanctions, counter-
terrorism and non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction.

Greece associates itself with the statement to be
made later on behalf of the European Union by the
Permanent Representative of Austria.

The fight against terrorism remains vitally
important, as terrorism is one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security, as well as to
the security of our citizens and our societies. This is
obvious in the light of the many devastating terrorist
attacks worldwide that have inflicted mass casualties
involving thousands of people. The scale of
destruction, however, would be much worse if
terrorists succeeded in getting access to weapons of
mass destruction.

This means that terrorism can be effectively
defeated only through a global response, with the
United Nations playing a leading role, and through the
adoption of a comprehensive and action-oriented
counter-terrorism strategy. In this respect, we support
the Secretary-General's report of 27 April 2006
(A/60/825), which is centred on elements and
recommendations that can assist the United Nations in
addressing and confronting the phenomenon of
terrorism in a more effective and coordinated manner.

What is also frightening about terrorism is not
only that it poses a threat against our lives, but that it
also undermines the very values and principles on
which our societies are founded: freedom, democracy
and the rule of law. That is why we need to fight and
defeat terrorism - without, however, compromising
our values and principles. We must ensure that counter-
terrorism measures are in conformity with international
law, including human rights, international humanitarian
and refugee law.

The sanctions regime established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1267 (1999) remains a
critical tool in the fight against terrorism. We welcome
the continuous efforts of the Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions Committee to bring further improvements to
this regime, and particularly to its Consolidated List
and to its guidelines on issues related to listing and
delisting procedures. The recommendations put
forward by the Monitoring Team in its fourth report
(S/2006/154, enclosure) provide valuable assistance
and guidance to the Committee, and we support their
early adoption.

We believe, however, that the Committee should
further address concerns regarding the need to
establish procedural fairness and an effective remedy
within the current system of listing and delisting
procedures. The establishment of such fair and clear
procedures will, in our view, enhance the effectiveness
and credibility of sanctions and will reduce their
negative effects on innocent individuals.

As regards the issue of procedural fairness, we
are of the view that targeted individuals and entities
should be notified of their listing and should be
allowed to have direct access to the Committee's
delisting procedures. Likewise, we believe that a
review mechanism should be in place in order to
consider delisting requests in case of wrongful
application of a targeted sanction.

In that respect, we welcome the initiatives taken
by Denmark and France, each aimed at addressing,
respectively, the two aspects of that problem. Likewise,
we commend Germany, Sweden and Switzerland for
sponsoring the recent academic study of the Watson
Institute on strengthening targeted sanctions through
fair and clear procedures, which we see as a new
process regarding the improvement of targeted
sanctions and their implementation. The paper contains

Sll'V.5446

 

useful suggestions that should be thoroughly studied by
the sanctions Committee.

We commend the work carried out by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and its Executive
Directorate (CTED), and we fully support the three
areas in which the Committee has decided to focus its
future activities. The revision of the reporting system,
the enhancement of the dialogue with Member States
and the deepening of cooperation with international
and regional organizations are key elements for better
implementation of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001). Making visits to Member States is another
important tool of effective monitoring and, if properly
used, can be of great help in that respect. We attach
great importance to proper follow-up to these visits.
We also support the Committee's efforts to facilitate
and coordinate the provision of technical assistance to
Member States.

Lastly, we welcome the recent adoption by the
Committee of policy guidance for the CTED on how
the Directorate should take into account human rights
concerns in the course of its activities. We expect that
the CTED will continue to effectively implement these
guidelines in its day-to-day interaction with Member
States. We are certain that these measures will enhance
the counter-terrorism policy of the sanctions
Committees.

Greece firmly supports the work carried out by
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), given the seriousness of the threat that the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, their
means of delivery and related material poses to
humankind.

The recent adoption of resolution 1673 (2006),
which extends the mandate of the Committee for
another period of two years, is a positive development
that will enable the Council to focus on the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in all its
aspects. In that respect, we urge States which have not
submitted their reports to do so, in order to allow the
Committee to carry out its most demanding task.

Finally, I would like to stress the importance of
facilitating the provision of technical assistance to
States which lack the capacity to fulfil their obligations
under resolution 1540 (2004).

