Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): As Angola's presidency
of the Security Council is coming to an end, allow me
to convey to you, Sir, the full esteem and appreciation
of my delegation for the mastery with which you have
led the Security Council's work this month, and for the
expertise and competence with which you have fulfilled
your mission. I take this opportunity to thank you for
giving me the opportunity to speak before the Council
at this meeting on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

My delegation notes the adoption a moment ago of
resolution 2277 (2016), on the renewal ofthe mandate of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo (MONUSCO).
While thanking the Council for this act, and through it
the United Nations, my Government regrets and cannot
hide its disappointment that the resolution chooses to
ignore the relevant Views of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo on key issues involving its future. I therefore
wish to comment briefly on certain points, in particular
regarding the elections, the fight against armed groups
and the drawdown of MONUSCO.

With respect to the elections, as His Excellency
Mr. Raymond Tshibanda, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation, reaffirmed
before the Council on 23 March (see S/PV.7654), my
country attaches great importance to the organization
of free elections that meet international standards
of inclusiveness, transparency and credibility. The
insistence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of my country on the
importance that the Democratic Republic of the Congo
attaches to peace and stability should not be interpreted
as an excuse for my country to postpone the elections.
The leader of the Congolese diplomatic corps simply
meant that, given our experience in the elections
of 2006 and 2011, the necessary requirements and
conditions essential to the proper conduct of elections
must be met in such a manner that they are in no way
tainted by violence either before, during or after their
organization, and that the results do not give rise
to disputes.

Regarding the delay in the electoral process, which
the Council has deplored, it is due to one section of
the opposition that, after procrastinating recklessly,
is causing the stalemate in the process. That group
continues to hinder dialogue to this day. Moreover,
in the view of my delegation, the Council ought not
to have encroached on powers that, under the law
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, fall to the
jurisdiction of the National Independent Electoral
Commission. In that context, it could have- as it
has done in the past- left the setting of all upcoming
deadlines, including for the legislative and presidential
elections, to the competence of Commission, to which
it has recommended the publication of a revised overall
electoral calendar.

My delegation welcomes the recommendation
and support of the Council for the political dialogue,
thereby endorsing the initiative of His Excellency
Mr. Joseph Kabila Kabange, President of the Republic,
who called for its organization a few months ago. The
national dialogue will be a landmark in the collective
assumption of ownership of our country's future.

My Government reaffirms its determination to
pursue its efforts to secure the eastern part of its
territory. It will therefore pursue the eradication of
armed groups and negative forces so as to stabilize the
situation in order to enable our people to live in peace, to
go freely about their business and to devote themselves
to the development of their country. The Security
Council will agree that this objective can be achieved
only with the cooperation of all countries of the region,
especially those that are concerned with the situation in
the eastern part my country. By combining our efforts,
we can together make our region a haven of peace, as
the Council has always hoped it would become. We
recognize, however, that the failure of some countries
of the region to honour their commitments under the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
constitutes a danger that could undermine those efforts.

It is with that concern in mind that my delegation
cannot conceal its surprise that the Council has made
no reference to the serious situation described in the
latest report of the Group of Experts on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (S/2015/797). Indeed, according
to the report, the Group of Experts established by
resolution 1533 (2004) refers to Burundian refugees
who had been recruited in a neighbouring country,
given military training by that country, armed and
infiltrated into the Democratic Republic of the Congo
with Congolese voting cards to sow unrest in Burundi.
My delegation cannot understand how the Council
can remain silent on such a serious situation, which
has been brought to its attention by its own experts.
My country, which already suffers crimes of all kinds
committed by armed groups and negative forces against
its people, cannot agree to become yet again the safe
haven of a new foreign armed group.

Concerning the gradual drawdown of MONUSCO,
my Government also regrets that the Council has been
unable to respond favourably to the legitimate request
addressed to it by my country. My delegation has trouble
accepting the Council's position on this issue, to the
extent that it has not taken into account the figure of
1,700 men recommended by the Secretary-General. We
believe that this position shows a lack of flexibility that
may affect the mood of the work on the ground and sap the
enthusiasm inspired by the new MONUSCO leadership.
Nor can we understand the justification that the current
workforce of MONUSCO must be maintained in order
to address the various threats it faces, given the fact
that after 17 years in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and with the financial and logistical resources
available to it, MONUSCO could have achieved more
results if outcomes were dependent on greater numbers.
Yet its record is mixed. This means, and we should not
hesitate to say, that the troubles plaguing MONUSCO
are deep and deserve careful consideration. Moreover,
my delegation also cannot understand how the Security
Council could adopt a resolution that paints an outdated
picture of developments and the progress achieved on
the ground by our country.

Regardless of all that, my Government will pursue,
in accordance with its national and international
commitments, the implementation of its various projects
and all the multisectoral reforms it has undertaken over
the past decade in the interests of its people.

The meeting rose at10.25 am.
