Mr. Egeland: I would like to make one or two
concluding remarks. First, I would like to express how
much we in the humanitarian community have
appreciated having had the opportunity once again to
convey to the Security Council our deep and profound
worries about the trend line, which is negative for
civilians in so many conflict situations. But I also think
that the debate today proves that there is hope. There is
increased attention to the situation of civilians in
armed conflict. There is increased action in many
places. We have more and better peacekeeping than
before. We have more and better humanitarian action
than before. And I certainly think that we have more
and better human rights action than before.

But the counter-forces also seem to be stronger.
At least we know much more now than we have known
ever before about the extent, nature and gravity of
violations against civilians, in particular violations
against the most vulnerable: women, children, the
displaced, the elderly, the non-combatants.

Many members of the Security Council, and other
Member States, have underlined that we need to go
from rhetoric to action. I very much agree with that.
There is very widespread agreement now about what
should be done and on what the goals are for our
actions. We now have to discuss what we should do
concretely in the field.

In my December 2004 introduction of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2004/431) (see S/PV.5100)
and in the report itself, I hope we were able to provide
a clear picture of the trends in each of the 10 areas of
the 10-point programme we had presented in December
2003 for the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(see S/PV.4877). There are areas where we have made
progress; there are areas where we are at a standstill;
and there are areas where we are, unfortunately,
regressing. Our aim should be to make progress in each
of the 10 areas.

I think we can also sharpen our tools by defining
trend lines. I believe it was the representative of
Denmark, among others, who mentioned the
importance of looking at our tools and at how they can
be made more effective.

I believe it was also the representative of
Denmark who mentioned the importance of including
women in decision-making. Here, I would like to refer
to resolution 1325 (2000), on women, peace and
security. The Division for the Advancement of Women
is reporting specifically on that important area.

For me, as Emergency Relief Coordinator, a
particularly important opportunity has arisen this year
in connection with the Secretary-General's reform
proposals and the upcoming summit, namely, making
humanitarian and protection action more predictable.
We are able to deploy large missions, large
humanitarian operations and a large humanitarian
presence in some areas of conflict, to the benefit of
some populations caught in the crossfire and in endless
vicious circles of violence. Elsewhere, however, we
take very little action. There should be predictability of
action according to needs, and not according to
political or media attention or resource availability -
as when we see some regions of the world getting more
attention and resources than others that seem to have
been orphaned by the international community.

I would like to remind the Council that the
Secretary-General has proposed both more predictable
funding, through a humanitarian fund that could in
particular focus on neglected and forgotten
emergencies, as well as on jump-starting operations in
areas similar to the crisis we saw in Darfur nearly two
years ago, where all of us, donors and humanitarian
agencies alike, were slow to act.

The second area where we will, it is hoped, see
more predictable action is in the area of response.

Humanitarian agencies - United Nations agencies,
non-governmental organizations and our colleagues
from the Red Cross and Red Crescent - are now

working together to look into how to fill the gaps in
our humanitarian-response capacity. We hope to come
up with a series of proposals this autumn to fill those
gaps.

I hope all of that will lead to us being able to
meet again in December and next June to have a more
positive picture of the situation of civilians in conflict
than the one that I was, unfortunately, obliged to
present today. There is hope, but there is also a great
deal of hard work left to do.

I thank the President and all the other members of
the Security Council for their continued interest.
