My first remark is on the recent outbreaks of violence we have seen in Afghanistan. In March, the Secretary-General called for a global ceasefire. In July, the Security Council did the same. We will have a discussion next week in the Security Council on the follow-up. Violence in Afghanistan has once again claimed numerous victims. The persistently high-level of attacks by the Taliban against Afghan security forces, like the current escalation around Kunduz, is diametrically opposed to the creation of an environment conducive for peace negotiations. Recent targeted killings are especially heinous crimes that must stop immediately. Our thoughts are with the families of the victims. On the peace process, a negotiated and inclusive political settlement, owned and led by the people of Afghanistan, including the women of Afghanistan, is vital. All talks and negotiations need to build on what has already been achieved in the area of human rights, including those of women, girls and minorities. We might witness the start of intra-Afghan negotiations very soon. I listened very carefully to Ms. Deborah Lyons, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), who informed us that we are speaking about days, not weeks. The Security Council should welcome that. The international community must encourage both sides to take constructive and confidence-building steps towards successful negotiations and peace. Germany will continue to support that process in close cooperation with its partners, including our co-penholder Indonesia, as well as Norway, Uzbekistan, Qatar and the United States. We highly recommend that the United Nations play an active role. Let me say a word on UNAMA. We commend the important role that the Mission plays in engaging with conflicting parties and supporting the preparation of negotiations, but also in coordinating international assistance, particularly during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Council members should continue to lend their support to this vital Mission. Germany and Indonesia have started engaging with Council members to renew its mandate. I call upon all sides to approach the negotiations with a spirit of cooperation. Let us build on the progress reached in the most recent negotiations of September 2019. The United Nations needs to continue to play an important role in Afghanistan. Protecting human rights, safeguarding women's and children's rights and promoting sustainable development in Afghanistan will remain important tasks for the United Nations and the international community. That brings me to COVID-19 and the future role of international assistance. We all know that the COVID19-crisis will continue to affect Afghanistan for years to come. Beyond safety and security, Afghanistan needs continued and reliable international assistance to address the immediate humanitarian needs and the long- term economic and social challenges ahead. The 2020 Afghanistan conference, to be co-hosted by Finland and Afghanistan in Geneva, will be a gauge of future support. Continued funding is vital if we want to minimize the risk of jeopardizing the progress achieved over the past 19 years, which Mr. Saad Mohseni, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of MOBY Group, just recalled in such an inspiring way. Such a commitment must be based on the joint understanding that Afghanistan will continue on the path of reform and adhere to international human rights, especially those of women, girls and minorities. I think it is politically important to bear that in mind. Let me finish by asking Mr. Mohseni a question. We appreciate the Government's commitment to reform the law regarding non-governmental organizations. I would be interested to hear his assessment of the Government's attitude towards non-governmental organizations and the reform process. I would also like to commend the people of Afghanistan for its progress on press freedom in the country. Afghanistan performs quite well in press freedom indices. What perspectives does he see in that regard, given the context of the peace process ahead?
