Mr. Krokhmal (Ukraine): My delegation would
like to join previous speakers in commending the
Netherlands presidency for its initiative to convene an
open briefing on the situation in Guinea-Bissau, which
is in the process of post-conflict peace-building. We
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
important statement to open the discussion.

My delegation welcomes Mr. Imbali, Vice-Prime
Minister of Guinea-Bissau, as he takes part in this
meeting of the Council. We also believe that the
participation of representatives of financial institutions
and subregional organizations today will send a strong
signal of international encouragement and support to
the people of Guinea-Bissau in their peace-building
and reconstruction efforts.
We agree that Guinea-Bissau is a good example
of a case that should be considered by the international
community in the context of the recent discussions on
the peacekeeping and peace-building strategies of the
United Nations. In this connection, we hope that
today's discussion will make for a valuable
contribution to the promotion of the effective
coordination of the international assistance and support
for the post-conflict reconstruction in the country.

In the light of the recent political developments in
Guinea-Bissau, which threaten to undermine the
progress achieved so far, it is particularly important
now to uphold civilian rule and the rule of law, as well
as to ensure the depoliticization of the army. We
believe that the continued disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process, with the proper funding,
would significantly advance the successful
implementation of the peace process.

The pressing economic situation constitutes yet
another challenge as the country emerges from the
conflict. Significant financial and economic aid from
the international community is indispensable in helping
to ensure the socio-economic rehabilitation and
reconstruction of the country and in promoting the
prospects for sustainable peace and development. At
the same time, it is equally important that the
Government continue to do its utmost to build on the
gains and to make progress towards these goals.

We are particularly pleased to note the efforts
being made by the Government of Guinea-Bissau for
the strengthening of democratic institutions and the
promotion of macroeconomic stability. The unstable
regional context remains a serious security challenge
for the country at this particular phase of peace-
building. We welcome the bilateral initiatives aimed at
the stabilization of the common border region and
building confidence between the neighbouring
countries. My delegation would like to commend the

important role that the regional organizations - the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries - are

playing in support of peace and democracy in Guinea-
Bissau. We would also like to note the outstanding
work of the United Nations Peace-building Support
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) and the efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Nana-Sinkam, in facilitating the consolidation of
peace and the promotion of the democratization
process. My delegation welcomes the proposal by the
Secretary-General to extend the mandate of UNOGBIS
until the end of 2001.
In conclusion, I would like to express my
delegation's support for the draft presidential statement
that will be adopted shortly. We strongly believe that
the consolidation of political and development efforts
in support of post-conflict peace-building and
reconstruction in Guinea-Bissau, within an integrated
and coordinated approach among all the actors
involved, will ensure success in achieving long-term
peace and stability in the country.

