Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to provide the Security Council
with some information concerning the Astana process.

The Astana process - during which, as Council
members know, I participated in its deliberations
leading to the Astana 4 agreement - is intended

to reach an understanding aimed at establishing
de-escalation zones within Syria. That understanding
was temporary for six months, renewable in the event
that the armed groups that participated in reaching
the Astana 4 agreement respected the ceasefire and
disassociated themselves from terrorist groups. That
has not happened in Idlib.

Those armed groups refused to dissociate
themselves from terrorist groups. Rather, to be
precise, the armed groups did not refuse to dissociate
themselves; it was the same sponsors of those armed
groups and terrorist groups that refused to do so
while the armed groups had agreed to the Astana 4
agreement. Thus, the disassociation did not happen in
Idlib. In addition, the terrorists in Idlib launched 400
drones targeting the Russian Hmeimim base in Latakia.
They have also bombarded Aleppo city almost daily
for more than a year-and-a-half since we adopted the
Astana 4 agreement. Therefore, whoever says that Idlib
is a de-escalation zone is wrong, being unaware of the
situation on the ground. There is no de-escalation zone
in Idlib because armed groups have not respected the
provisions of the Astana agreement.

This is just an introduction for members of the
Council to explain what we mean by the Astana
process, its understanding and how we have reached
the current situation in Idlib. Of course, the story dates
back earlier. As the Council knows, it started at the
Vienna conference in November 2015, in which Syria
did not participate and to which it was not even invited.
At that conference, it was decided that Jordan would
prepare lists determining who is and is not a terrorist.
Saudi Arabia was asked to decide who represented
and did not represent the opposition. So far that has
not happened, which explains the current situation.
The countries sponsoring terrorism do not want to
distinguish between terrorists and armed opposition.

The Astana process tried to find a solution
through the establishment of de-escalation zones.
Unfortunately, the process has failed in Idlib for the
same reason because the sponsors of the armed and
terrorist groups failed to respect the decisions made in
Vienna Conference in 2014 and the Astana 4 agreement.
My British colleague said earlier that there are 50,000
terrorists in Idlib. Mr. De Mistura said that there are
very few gunmen in Idlib, but I would say to my dear
colleague the British Ambassador that we are talking
about 50,000 terrorists. Could she imagine some day
seeing 50,000 terrorists in Manchester, wreaking
havoc, while we call them the moderate British armed
opposition? Is it imaginable that the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs would provide
them with humanitarian aid so as to sustain them in
Manchester? That would be absurd.

It is truly ironic that many States Members of
the Organization are now facing an unprecedented
challenge, namely, that the presidency of the Council
is simultaneously playing the role of adversary and
arbiter. Yesterday, Madam President, you forced the
discussion on Nicaragua onto the Security Council's
agenda, although the situation in that country does not
constitute a threat to international peace and security.
Today, you are forcing a discussion on Idlib, which is
a dear part of my country. It will be Venezuela's turn
tomorrow, followed by that of Iran, according to our
understanding of the current month's programme
of work.

The bitter hostility directed towards us for decades
has never been our choice because we are one of the
founding Members of the United Nations. We believe
in peace and in sparing humankind the scourge of
war. It has become common practice for three Western
countries that are permanent members of the Security
Council to use their presidency of the Council to rally
others against my country and Government. They
hold hundreds of meetings, ring alarm bells, level
accusations against us and use menacing language
whenever the Syrian army and its allies make progress
in countering the armed terrorist groups that are the
tools used by those countries.

For the thousandth time, we underscore in this
Chamber that the Governments of those three Western
countries and their tools in the region are the main and
direct cause of the suffering of our people inside and
outside the country. They fuel the conflict in Syria and
do their utmost to perpetuate by investing in the takfiri,
Wahhabi and Saudi terrorism that they invented in the
1980s. Their intelligence services devised deceptive
names for the terrorists, such as the Caliphate State,
the Army of Islam, the Soldiers of Islam, the Al-Nusra
Front, the Turkistan Islamic Army and the Nur Al-Din
Al-Zenki Movement. All those names have absolutely
nothing to do with Syria. They use such groups as a tool
of their foreign policy to exact revenge from countries
that reject their diktats.

Any action taken by the Syrian Government to
expel terrorist organizations from the Syrian province
of Idlib - Idlib is not in Somalia - is a legitimate,
sovereign right under international law, the Charter
of the United Nations, Security Council resolutions
on counter-terrorism and the Astana agreements.

Such action is ttaken in response to the demands of
millions of Syrians, including the people living in Idlib
who are besieged by terrorist organizations. Every
day, the Government receives thousands of appeals
from our people in Idlib, asking us to liberate them
from terrorism.
No country or entity has the right to curtail our
sovereign right or use the suffering of civilians in
Idlib as a pretext for political or media bartering
in order to dissuade the Syrian Government from
restoring security, stability and normalcy to that Syrian
province. Defending terrorist groups operating in Idlib
and surrounding areas is a desperate attempt to save
such groups and prolong their existence in preparation
for recycling them and then sending them as heavily
armed "moderate" oppositions to other countries, such
as Yemen, Iraq, Afghanistan and Nigeria.

The Syrian State is deeply committed to ensuring
the safety of its people. That is why we have clearly
stated that reconciliation is our priority. We gave
armed groups in Idlib plenty of time to lay down their
arms, become part of the reconciliation process and
disassociate themselves from terrorist organizations
not covered in the Astana 4 agreement. In that regard,
those who facilitated the entry of foreign terrorist
fighters into my country - the United Nations and
the Secretariat refer to them as non-State actors, as
opposed to terrorists; the French Ambassador uses the
term "jihadists", not "terrorists" - in particular the
Turkish Government, still have a chance to remove
them from Idlib province, just as they did with elements
of the White Helmets who were sent to Idlib, with the
cooperation of Israel and Jordan, in order to commit
further terrorist crimes with chemical weapons.

If armed terrorist groups refuse to lay down their
weapons and leave Syria, the Syrian Government is
prepared to shoulder its humanitarian responsibilities
and take all the necessary measures to protect civilians;
ensure them safe corridors for leaving Idlib; and
provide them with shelter, food and medical care, just
as in other, similar situations. The aim is to liberate
the province of Idlib from the Al-Nusra Front, which
is a designated terrorist organization, alongwith other
affiliated terrorist groups not covered by the Astana
agreements. The Syrian Government has also called
upon all international organizations operating in Syria
to prepare to meet urgent humanitarian needs.

Speaking of the Al-Nusra Front, I note that the
United States, Britain, France and Ukraine continued
for one full year in this Council to refuse our call to add
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham - which means the Al-Nusra
Front, which means Al-Qaida, which means the
criminals who attacked New York - to the Council's
terrorist list. However, a month ago we suddenly heard
that Washington, DC, had approved the designation
of Hayat Tahrir al-Sham as a terrorist group affiliated
with the Al-Nusra Front, which means Al-Qaida.

The Syrian Arab Republic is committed to
countering and uproot terrorisming and to liberate
all Syrian territories from terrorism and foreign
occupation in all its forms and manifestations. Support
for Syria today is the litmus test of good intentions,
compliance with international law and the Charter and
of credibility in the war against terrorism. We have
provided information to the Council on the intention
of terrorist organizations and the White Helmets to
use chemical substances in order to blame the Syrian
Government and pave the way for yet another tripartite
act of aggression. We call on those three countries
with influence on terrorist organizations to prevent
them from using weapons or chemical substances as a
pretext to allow interference and direct aggression by
their sponsors against my country.

I would like to inform the Council of the good
news that investing in terrorism in Syria has failed.
Liberating Idlib from the Al-Nusra Front and other
terrorist organizations would be the last nail in their
coffin. It would crush the hopes of those who invested
billions of dollars in terrorism and whose cries have
echoed in the halls of the Organization, just as they did
when the Syrian army liberated the eastern districts
of Aleppo, eastern Ghouta, Dar'a, Quneitra and their
rural areas.

In conclusion, I would like to respond to my
colleague, the Deputy Foreign Minister of Kuwait.
I remind him that Waleed Al-Tabtabaie, a member of
the Kuwaiti National Assembly, organized a campaign
to send terrorists to Syria in 2012. The campaign was
called "Go fight forjihad in Syria". I am speaking here
about a member of the Kuwaiti Parliament, supported
of course by terrorist takfiris and salafis who are also
members of Parliament in Kuwait. Another Kuwaiti,
Shafi Al-Ajmi, who was added to the list of terrorists
at our request, although other members had refused
to do so for several years, claims that he is a religious
leader. He sent thousands of terrorists and billions of
dollars to support terrorism in my country. In 2012, The
New York Times published a long article on a member
ofthe Kuwaiti army, one Sergeant Al-Mutairi, alleging

that he had sent terrorists and $500 million to sponsor
terrorism in my country. That is what we received from
our brothers in Kuwait. Kuwait calls us brothers but
I do not know what kind of brothers these men are.
Cain and Abel were not like that. When we stood by
Kuwait's side, we did not send terrorists to Kuwait. We
sent military forces to protect Kuwait.

The meeting rose at noun.
