Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom supports all efforts to maintain a full,
nationwide cessation of hostilities and an end to the
bloodshed in Syria. For that reason, we welcome the
Security Council's adoption of resolution 2336 (2016)
today. In the coming days and weeks the world will
be watching to make sure that the ceasefire is upheld.
We call on all the parties to adhere to the terms of the
ceasefire. Those with influence over them, particularly
the Russian and Turkish guarantors, must use it to
ensure that the ceasefire lasts. We are concerned about
reports of violations on the ground. The ceasefire is the
essential first step required to create the conditions for
the return to political negotiations, which we all agree
is the only way to end this terrible conflict. In order to
ensure that, the confusion over some of the key texts
and the discrepancies between them must be resolved.
As the failure of previous cessations of hostilities has
shown, monitoring the ceasefire will be crucial.

The role of the United Nations is essential. As
guarantors of the agreement, Russia and Turkey must
ensure that any monitoring measures are genuinely
independent and closely coordinated with the United
Nations and with the International Syria Support
Group's ceasefire task force. Fundamental to the
ceasefire's success is implementation, not just of this
agreement and the resolution we have just voted on,
but also of other Security Council resolutions, which,
when they were agreed on, gave us a sadly short-lived
optimism that the suffering of the Syrian people would
see some respite.

First and foremost, all sides must ensure unfettered
humanitarian access across the country, as is required
by resolution 2328 (2016), adopted earlier this month.
Secondly, the talks in Astana must be in support of
the United Nations-led political process, under Special
Envoy De Mistura, The United Kingdom will be a
steadfast supporter of any steps towards an inclusive
political settlement that realizes the aspiration for a
peaceful Syria, as set out in resolution 2254 (2015) and
the Geneva communique of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex).

As we end 2016, we can all agree that it is time to
end the bloodshed in Syria. The ceasefire is still very
fresh, and the situation on the ground will develop in
the coming days and weeks. But if the ceasefire holds,
I sincerely hope that it can provide a foundation for a
breakthrough in the wider political process, and that
2017 turns out to be a far better year for the people
of Syria than 2016 has been. Following a political
transition, we will all have to support reconstruction.

