Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): At the outset, let me
congratulate the Spanish presidency on convening this
timely debate. The tireless efforts of Madrid to advance
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) are also
very much appreciated. We would like to welcome
today's adoption of resolution 2325 (2015), which
Hungary co-sponsored.

I align my statement with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union.

Hungary has traditionally been active in the field
of non-proliferation, export controls on sensitive
technologies and materials and, more recently, the fight
against terrorism. That is why we have already taken
various legislative and executive measures to ensure
compliance with resolution 1540 (2004). Furthermore,
we are continually reviewing our policies with a View
to identifying what further action may be necessary.

The threat of non-State actors and terrorists using
weapons of mass destruction (WMD), whether nuclear,
chemical or biological, is one of the greatest facing
the international community today. Its scope is not
limited to a specific country or region, but rather has
global ramifications. Non-State actors have already
demonstrated some capability for acquiring and using
WMDs. The chemical weapons used by Da'esh in Syria
and Iraq serve to underscore how important it is for
the international community to broaden and deepen
its understanding of such actors. We clearly have more
work ahead of us if we are to understand how such
actors operate in every area of WMD proliferation.

Building and maintaining WMDs still requires
specialized knowledge and infrastructure. However,
with technology advancing rapidly and opening up
new possibilities, the international community has
an obligation to monitor non-State actors engaging in
proliferation activities, and it should also emphasize
the sharing of relevant information on such groups.
Particular attention should be paid to unstable and
failed States. The possession by such States of WMDs
is obviously exceedingly worrying, since there is a
significant risk that they may end up in the hands of
non-State actors. It is therefore vital to monitor related
equipment and parts of weapons, as well as other
dual-use items that may fall into the hands of unstable
and failed States.

The comprehensive review of resolution 1540
(2004) rightly emphasizes assistance and regional and
international cooperation. As its means and capabilities
allow, Hungary provides active assistance to partner
countries both within the framework of the European
Union and on a bilateral basis. In that context, I would
like to highlight the assistance we have given to Bosnia
and Herzegovina injoining the Wassenaar Arrangement.
We believe that such activities contribute to improving
the practical implementation of the resolution.

