Mr. Ibrahim (Somalia): I would like at the outset
to seize this opportunity to express my profound
gratitude to you, Mr. President, for enabling us to
participate in this discussion on the situation in
Somalia. I would also like to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month.

It is incumbent upon my Government and my
people to thank the Security Council for its unwavering
support to Somalia's peace and reconciliation efforts.
The Transitional Federal Government of Somalia, the
immense challenges it faces notwithstanding, continues
to provide the leadership and wisdom required in
advancing peace and stability in the country.

But the Government's commitment to peace and
dialogue and its determination to rebuild a nation
shattered by a prolonged crisis are being hampered by
a group of terrorists with links to Al-Qaida.
Nonetheless, the Government, with the support of the
international community, will continue to provide
coordinated, timely and sustained engagement with a
view to countering the insurgency and to bringing
lasting peace and security to the entire nation. The
insurgents' plan to overthrow the Government of
national unity and their attempt to foment further
destabilization and chaos in the country have been
foiled.

What we are witnessing in Somalia now,
following the successful efforts for the implementation
of the Djibouti peace process, is an inclusive political
process with broad-based support. The President, the
Speaker of Parliament, all the members of Parliament,
the Prime Minister and his cabinet are all operating in
Mogadishu. I am pleased to reiterate to the Security
Council that the leadership of the Government of
national unity in Somalia has succeeded in exercising
its mandate with a great deal of responsibility and
devotion. It has embraced the principles of collective
leadership and has successfully shattered anything that
would potentially elicit differences and undermine
cohesiveness and unity among members of the Cabinet,
on the one hand, and between the Government and
Parliament, on the other. The current discussion that is
now taking place between members of the Transitional
Federal Parliament must not be construed as bickering.
It is an exercise of the democracy that is being
resuscitated in Somalia, which we trust will strengthen
our national institutions and safeguard their political
legitimacy.

Somalia, under the leadership of the current
Transitional Federal Government, has made significant
headway with regard to reconciliation. Important
members of Hizbul Islam have embraced the
Government's efforts, agreed to support the
Government and joined the cabinet. Moreover, some
prominent Al-Shabaab commanders and their fighters
have defiantly denounced violence publicly,
condemned the crimes perpetrated by the radical
extremists and subsequently decided to defect to the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia.

Within the framework of my Government's
continued attempt to reach out to Somalis who have
remained outside the Djibouti peace process, the
Government signed, on 15 March 2010, at the African
Union headquarters in Addis Ababa, a cooperation
agreement between the Transitional Federal
Government and Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama'a. This
agreement provides for, among other important
elements, the merging of Transitional Federal
Government and Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama'a forces to
counter the insurgent menaces. Moreover, most of the
provisions that have been agreed upon by both parties
within the framework of the agreement are being
implemented by my Government.

The Government has succeeded in bringing about
stability peacefully in certain regions of the country. It
has been able to mediate between the leaders in the
Galmudug regional administration, which is located in
the central part of Somalia, and has convinced them to
settle their differences and other contentious issues
peacefully. Following this mediation, the leaders of the
Galmudug regional administration, in the presence of
the President of the Transitional Federal Government
of Somalia, signed an agreement that has successfully
ended their differences through compromises and
concessions.

In my Government's effort to improve the
security situation in the country, it has been able to
reorganize the armed forces. Private militias and
Government forces have been reintegrated, and are
now part of the Somali national army. The Government
has made the necessary changes in the leadership of the
Somali national security forces to bring about a rapid
transformation in the command and control of these
forces. Likewise, the Government recently nominated
the deputy commander of the Somali national army as
part of the agreement package with Ahlu Sunna Wal
Jama'a.

These newly reintegrated forces have been
engaged to carry out their national duties. The
Government forces have recently gained ground, and
this has led to the expulsion of Al-Shabaab from some
of its strongholds in Mogadishu, namely Hodan,
Howlwadaag, and the road that leads to the Bakara
market, also known as Dabka Road - a very famous
road. This successful offensive launched by our forces
against the radical extremists has generated cautious
optimism among our forces and constituted a relief for
the forces of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), which were subject to continuous attacks
launched from those areas.

The international community is seriously engaged
in the training of security forces inside Somalia,
Uganda and neighbouring countries. Also, we very
much thank the French Government, which also took
part in that training. While we appreciate and commend
the efforts of Uganda and other neighbouring countries
with regard to these training programmes, we believe
that our troops would tend to be more effective if the
training took place inside the country. Despite the
serious engagement of AMISOM. and its contribution
to the attainment of peace and stability in Somalia, we
believe that there is a need for the deployment of the
remaining agreed strength of 8,000 AMISOM
peacekeepers. We also believe that the deployment of
adequate United Nations peacekeeping forces with a
clear and relevant mandate and rules of engagement
would contribute to the stabilization of Somalia and
render AMISOM. more effective.

My Government contends that peace, stability
and security are a sine qua non for any meaningful
socio-economic development and for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. The United Nations
peacekeepers, if deployed, can achieve this with the
help of the Government and AMISOM. forces.
Furthermore, my Government welcomes the
deployment of forces from the East African Standby
Brigade of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development. The military commanders of the Brigade
recently visited Mogadishu to carry out assessments.
We believe that their deployment will certainly
enhance security in the country and contribute to the
reconstruction of certain vital infrastructures.

In terms of the constitution-making process, the
Government has embarked with the relevant
stakeholders on building the capacities of the
institutions that will be involved in the preparation of
the draft constitution. The new members of the
Independent Federal Constitutional Commission have
been sworn in. Various stakeholders are now
brainstorming on the constitution-making process.

Other priorities laid down by the Government
with a view to finding a lasting solution to the crisis
include the delivery of humanitarian assistance to the
needy and the internally displaced; the formulation of a
comprehensive national security strategy that would
enable the Government to function more effectively in
the midst of security threats unleashed by international
terrorist groups; the consolidation of good governance,
accountability, transparency and justice in the State
institutions; the rebuilding of the infrastructure of the
country that would ensure a sustainable economic
recovery; the creation of alternative livelihood projects
for the coastal communities and other areas to dissuade
youth from piracy and other criminal activities, which
we see as very important; and the strengthening of
good relations, mutual understanding and cooperation
among countries in the region.

I call upon the Security Council to act because we
in Somalia indeed count on it. We thank it for its
unwavering support. Over the past two decades, we
have had reports, missions, statements, assessments,
embargoes and a proliferation of conferences on the
situation in Somalia. We believe that it is high time that
we come up with a paradigm shift that would look at
the situation differently.

It is our belief that, given meaningful
collaboration in the security sector, we will be in a
much better position to talk about and make progress in
other important areas, such as humanitarian assistance,
human rights, the prevention of piracy and the
attainment of the Millennium Development Goals.

Finally, let me go on record in appealing to
United Nations Members and the Security Council to
take an urgent decision to support, unequivocally, the
Government of Somalia so that it can provide for the
people of Somalia effectively. I am obliged to repeat
that any small, hesitant, half-hearted measures of help
and protracted delays will only increase the
intransigence of the extremist die-hard elements, and
that the converse is true. One may say that there are
challenges and risks in the Somalia situation, but there
are also enormous opportunities. In our view, the
opportunities in Somalia far outweigh the risks. We
hope and pray that we achieve a new momentum.

In that regard, we would like to cordially request
that in future discussions on Somalia, the report of the
Secretary-General be released in good time to enable
all the stakeholders to have ample opportunity to
discuss and consult as widely as possible within the
framework of seeking solutions to the challenges
facing Somalia, the region and, indeed, the
international community.

