Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia would like to
thank Mr. Michel Kafando, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, and the Permanent Representative
of Switzerland, Ambassador Jiirg Lauber, in his
capacity as Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings.

Bolivia values and supports the Special Envoy's
efforts to continue the Inter-Burundian Dialogue
in an inclusive environment. In that regard, we see
positive developments in his work during his visits
to Burundi and Tanzania with national stakeholders,
including the Government authorities in Bujumbura,
and his consultations with the facilitator of the
Dialogue appointed by the East African Community.
We encourage all the parties to support the
facilitation efforts led by Tanzania's former President,
Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, and President Yoweri Museveni
of Uganda, in accordance with the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement, which should continue
to be the cornerstone of this process. We also call on
the parties to implement the road map proposed by
Mr. Mkapa in order to reach consensus and create
appropriate conditions for a peaceful environment
during the upcoming elections, which will take place
in 2020. In that regard, we appreciate the efforts made
during the fourth dialogue meeting, held in Arusha
from 27 November to 8 December last year, which
resulted in a summary of 19 points of convergence.

We highlight that progress and we call on the
parties to continue with the inclusive dialogue and
work on the points of divergence in order to reach a
negotiated political agreement and to promote national
reconciliation. Similarly, we praise the work the Office
of the Special Envoy carried out during the meeting in
providing technical assistance to the facilitator.

We acknowledge the work of the EAC, the Special
Envoy of the African Union, the Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the United Nations country team. We encourage them
to continue their work and to coordinate their efforts
in order to achieve better cooperation and continue to
support the EAC-led mediation.

We also welcome the joint statement of the nineteenth
summit of the Heads of State of the Community of East
African States, issued on 23 February, which expressed
gratitude for the work of the facilitator and the mediator
of the inter-Burundian dialogue. We also commend
the EAC for its commitment through this statement to
finance, within its possibilities, the dialogue process.
We agree that the EAC should continue to lead
this process.

We note the efforts of the Government of Burundi
to restore peace following the 2015 crisis and we
highlight the fact that the security situation remains
stable. We encourage it to continue to build a peaceful
environment that contributes to the development of
Burund and we commend its decision to host the
twentieth summit of the Common Market for Eastern
and Southern African in April, which also testifies to
the calm currently being enjoyed in the country.

We welcome the voluntary return of refugees.
We call on host countries to continue facilitating
their return in cooperation with the Government and
the High Commissioner for Refugees and to continue
supporting the return programme, since it is hoped
that 60,000 refugees will return over the course of this
year. We believe that conditions ensuring a voluntary,
informed, dignified, safe and permanent return to their
places of origin must be guaranteed. To that end, we
call on host countries to relocate refugees far from the
borders in cases in which they do not want to return,
in accordance with the 1951 Convention relating to the
Status of Refugees.

We encourage the international community
to continue financing the humanitarian response
programme in Burundi and we call on the countries
that imposed sanctions to consider lifting them, since
unilateral sanctions run counter to the Charter of the
United Nations, constitute a violation of international
law and have been shown to have negative consequences
on the lives of vulnerable groups, such as women
and children, as well as a negative impact on the
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals.

In conclusion, we believe that the full and
committed involvement of the international community
and of all the parties is of utmost importance. In this
vein, it is essential to continue strengthening the bases
to cooperate on the permanent stabilization of Burundi
in the framework of the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and with
strict respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Burundi with a process led by
and for Burundians.

