Mr. Effendi (Indonesia): On behalf of the Indonesian
delegation, I should like to express our congratulations to
you, Sir, on your delegation's assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of March. We are
confident that the diplomatic skills that you bring to this
high office will facilitate the discharge of your weighty
responsibilities.

My delegation has asked to participate in this debate
to express its deep concern at the continuing dispute
between Libya and some permanent members of the
Security Council over the Lockerbie incident. Our concern
is further heightened by the lack of progress, which has
given rise to negative consequences. For the families who
lost their loved ones, the stalemate in finding a just and fair
solution has served only to prolong their agony and
suffering. For the Government and people of Libya, the
maintenance of sanctions during the past six years has
taken a heavy economic toll. If the situation remains
without a settlement, it may lead to tension and instability
in the region and beyond.

It should be recalled that the sanctions imposed on
Libya in 1992, which were subsequently expanded in 1993,
include, inter alia, restrictions on civil aviation and
diplomatic activities, and financial aspects such as the
freezing of assets and the prohibition of imports of certain
items of equipment deemed critical to Libya's socio-
economic progress. Taken together, these and other punitive
measures that have been applied against Libya for the last
six years have resulted in considerable human and material
losses for the people of Libya.

The situation in Libya is vividly described in the
report of the Secretary-General's fact-finding mission to
Libya (S/1998/201), which paints a sombre picture of the
detrimental consequences of sanctions not only for the
people of Libya but also for its neighbouring countries. As
the report further makes clear, general economic conditions
have steadily deteriorated, impinging upon such vital
aspects as the country's gross domestic product, foreign
investment and infrastructure. Consequently, the poverty
and pestilence afflicting the people of Libya are at
unprecedented levels. It is therefore incumbent upon the
Security Council to undertake a reappraisal of the
humanitarian dimension of the situation in Libya, mitigate
the adverse impact of sanctions and consider ways and
means of settling this crisis expeditiously and peacefully.

It is pertinent that since the beginning of the crisis
Libya has consistently striven to fulfil its obligations
under relevant Security Council resolutions and the
provisions of the United Nations Charter. The measures
taken by Libya have been widely acknowledged as
significant contributions to clarifying the issues involved
and promoting a peaceful solution. Libya has also
expressed its readiness to cooperate with the efforts of
regional and international forums in defusing the situation
and in the endeavours to reach an amicable settlement.
Thus, Libya has supported the initiative taken by the
League of Arab States, which was endorsed by the
Organization of African Unity and the Movement of Non-
Aligned Countries. We remain fully convinced that
acceptance of the initiative by the Security Council would
serve not only the cause of justice but also the interests of
the parties concerned.

In my delegation's view, a settlement of this dispute
should also be sought on the basis of the Judgments
delivered last month by the International Court of Justice,
which upheld the legality of Libya's claims and also the
applicability, in connection with the Lockerbie incident,
of the 1971 Montreal Convention on the Suppression of
Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation.

Regrettably, however, these balanced and well-
meaning initiatives and recommendations by the
international community and the new situation created by
the Court's Judgments to facilitate a speedy and definitive
resolution of the crisis were cast aside, leading to an
impasse and to increased suffering for the people of
Libya.

In the past, the periodic review was a routine
procedure to continue the sanctions over an indefinite
period of time. But this is no longer tenable, as the
sanctions are having an increasingly devastating effect on
the people of Libya, and especially on the vulnerable
segments of their society - the elderly, women and
children. As a rule, sanctions should be terminated once
their original objectives have been achieved. In the
present crisis, those goals have been accomplished, and
any prolongation of sanctions would lead to the further

 

worsening of the situation in Libya, ultimately benefit no
one, and may even prove to be counterproductive.
Therefore, the time has come for the Security Council
to take steps to achieve a breakthrough in the deadlock. We
call upon the countries most directly affected to be flexible
and to respond positively to the initiatives for dialogue and
negotiations that would lead to an urgent, peaceful, just and
comprehensive settlement of the crisis, and to refrain from
actions that further exacerbate the situation.

Finally, the Secretary-General should be encouraged
to exert his efforts in resolving the current crisis. A
settlement of this dispute would not only end the plight of
the Libyan people but also usher in a new era of peace,
security and cooperation in the Mediterranean region and
beyond.

