Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): It is very
rare for the Security Council to encounter a situation
in which, seeing a return to peace and stability, it can
decide that its efforts have achieved their goals. That is
the case today with C6te d'Ivoire, with regard to which
the Council has just taken two major decisions. On
the one hand, resolution 2283 (2016) decides to lift all
United Nations sanctions on C6te d'Ivoire. On the other
hand, resolution 2284 (2016) grants the United Nations
Operation in C6te d'Ivoire (UNOCI) a final mandate,
with the goal of organizing the mission's final departure
by 30 June 2017. France welcomes the adoption of those
two resolutions.

Above all, today's resolutions reflect the length
of the road travelled by cote d'Ivoire towards
reconciliation, peace and security. They are a tribute
to the determination shown by the Ivorian people and
the country's authorities to turn the page on the crisis.
C6te d'Ivoire has proved its determination to fully take
its future into its hands and itself to consolidate the
achievements made in the areas of peace, security and
lasting reconciliation. We commend that commitment.
We support it. And we will continue to do so fully.

In a world where, unfortunately, crises continue
to proliferate, rather than being resolved, the example
of cote d'Ivoire proves that the Security Council's
tools can indeed achieve results in helping a country
successfully get back on its feet following a crisis. In that
context, UNOCI and the sanctions regime contributed
to re-establishing peace and security in cote d'Ivoire.
In that regard, I pay particular tribute to the troop-and
police-contributing countries, as well to all ofUNOCI's
personnel, who have done an outstanding job, and will
continue to do so up until the mission's closing.

This approach has borne fruit. The resolutions
that we have just adopted symbolize that success. We
are pleased both for cote d'Ivoire and for the Security
Council, as well as for the United Nations.

