Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): I have the honour to
address the Council on behalf of the 10 States members
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
in today's open debate.

I wish to begin by thanking China for convening
this open debate on the very important topic of
strengthening multilateralism. The United Nations
is the ultimate global institution for multilateralism,
where nations large and small interact with each
other on the basis of sovereign equality. It is therefore
appropriate and timely that we are discussing the topic
ofmultilateralism in the Security Council. The Security
Council has a special responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Accordingly, the
members of the Council have the special responsibility
to be custodians of multilateralism and guardians of
the multilateral rules-based system. In particular, the
permanent members of the Security Council have a
duty to strengthen multilateralism, and to not weaken
it, through their words and actions.

In the past seven decades, the United Nations has
been an important pillar of the multilateral architecture
by providing a forum for dialogue and cooperation.
More importantly, it provides a framework of rules
and norms that governs the behaviour of countries.
That rules-based framework, which we have built
painstakingly, has brought peace, security and
sustainable development to all our peoples.

However, there is no doubt thattoday, multilateralism
is at a crossroads. In fact, there is a clear sense that
multilateralism is under siege, as evidenced by the large
number of speakers we have today. In his remarks to the
General Assembly at the opening session of the high-
level week, the Secretary-General spoke of a crisis of
confidence in multilateralism (see A/73/PV.6). As he
put it, there is a "trust deficit disorder", especially
among the major players. The lack of trust and the
polarization that we are witnessing among members
of the Council are not new. However, they come at a
time when the world expects members of the Council
to work closely together to resolve global issues and
transnational problems.

The lack of trust among the major players has also
affected the rules-based multilateral trading system,
of which the Word Trade Organization is an important
component. In ASEAN, we are deeply concerned about
the spectre ofa prolonged trade war that could seriously
damage global economic prospects. While we must
adapt and reform the global trading system, unilateral
actions cannot be the solution. Unilateral actions only
serve to undermine the multilateral trading system
that has underpinned global prosperity for decades.
Ultimately, all of us will be worse off if the current
rules-based multilateral trading system is damaged
or destroyed.

ASEAN has been actively promoting political
security dialogue, economic integration and people-to-
people links. Regional organizations like ASEAN
complement and reinforce the work of the United
Nations in areas such as peace, security and sustainable
development. However, if regional organizations are
to be successful, they must operate in a world that is
governed by a rules-based multilateral system. When
the multilateral system and the United Nations are
vibrant and healthy, regional organizations like ASEAN
can thrive and prosper.

For over 50 years, ASEAN has put in practice the
principles ofa rules-based multilateral system. Through
dialogue and consensus, ASEAN has established a
framework to manage our differences and helped to
build peace and mutual trust in our region. ASEAN's
success is testament to the fact that we need more
multilateralism, not less, to overcome the challenges
that confront us today.

If multilateralism is to be effective, we need to
reform and strengthen the United Nations. To that
end, ASEAN members have been strong supporters
of efforts to reform the United Nations and make it
more fit for purpose. ASEAN countries have played
an active and constructive role in the three pillars
of the United Nations reform process. We were the
first region to universally endorse the Secretary-
General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative. ASEAN
members now rank among the largest troop- and
police-contributing countries.

The United Nations remains the torchbearer
of multilateralism. All of us here have a duty and
responsibility to defend what we have built together.
More importantly, we have a duty to adapt and reform
the multilateral system to build a better future for all.

