Mr. Mahmassani (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to extend my congratulations to you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. We are confident that your skills and
distinguished diplomatic experience will lead to
Council to success. I would likewise like to thank
Ambassador Cesar Mayoral, Permanent Representative
of Argentina, for his successful efforts during his
presidency last month.

The Security Council is meeting today to discuss
the Israeli policy of escalating military operations in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, with their attendant effects in lost lives and
property. At the same time, Israeli occupying
authorities are expanding their illegal policy of
settlements on occupied Palestinian territory. They are
also continuing to erect the separation barrier, in
flagrant violation of the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice.

Israel's persistence in adopting a policy of
military solution will only lead to more deterioration of
the situation in the region. Israel has escalated its
military operations against the Palestinian people in the
wake of free democratic elections by the Palestinian
people, which led to the establishment of a Palestinian
Government. Israel has also adopted financial
measures to punish the Palestinian people for their
democratic practices, and has prevented the transfer of
tax and customs revenues that belong to the Palestinian
Government. It has imposed a siege against
Palestinians as a way of tightening the noose against
them through the use of military and economic means.
That is in blatant contravention of the Geneva
Conventions and international law.

The policy of extrajudicial targeted killings by
the authorities of the Israeli occupation, in violation of
international humanitarian law and the Fourth Geneva
Convention, has led to more tension between
Palestinian civilians and the occupation authorities.
That has in turn led to further exacerbation of the
situation on the ground. We appeal to the Security
Council to prevail upon Israel to renounce the policy of
a military solution and to reject the economic and
financial siege imposed against Palestinians in an effort
to starve them and to impose a de facto unilateral
situation, which will lead to more chaos.

The Palestinian Government faces a very difficult
financial and economic situation. It is indeed a tragic
situation. Halting assistance to the Palestinian people
and Israel's blackmail of Palestinians by preventing the
transfer of tax revenues to the Palestinian Authority are
negative measures that will lead to a humanitarian
disaster and will have disastrous consequences that are
in no one's interest.

Half a century of Israeli-Palestinian conflict has
proven that the road to peace in the region cannot be
travelled with violence and military action. In that
regard, the League of Arab States rejects the targeting
of civilians by any party. Violence against civilians
anywhere is completely unacceptable, including the
military actions by the Israeli occupying forces in the
occupied territories that have resulted in the loss of
scores of innocent lives. Ending the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict and reaching a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace in the region requires returning to serious
negotiations among the parties concerned, in
accordance with internationally binding resolutions and
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), as well as the provisions
of the Madrid Conference, the principle of land for
peace and the implementation of the Arab Peace
Initiative of the 2002 Beirut summit.

