Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank you, Madam President, for that warm welcome. I am pleased to be here with my colleagues today. As the new Deputy Permanent Representative of the United States Permanent Mission to the United Nations, I am very pleased that my first appearance in the Council is on this very important topic - the situation along the Sudan/South Sudan border. Let me thank Under- Secretary-General Lacroix and Special Envoy Onanga- Anyanga for your briefings and for all your efforts to date. In recent years, we have seen a dramatic improvement in relations between South Sudan and the Sudan, as we have just heard. The signing of the Juba peace agreement, on 3 October, was a significant milestone, and we believe that, if implemented, it can help stabilize not only the Sudan but the entire region. The United States commends South Sudan for its role in mediating the negotiations that led to the agreement. Now the Sudan and South Sudan should maintain that positive momentum and turn their attention to resolving the political status of Abyei and agreeing to security and administrative arrangements that can be implemented in the near future. Security in Abyei remains fragile. We have previously stated, in the Council, that the people of Abyei deserve better. That remains true today. We commend the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), the most remote peacekeeping mission in the world, for supporting stability and security in Abyei and along the border between the Sudan and South Sudan. We also want to recognize Ethiopia's leadership role in supporting UNISFA. The United States calls for the Sudan and South Sudan to lift restrictions that negatively impact UNISFA's ability to carry out its mandate. Denying visas for United Nations police and a civilian deputy for the mission, blocking UNISFA's access to the Athony airstrip and refusing to provide national police to join Abyei's joint police service is simply counterproductive. We very much regret the limited progress on those issues and expect additional steps to be undertaken by the parties in the coming weeks in that regard. The Under-Secretary-General just reported to us that, out of a total of 640 mandated United Nations police officers for UNISFA, only 35 officers are present, due to delays by the Sudan in granting visas. The lack of police is causing community policing sites to close. Denying access to Athony airstrip also poses a risk to peacekeeping, as it hinders medical- and casualty- evacuation capabilities. Those restrictions together are undermining stability in Abyei and endangering both civilians and peacekeepers. We look forward to working together with our fellow delegations to renew UNISFA's mandate. While the mission's presence should continue, given the warming relations between the Sudan and South Sudan, we believe that now is the time to consider a future in Abyei that does not require an international peacekeeping operation - either because there is a final resolution or because the parties themselves develop joint security and administrative mechanisms on their own. A transition from UNISFA will need to prioritize the safety and security of civilians and support communities to achieve a more peaceful coexistence. The concerns of women must be at the forefront of such efforts. South Sudan and the Sudan should look to build on UNISFA's leadership in promoting women's participation in decision-making processes, which, as many of us know, recently led to community leaders nominating women for positions in the local administration. Those are important steps if we are to build a durable peace in the region. UNISFA was created as an interim force. Almost 10 years later, the Council, the Sudan, South Sudan, Ethiopia, the United Nations and the African Union (AU) should all re-evaluate how Abyei's status can be resolved and how security can be provided. In my delegation's view, the mission's indefinite continuation, especially while the Sudan and South Sudan place restrictions on its operations and staffing, is untenable. In the near term, the AU and the United Nations should strengthen their support in order to develop administrative and security arrangements for Abyei. They should also encourage the parties to support local communities to engage in meaningful dialogue. Regular meetings of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism should inform that process. In conclusion, let me state that the United States will continue to support stability in the Sudan, South Sudan and the greater Horn of Africa. I was pleased to hear Special Envoy Onanga-Anyanga mention President Trump's recently announced decision to remove the Sudan from the United States State Sponsors of Terrorism list. We agree. This is a tremendous step forward for the Sudan and a recognition of the clear progress made on the ground. We hope that progress in the region continues and the parties come together to provide the people of Abyei the opportunity to live free from violence.
