Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank colleagues
for the views and expressions of solidarity and support.
I also thank those colleagues who repeated their
revulsion at the use of chemical weapons wherever and
whenever it occurs. I just want to make it very clear
that the United Kingdom shares that position about
bolstering the international prohibition on the use of
chemical weapons.

I was asked a number of questions, Madam President,
so with your permission I will respond briefly.

I was asked about the investigation. I would just
like to recall for my colleagues that in the United
Kingdom, the police are independent of Government.
The investigation has been independent. The one
into the murder of Dawn Sturgess, which is ongoing,
is also independent. We believe that it is methodical
and comprehensive.

I was asked about inconsistencies in the evidence
identifying the two Russian individuals as Russian
Military Intelligence Service (GRU) operatives. We
have closed-circuit television footage. We are happy
to share those images with colleagues. To take one
instance, the Russian Ambassador mentioned that
there was a time stamp in the same corridor for both
individuals. I do not know if the Ambassador has
been to Gatwick Airport. We have been to Gatwick
Airport. There are multiple identical corridors through
which people can go. That is what happened to the
two Russians. We are confident in our evidence, and
I am very happy to talk to any colleague. Indeed, any
member of the General Assembly who has doubts
about the evidence is very welcome to come and have a
briefing at the British Mission.

I was also asked about cooperation with the
Russian authorities. I would like to recall for Council
colleagues that when this episode first happened in
March, my Government went to the Russian authorities
and asked for their cooperation. We were given a reply
that the request for cooperation was null and void.
We would have been happy to collaborate with the
Russian authorities at the time. We have indicated our
willingness to do so since that point, but in fact what
we have seen is a diversion into avenues that are not
relevant to this particular case. I think that is a great
pity. The Russians also asked us if they could join the
investigation once it was under way. I have said before
in this Chamber, and I repeat it, that you do not recruit
an arsonist to put out a fire. You especially do not do
that when the fire is one that the arsonist caused.

I was asked about GRU operatives using fake
names. The names may be fake but the crimes are real.
The time for lies and discrimination has passed, and it
is now time for truth and accountability. We have not
assumed that the Russians are guilty. We have done an
investigation. The assumption of guilt over innocence
may happen in the Russian judicial system. It does not
happen in the United Kingdom's, but I do think there is
an interesting question for the Russian authorities as to
whether the GRU operatives were incompetent in what
they did to leave traces or whether they were rogue. I
think that is an important angle to think about.

We were accused of not granting consular access
to the Skripals. In fact, as I have told the Council, we
did pass on the details from the Russian Consulate in
London to Yulia Skripal, and it was her wishes that we
followed in all subsequent contact. I am glad to say that
Yulia is making a good recovery. We have had no other
thought in our dealings with her than her welfare and
her wishes.

We are now up to some 37 accounts from Russia as
to why and how Salisbury took place. I think that none
of them hold water. We believe that the evidence we
have presented speaks for itself, but I repeat that I am
very happy to give any Member of the United Nations
that would so wish a briefing on that. We should recall
that a woman has died, two people have narrowly
escaped death, a whole city was placed at risk, and the
global chemical-weapon non-proliferation regime has
also been placed at risk. I would hope that the Russians
would respect the Council, engage on the facts and
accept the compelling evidence of Russian complicity
in this crime.

As regards the British allegations against Russia
about Douma, I think again that this shows that many
Russian authorities work in a parallel universe where
facts and international norms are inverted. We abhor the
use of chemical weapons. We take our responsibilities
under the Chemical Weapons Convention extremely
seriously. We call on the Syrian authorities and the
Russian authorities who work with them not to use
chemical weapons against their own people and not to
repeat the experience of eastern Ghouta and Douma.
But as you, Madam, our French colleagues and the
United Kingdom have made clear, we will uphold our
international responsibilities and we will uphold the
international commitments and obligations that the
international community has laid down.

In conclusion, the world is poorer owing to the
fact that Russia, a permanent member of the Security
Council, will not join us in doing precisely that to
uphold the international order.

