Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): Madam
President, my delegation is pleased to take part in
this debate under your presidency, which confirms
your commitment and ongoing efforts on this issue.
I congratulate you for the adoption this morning of
resolution 2143 (2014). I also would like to thank
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Mr. Anthony Lake and Mr. Alhaji
Babah Sawaneh for their statements.

Since 1999, the issue of the involvement of children
in armed conflict has enjoyed the special attention
of the Security Council. Despite the progress made,
the international community continues to face major
challenges related to the ongoing recruitment of children
by certain parties to armed conflict, in violation of the
most basic elements of human rights and international
humanitarian law, including refugee law. The focus on
women, boys and girls as vulnerable groups in times
of armed conflict must remain at the very centre of the
Council's concerns with a view to eliminating the worst
forms ofviolence and exploitation against those groups,
promote their rights and ensure respect for their human
dignity.

The adoption by the Council of resolution 1612
(2005) on the recruitment and use of children in
armed conflict facilitated the establishment of a
mechanism to monitor and report on grave violations
committed against child soldiers. That mechanism has
broadly contributed to collecting reliable information
supporting the implementation of national action plans
for the protection of children in armed conflict.

Other resolutions 4 including 1882 (2009) on
sexual violence and children, 1998 (2011) on attacks
against schools and hospitals, and 2068 (2012) on
criminal liability for persistent perpetrators - are
among those initiatives aimed at bolstering existing
legal frameworks in terms of child protection. Through
its ongoing commitment, the Security Council has
also clearly highlighted the fact that the fight against
the phenomenon is not only a moral and humanitarian
imperative, but also a pillar of international peace and
security.

Nevertheless, the international normative
framework adopted to ensure the best possible
protection of children in armed conflict, and the
United Nations mechanisms established in that area,
cannot guarantee the necessary protection without the
essential political involvement of Member States to put
an end to the scourge.

The stubborn nature of the recruitment of child
soldiers is closely related to the illicit trafficking
of small arms and light weapons, particularly by
organized crime networks and due to weak border
control cooperation and difficulties in implementing
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes. Within the framework of its efforts, the
Council should adopt a holistic approach to address
the phenomenon of child recruitment in its military,
security and social and humanitarian dimensions.

My delegation shares the view that the fight
against child recruitment of soldiers includes conflict
prevention while addressing such root causes as poverty,
exclusion and social inequalities. In the framework
of post-conflict situations, we must strive to ensure
national reconciliation, respect for the rule of law and
democracy, and conditions conducive to sustainable
development.

National child protection strategies continue to
depend on measures to build Government capacities
and on the availability of material, financial and human
resources to ensure the sustainablility of initiatives
established under national action plans. They also
require attention to international development
indicators in the establishment of rehabilitation and
reintegration programmes aimed at child victims of
recruitment through national training and job-creation
projects to offer young people improved prospects
through re-education and training. In that respect, my
delegation welcomes the growing number of action
plans signed or in negotiation that reflect the merits of
dialogue and cooperation. Those efforts should involve
not only public authorities, but also non-governmental
organizations, national human rights entities and civil
society.

The Kingdom of Morocco commends the "Children,
not soldiers" campaign launched by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and UNICEF,
aimed at ending the recruitment of children in armed
conflict by 2016 and supporting national initiatives in
that area. Similarly, we welcome measures taken by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
to strengthen the education and training of military
personnel involved in peacekeeping operations so as to
enable them to protect children in situations of armed
conflict.

My delegation hopes that the guidelines jointly
set forth in 2009 by the DPKO and the Department of
Field Support will help to guide activities of the United
Nations system related to children in armed conflict and
to support the mandates of child protection advisers in
peacetime. The recruitment ofchildren in armed conflict
is a crime that must be denounced, condemned and
punished. The efforts of the international community to
end it will require specific, targeted, practical actions.

