Monsignor Grysa: I would like to thank Indonesia
for convening today's open debate to consider the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

As other speakers have already noted, this year
marks the seventieth anniversary of the four Geneva
Conventions, which together form the cornerstone
of international humanitarian law, and the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999),
which was adopted in a context precisely where respect
for international humanitarian law and human rights
law was eroding.

Two decades later, the strong condemnation of the
deliberate targeting of civilians and the calls urging
all involved in armed conflicts to comply strictly with
international humanitarian law are more relevant and
pressing than ever, considering that more and more
victims in armed conflicts are innocent civilians. While
in the early 1900s civilian fatalities in armed conflict
were around 5 per cent, in the 1990s non-combatant
fatalities were over 90 per cent. Civilian populations
clearly pay the highest price.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2019/373) notes
that since the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999) and
the other protection-focused resolutions that have
followed, the attention and action of the Security
Council have strengthened the framework for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and saved
countless lives. The same report, however, as well
as other sources of information, show us that much
remains to be done to ensure the protection of civilians
and humanitarian actors.

As a response to that need, recent peacekeeping
mandates have explicitly included the protection of
civilians, the prevention of sexual violence in conflict
and strict compliance with international humanitarian
law and human rights law. Moreover, increased
attention to predeployment formation and context-
specific training has improved the operational capacity
and performance of the Blue Helmets.

A major part of the problem, although not the entire
problem, is that today's conflicts are more drawn out
and fragmented. They increasingly also involve the
engagement of non-State armed groups, which, more
often than not, act either in total ignorance of or in
absolute disrespect for humanitarian law and principles.
Places where civilians should feel safe are instead
targeted; schools come under fire; hospitals, medical
staff and patients are attacked; places of worship, which
should be havens of peace, become places of death
and devastation; systematic attacks against cultural
heritage turn into weapons of war; homes are destroyed
and entire villages are burned to the ground; women
and girls are raped; children are abducted and forced to
join armed groups; and in far too many places, whole
generations are deprived of education and other basic
services, thereby increasing the danger of perpetuating
that vicious cycle of Violence and underdevelopment.

Protracted crises, the restricted movement of
goods and the denial of humanitarian access all have
devastating effects on civilian populations. They are
ensnared in conflicts not oftheir choosing, forced to flee
their homes and live in camps where they are vulnerable
to diseases and exposed to abuses of all sorts. Even
humanitarian workers and volunteers increasingly find
themselves targets of direct, intentional attacks, often
made possible by the illegal sale and proliferation of
small arms and light weapons.

How ironic it is that food and medical supplies are
often impeded while guns and ammunition circulate
freely. That widespread and growing culture of
impunity impedes warring parties from respecting
the rules of war. If more robust legal mechanisms and
sanctions were put firmly in place, a shift of mentality
and culture would be, at least, given a chance to grow
and flourish.

As we fail to spare too many from the scourge of
war, we must focus our efforts on protecting the most
vulnerable, particularly women, children, the elderly
and the disabled, as well as on ensuring that all those
engaged in armed conflict, State actors and non-State
actors alike, must adhere to the principles enshrined
in the Geneva Conventions and the provisions of the
Council's resolutions. Today's open debate must serve
as proof of the Council's commitment to translating
resolutions into effective action to better protect
civilians in conflict. We owe them that.

