Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): It is an
honour, Sir, to see you here today to preside over the
work of the Council, as President of the Republic of
Costa Rica and a Nobel Peace Prize laureate. We hope
that this spirit of peace will suffuse our work here
today. I would also like to convey my gratitude to
Mr. Duarte for having delivered the Secretary-
General's message, and to note with thanks the
presence of the Vice-President of Panama, who
honoured us with his statement.
It is my great privilege to take the floor on behalf
of the European Union, Turkey, Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Albania, Ukraine
and the Republic of Moldova align themselves with
this statement. A complete version of my statement will
be distributed.

The European Union acknowledges the main
responsibility of the United Nations in peacekeeping
and international security in all its forms.
Non-proliferation, disarmament, and arms control
represent complex challenges. The Charter of the
United Nations grants the General Assembly a
substantial scope of powers in this area. At the same
time, these challenges by their very essence deal with
international peace and security with which the
Security Council is entrusted.

The European Union is an exemplary body with
respect to stability and in combating these challenges.
It exerts a stabilizing influence on its region, and has
inspired in many of its neighbours a desire to join it. Its
territory is subject to regional arms control
arrangements, in the broad sense, which play a pivotal
role as a result of geography during the cold war. That
is also true of the Treaty on Conventional Forces in
Europe (CFE).

This year, the European Union made a series of
realistic and concrete disarmament proposals in the
General Assembly, which promoted, inter alia, the
universal ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) and the conclusion of its
verification regime, as well as the dismantling, as
rapidly as possible, of all nuclear testing facilities in
transparent and open manner; the immediate start of
negotiations without preconditions on a treaty banning
the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons,
as well as an immediate setting up of a moratorium on
the production of such materials; the development by
nuclear Powers of confidence-building and
transparency measures; additional progress in ongoing
discussions between the United States and Russia on
the development of a legally binding post-START
arrangement, as well as an overall reduction of the
global stockpile of nuclear weapons, in accordance
with article VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), especially by those States
with the largest arsenals; the inclusion of tactical
nuclear weapons by States which possess them in the
overall processes of arms control and disarmament,
with a View to reducing and eliminating them; the
opening of talks on a treaty banning short- and
intermediate-range surface-to-surface missiles;

universal adherence to and implementation by all of
the Hague Code of Conduct.

The European Union also plays an active role
against the indiscriminate dissemination of weapons,
including through its code of conduct on arms transfers
and its unqualified support for a draft arms trade treaty.
The European Union is also pursuing a very active
policy to counter the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and backs the United Nations action in this
field. The European Union is also a key player in the
fields of development and the promotion of human
rights.

It is difficult, however, to impose rigid
mechanisms to cover all regions of the world. In some
regions, military expenditure indicators do not
necessarily reflect a country's level of insecurity.
Indeed, the United Nations current policies are to build
up the military capabilities of regional organizations in
certain developing areas. However, regionalization
should not weaken universal norms, such as the NPT,
the Ottawa Convention on the Prohibition, Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Antipersonnel
Mines and on Their Destruction Ottawa Convention on
anti-personnel mines and, of course, the draft Arms
Trade Treaty. This perspective also includes non-
universal norms, but which cover several areas at once,
such as the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in
Europe. Finally, this view also encompasses bilateral
norms which are especially important given security
issues, such as the START regime.

The European Union would like to make a
number of simple points. We must safeguard the
achievements of the arms control agreements,
especially those of the CFE Treaty. We must work
tirelessly to reduce the bloodshed resulting every year
from the illicit trafficking and excessive accumulation
of small arms and light weapons. The non-proliferation
regime is essential to our security, and given the
important deadlines over the next two years, we must
do our utmost to strengthen it. We must also make the
best possible use ofthe three remaining years before us
to arrive at a strong, binding and universal arms trade
treaty. Finally, building upon our own experience, we
would like to call for a strengthening of regional
solidarity which quite clearly is a factor that bolsters
peace and stability throughout the world.

Speaking in my national capacity now, I would
like to briefly remind the Council of the unprecedented
transparency measures and initiatives announced on
21 March by the President of the French Republic. I
am referring here, first and foremost, in the nuclear
field, to the visit to our former fissile material
production facilities which have now been dismantled
which was carried out by representatives of the
Disarmament Commission on 16 September. I am
referring here to the significant reduction of the
configuration of our forces which was announced as
well as to an announcement regarding the size of our
national arsenal, which was made public on 21 March.
Finally, I would add that France, of course, backs the
draft presidential statement that has been submitted to
us.

