Mr. Negroponte (United States of America):
Today, the Security Council meets again to consider the
situation in the Middle East. When many of us left
New York for Monterrey for the International
Conference on Financing for Development just over
two weeks ago, there was cause for guarded optimism.
The Security Council had just passed resolution 1397
(2002), Crown Prince Abdullah had begun to lay out
his bold vision for peace, and both parties had
welcomed General Zinni's return to the region. Now,
two weeks later, we are faced with a terrible crisis. As
Secretary Powell said yesterday morning, both sides
are losing right now, and it is time to find a way
forward.

My Government is committed to working with
the parties to find a way forward. Just last month
President Bush stated, "We have an obligation to work
for peace in the region, and we will." We have been
working for peace at the highest levels - in
Washington, through General Zinni, through our
embassies in the region and, where appropriate,
through the United Nations Security Council.
Ultimately, however, the United States believes that
there is no military solution to the current impasse.

Palestinian aspirations are not being advanced
through terror and Violence. And long-term security
and peace for Israel cannot be achieved by military
means. We are also concerned by the violent incidents
taking place on Israel's northern border, instigated by
Hezbollah and Palestinian elements. These incidents
are clear violations of the "blue line" and further
aggravate the regional situation.

The United States has been supportive of a
constructive Security Council role during this crisis.
We introduced resolution 1397 (2002), which affirmed
a political vision of two States, Israel and Palestine,
within secure and recognized borders and called for a
cessation of violence and terror. We voted in support of
resolution 1402 (2002), which called for an immediate
ceasefire, the withdrawal of Israeli forces and a return
to the Tenet work plan, which is the first step towards
implementation of the Mitchell Committee's
recommendations. Mitchell, in turn, rapidly gets us into
a political process and negotiations, as Secretary
Powell has said.

We are working around the clock with both sides
to secure the implementation of resolution 1402 (2002)
in its entirety. Through resolutions 1397 (2002) and
1402 (2002), the Council has laid out the road map. We
would urge the parties to engage immediately in the
implementation of these provisions.

