Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We wish you all the very best in your presidency, Sir.

We have been following with concern the serious
events that are causing losses of life and flows of refugees
in East Timor. Cuba believes that measures should be
taken, with all due urgency, to end the Violence, leading to
the full implementation of the 5 May Tripartite Agreements.
We were pleased to hear the statements made by the
Government of Indonesia reiterating its decision and full
resolve to honour those Agreements.

Through the popular consultation held on 30 August,
the people of East Timor exercised their right to self-
determination, and the international community expects the
Agreements to be fully implemented and all parties to act
effectively and in good faith. The people of East Timor
came out clearly in favour of independence, and they
should get it.

Neither threatening language nor unilateral sanctions
are the way to restore the climate of peace that is essential
for the implementation of the Agreements. Cuba firmly
rejects, and will always reject, any unilateral intervention
or military action by any country or group of countries.

We have confidence in the ability of the Government
of Indonesia to restore peace and order in East Timor,
acting with all of its strength and authority under martial
law.

Any international action would require due
authorization and direct mandate from the United Nations,
fully in accordance with the purposes and principles of
the Charter, and would most definitely require the explicit
consent of the Government of Indonesia, which is
responsible for taking all measures to guarantee order and
security in East Timor.

We must recall that it was the Government of
Indonesia that launched the initiative leading to the 5 May
Agreements and the popular consultation, in which 98.6
per cent of registered voters participated freely. The ballot
was recognized as democratic and successful.

We await with interest the report of the Security
Council ambassadorial mission which travelled to Jakarta
and East Timor and continues to make tremendous and
valuable efforts. The report will be an indispensable
element for any analysis of the situation.

The United Nations must urgently provide the
necessary humanitarian assistance, with the support of the
Government of Indonesia so as to ensure that it is
effective and to provide for the security of the personnel
providing such assistance.

For now, at least, we are reassured by several press
reports that seem to indicate that caution is prevailing and
that this time the new doctrine of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) will not be invoked, that
East Timor is not being placed within the so-called Euro-
Atlantic periphery, that there is no talk of global threats
and that no one is even thinking of repeating the criminal
mistake of trying to resolve humanitarian problems with
bombs and missiles. Humanity must not let the economic
crisis in South-East Asia drag us into a war.

