The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Brazil, Chile, Fiji, Japan,
Indonesia, Mozambique, New Zealand, the Philippines,
the Republic of Korea and Sweden in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
ofthe Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Wensley
(Australia), Mr. Viotti (Brazil), Mr. Valde's
(Chile), Mr. Naida (Fiji), Mr. Kobayashi (Japan),
Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia), Mr. Santos
(Mozambique), Mr. Mackay (New Zealand),
MrManolo (Philippines), Mr. Kim Young-molt
(Republic of Korea) and Mr. Schori (Sweden)
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and
Transitional Administrator of East Timor.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Vieira de Mello to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jose' Ramos-
Horta, member of the Transitional Cabinet of East
Timor responsible for foreign affairs.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Ramos-Horta to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Harri Holkeri,
President of the General Assembly.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Holkeri to take a seat at the side of
the Council Chamber.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Mark Malloch
Brown, Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), to Mr. Klaus
Rohland, Country Director for East Timor, Papua New
Guinea and Pacific Islands of the World Bank, and
Mr. Luis Valdivieso, Adviser, Asia and Pacific
Department of the International Monetary Fund (IMF).

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Brown, Mr. Rohland and Mr.
Valdivieso to be seated at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration ofthe item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
for the period 27 July 2000 to 16 January 2001,
document S/2001/42.

I should like to draw the attention ofthe members
of the Council to document S/2001/83, which contains
the text of a letter dated 25 January 2001 from Portugal
to the President ofthe Security Council.

I would also like to point out that this open
debate, by virtue of its timing, by virtue of the fact that
we will be looking into the renewal of UNTAET's
mandate and also by virtue of the fact that we will have
many distinguished speakers this morning - including
the President of the General Assembly, Mr. Harri
Holkeri, Mr. Jose Ramos Horta, who, I believe, will be
addressing the Security Council for the first time, and
Mr. Malloch Brown, as well as representatives of the
World Bank and the IMF - suggests that we are going
to have a future-oriented and forward-looking debate.
We believe that this debate should afford us an
opportunity to start to sketch out a collective vision for
the future of East Timor, both in transition towards
independence and after independence. We should also
discuss the role of the international community in
helping East Timor to achieve that vision.

I now give the floor to the Special Representative
ofthe Secretary-General, Mr. Vieira de Mello.


