Mr. Olguin Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):We
thank the United States for convening this open
debate and we thank Foreign Minister Asselborn of
Luxembourg for his country's leadership of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. Important
recommendations have emerged from its work. We also
thank the guest briefers and, in particular, we thank
Ms. Sandra Uwiringiyimana, whose childhood marked
by conflict should inspire us to continue working on
this agenda.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be made by the representative of Austria on behalf
of the Human Security Network, of which my country
is part.

Graca Machel once recalled that there were
clear moral and overwhelming reasons to protect all
children in armed conflict. The fact that children are so
shamefully abused is an indication that we have barely
begun to fulfil our obligations to protect them.

The changing nature of conflicts, indiscriminate
attacks against civilian areas and the increase and
persistence of the killing, maiming and detention
of children; the recruitment and use of children; the
sexual violence of which they are victims; attacks on
the schools and hospitals; and the actions of extremist
groups like the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant,
Jabhat Al-Nusra and Boko Haram call us to live up our
responsibilities. The situations in the Gaza Strip, Iraq,
the Syrian Arab Republic, the Central African Republic
and South Sudan serve to highlight that such actions
continue to be perpetrated.

We therefore support the initiatives of the
Secretary-General and the recommendations set out
in his annual report (S/20l4/339). We underscore the
work of his Special Representative Leila Zerrougui,
UNICEF and other actors within the United Nations
system, including the Children, Not Soldiers campaign.
We also appreciate the efforts of civil society in this
realm, and we acknowledge the important support that
Forest Whitaker continues to provide.

We welcome the fact that eight of the Governments
listed in the annexes to the Secretary-General's report
have signed action plans or have made a commitment to
putting an end to the recruitment and use of children by
their security forces. We hope that those commitments
will be accompanied by benchmarks and deadlines
for their rapid implementation and sustainable
implementation.

We also acknowledge the progress achieved
by nine non-State armed groups in the releasing of
children and in the publication of commitments to
protect, including the prohibition of recruitment.
In addition, the Secretary-General recommends the
adoption of binding concrete measures to prevent the
use of schools by armed forces and non-State armed
groups in violation of applicable international law. In
that regard, we urge the implementation of the guidance
note on resolution 1998 (2011) and resolution 2143
(2014) through strategies and plans of action to protect
children and their teachers, including establishing
measures for follow-up. Adequate training on child-
protection issues for must also be provided for civilian
peacekeeping personnel before deployment and during
a mission.

States have the primary responsibility to end
impunity and to prosecute and punish those responsible
for egregious crimes perpetrated against children.
Should States not have the ability or will to try those
who are allegedly responsible, it should be up to the
International Criminal Court to try those crimes set
forth in the Rome Statute.

Our country is aware that for there to be justice,
there must be a preservation of evidence. To that end,
there must be capacity training for United Nations and
peacekeeping personnel regarding the preservation of
evidence in crimes committed against children.

Chile strongly condemns all acts of sexual violence
committed against children and the perpetration of those
practices that seek to use children as sex slaves. We
would like to express the need for continued awareness-
raising for all parties to conflicts to eradicate those
unacceptable practices.

We appreciate the recommendations made by the
Panels of Experts of the Sanctions Committees, as well
as the informal briefings of the various committees that

include the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. As our country has been
proposing, we hope that resolutions on new committees,
or the renewal of mandates, can duly address the matter
of children in armed conflict.

In conclusion, I think that nothing we do here today
will allow us to forget the horror, abuse and death that
Sandra has shared with us. However, we offer her full
solidarity, and we hope that the work of the Council,
as well as the work of the Secretary-General and the
United Nations system, can mitigate, to some degree,
the abuse that exists.

