My delegation commends you, Mr. President, for convening today's timely open debate of the Security Council on the linkage of counter-terrorism and transnational organized crime and offers its deep appreciation to the briefers for their enlightening and informative briefings. Last year, the Security Council adopted resolution 2482 (2019) and expressed its concern that terrorists can benefit from organized crime as a source of financing through the illegal trafficking of arms and drugs, while emphasizing the importance of strengthening international efforts to respond to this threat. As the resolution highlights, the combined presence of terrorism and organized crime may undermine security, stability, governance and the social and economic development of a region and complicates conflict prevention and resolution efforts. Furthermore, while the entire international community is focused on responding to the current pandemic, terrorists and violent extremists are trying to capitalize on the socioeconomic grievances exacerbated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) to advance their propaganda. Against that backdrop, the Republic of Korea would like to emphasize the following four points. First, the strongest possible regional and international cooperation is of foremost importance in countering terrorism and its financing. No country can single-handedly respond to transnational organized crime and terrorist activities. The enhanced coordination of cross-border investigations is essential and the timely exchange of relevant operational information and financial intelligence is critical. It is also important to foster capacity-building efforts aimed at strengthening Member States' responses to linkages between international terrorism and organized crime. My delegation emphasizes the central role of the United Nations in pulling together the counter-terrorism efforts of the international community. We need to enhance coordination and collaboration among Member States and the various United Nations agencies. In that regard, the Republic of Korea commends the role of the Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact and welcomes the launch of its platform to strengthen cooperation among States and Compact entities. The Republic of Korea has made a financial contribution to the project for enhancing coordination and coherence across United Nations entities on counter-terrorism and the prevention of violent extremism through the effective implementation of the Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact. The Council can count on our continued support. Secondly, we need to step up our efforts to prevent and counter the misuse of new and emerging technologies for terrorist and criminal purposes. While such technologies can be effective tools in countering terrorism and organized crime, we should remain vigilant to the fact that those same tools can be exploited by terrorists to incite, recruit for, fund or plan terrorist acts. The illicit trafficking of arms through the dark web is one example of how organized crime methods are becoming increasingly sophisticated. The efforts of the Republic of Korea in responding to emerging terrorist threats include hosting three rounds of the Asia ICT and Counter- Terrorism Dialogue between 2017 and 2018 and co-hosting the regional workshop under the Initiative to Counter Unmanned Aerial System Threats in 2019. Thirdly, my delegation wishes to highlight that youth are our most important asset in the fight against terrorism. We must empower young people and strengthen their resilience against violent extremism. It is particularly relevant considering that extremist groups focus on spreading violent extremist ideas online, exploiting the fact that young people are spending more time online, especially with schools closed. Therefore, we must invest in creative education programmes, including e-learning activities, which can be effective in reaching out to young people, particularly in the time of the pandemic. Sports can also be a powerful means to promote a culture of tolerance and mutual understanding and to facilitate social inclusion and conflict prevention. The Republic of Korea has been working closely with the Office of Counter-Terrorism on the United Nations Global Programme on Security of Major Sporting Events and Promotion of Sports and Its Values as a Tool to Prevent Violent Extremism. We will continue to explore avenues for expanding our efforts in preventing violent extremism. Last but not least, my delegation would like to emphasize the importance of a whole-of-society and holistic approach to preventing and countering terrorism and violent extremism. Combating terrorism and preventing violent extremism must encompass not only security-based measures but also preventive steps that address the underlying conditions that drive individuals to terrorism and violent extremism. According to its national plan of action for preventing violent extremism, adopted in 2018, the Republic of Korea's response has encompassed a wide spectrum of efforts to address the environments conducive to terrorism, such as promoting human rights, creating an inclusive community that embrace marginalized groups, and enhancing public-private partnership. COVID-19 clearly demonstrates the importance of transnational cooperation in tackling transborder threats. This lesson also applies to our counter-terrorism efforts. Now is the time for the whole international community to unite against the common challenge of terrorism and organized crime. The Republic of Korea will continue to work closely with the United Nations for a world free from terrorist threats.
