Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for your briefing on the work of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea. My delegation
welcomes your able leadership of that Committee. I
also take this opportunity to congratulate the members
of the Somalia and Eritrea Monitoring Group on their
appointment pursuant to resolution 2245 (2015).

Malaysia welcomes the Monitoring Group's
active pursuit of its mandate, including through its
engagement with a wide range of interlocutors, its
visits to third countries and its site visits in Somalia.
However, it is regrettable to note that the group was
not granted access into Eritrea during the reporting
period. Access of the group to Eritrea would provide an
important opportunity for the Government to engage
constructively with the international community,
with a view to achieving better understanding of
the outstanding issues and questions, as well as in
addressing possible concerns. We urge Eritrea to
consider positively enhancing its cooperation with the
Committee and the Group in line with its obligations
under the relevant Council resolutions.

Somalia has undergone tremendous changes over
the years. In the past few years, we have seen significant
positive momentum in the critical aspects ofthe political
dialogue and State- and institution-building processes.
Such momentum has resulted in modest yet tangible
gains, including in the areas of peace and security
and the socioeconomic development of the country.
Mindful that 2016 is a particularly important year for
Somalia, it is important for the positive momentum to
be maintained.

In this regard, Malaysia welcomes the recent
announcements by the Federal Government of Somalia
on the electoral model for 2016. The Federal Government
should continue to work closely and cooperatively with
the existing and emerging regional administrations
in a transparent and inclusive manner so as to ensure
buy-in and cement support for the model and the
ensuing process. This would be a crucial step towards
a successful political transition. In this regard, it is
equally important that differences between the federal
and regional authorities on the issue of exploitation of
mineral resources be managed in a constructive and
equitable manner.

On a separate note, Malaysia echoes concerns
expressed on the humanitarian situation in Somalia,
particularly in areas where there is ongoing fighting
against Al-Shabaab and where intercommunal tensions
and conflicts have re-emerged. We note that in 2015
alone, at least 157 incidents of grave violations against
children were documented. In its ongoing effort to
improve the overall peace and security situation in
the country, we urge the Government to continue
implementing its action plan on children and armed
conflict.

It is important to continue focusing on the threat
posed by terrorist groups in Somalia, particularly
Al-Shabaab. Malaysia fully concurs with the view that
pressure must continue to be exerted on that group, its
supporters and affiliates. We greatly value and respect
the sacrifices made by all security sector actors in
Somalia, most notably by the African Union Mission in
Somalia and the Somalia security forces in countering
this threat. Such threats can only be effectively
neutralized through a comprehensive strategy.

In this regard, the finalization of the national
security policy and a national defence act as well as the
integration of regional forces into the Somali National
Army are positive developments, which contribute to
enhancing its ability to combat Al-Shabaab. At the
same time, we note that the respective presences of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Qaida in
the Arabian Peninsula are seeping into Somalia and the
Horn of Africa. As rightly highlighted in the President's
briefing, this worrying development is one of the factors
changing the security situation in the country.

With regard to the Council's work on this issue, it
may be useful to consider convening a joint meeting
between the 751/1907 Committee and the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities. The purpose could
be, inter alia, to explore possible synergies in the work
of both Committees, including examining how the
existing sanctions regimes could be better focused
on terrorists, their supporters and affiliates, which
all threaten to undermine the positive gains made in
Somalia, and perhaps more generally in assessing and
addressing the threat posed to the Horn of Africa.

With regard to the implementation of the charcoal
ban, Malaysia supports the recommendations for better
coordination between the combined maritime forces
and the Federal Government of Somalia in curbing
the illegal trade in Somali charcoal. The Monitoring
Group could play a bridging role, including through the
sharing of information in this regard.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm my delegation's
commitment to working closely with the 751/1907
Committee and its Chair, the Somalia and Eritrea
Monitoring Group, all Council members, partners and
stakeholders in contributing to our collective effort
in assisting Somalia, in the maintenance of peace and
security and in securing stability in the Horn of Africa
and beyond.

