The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Oman, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Hinai
(Oman), took the seat reservedfor him at the side
of the Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Mexico.

In this Chamber, we recently heard the Secretary-
General state that, unless something happens, it is very
probable that violence will further increase in the
Middle East. Those words posed a major challenge to
us all, to the Israelis and Palestinians, to the
community of the Middle East, to the international
community as a whole and thus to the United Nations.

The establishment of peace in the Middle East
hangs over the international community as an
unfinished task, an assignment that periodically
absorbs our collective conscience with the
heartbreaking images of an apparently endless conflict.
The States Members of the United Nations should not
allow despair to prevail. We must not become
insensitive to those images of death and destruction.
The violence that threatens to spread everywhere
cannot be the way to a solution. There is no military
solution and we shall not tire of repeating that.

It is imperative to break the spiral of violence and
to protect the civilian population in accordance with
the provisions of international humanitarian law. We
agree with those at this table who have affirmed that
there is nothing - no international action or
initiative - that can replace the will of the parties to
negotiate. We therefore call on that will to resume
direct dialogue.

The international community, however, does have
a clear responsibility in the Middle East that it cannot
shirk. It is a responsibility of the United Nations and,
of course, of the Security Council. As Secretary-
General Kofi Annan said, we must find new and
imaginative formulas and viable proposals to fulfil this
mission. Above all, we must be prepared to that end to
discuss the matter in the Security Council and to do so
in a spirit of mutual consideration and understanding.

In recent weeks, we have had four opportunities
to address this item - two in consultations and two in
public meetings. In the light of circumstances and
developments, this process is already leading the
Security Council to consider promising and viable
initiatives. Tonight's debate is in itself an opportunity
that has been fully exploited to explore the approaches
being sought by the international community. Members
of the Council have indeed referred to very relevant
proposals, such as the initiative of Saudi Arabia that is
today the subject of attention and consideration in
Israel, Palestine, the Arab countries, Europe and the
United States.

S/PV.4478

 

It is also up to the United Nations to explore
confidence-building mechanisms. The role of the
United Nations Special Coordinator is especially
relevant in that regard, both in and of itself and within
the context of the so-called quartet. It also falls to the
United Nations to promote humanitarian activities,
attending to the needs of the civilian population and
advancing reconciliation. For all of these reasons, and
given our hopes for the future, my country is
convinced and firmly believes that the United Nations
is a part of the solution.

Other international efforts are also highly
relevant and must not be abandoned. The international
community greeted with hope the results of the Madrid
conference in 1991, the Oslo Accords in 1993, the
Sharm el-Sheikh summit in 2000 and the proposals
contained in the Mitchell report and the Tenet plan.
Israelis and Palestinians should not forget those
commitments because they are a symbol of what can be
achieved when there is a will. Mexico would like to see
that hope for dialogue and peace in the region
rekindled. Reconciliation, mutual trust and prudence:
these are what the Mitchell report recommends.

We call on the parties promptly to implement the
recommendations of the Tenet plan and the Mitchell
report. While, the ceasefire is important, it is necessary
that negotiations begin immediately between the
parties as a demonstration of the willingness and desire
firmly to resume a long-term peace process.

Mexico reaffirms the rights of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and to establish a State
and the need for the resolutions of the United Nations,
specifically Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973), to be implemented. We also reiterate
our position in support of the right of all States of the
region to live in peace within secure and recognized
borders and to prosper together. Mexico urges the
representatives of the quartet - the United States, the
Russian Federation, the European Union and the
United Nations - to intensify their cooperation with
the parties in order to find a solution to the current
situation in the occupied territories. Given its vital
importance, we must follow up - and Mexico will do
so - the Saudi Arabian proposal for a peace plan for
the region.

Lasting peace in the Middle East is the political
goal to which we aspire. However, we must not lose
sight of the fact that, if peace is achieved, the task of

reconstruction will then be on the agenda. Once peace
has been attained, the necessary material and emotional
capacities will have to be restored. That will require a
coordinated effort on the part of all of the agencies and
programmes of the United Nations system and the
international community.

It is more difficult to bring back to a people its
hope in the future than to lay power cables or build a
house. But, working together, we must find a way to
achieve both objectives at the same time - hope in the
future, and development. As an international
community, we have an obligation to support, both
morally and materially, economic reconstruction,
mutual confidence-building and individual and
collective prosperity for all the peoples and
communities of that region.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

We will now continue with the list of speakers.
May I remind representatives of the request that
statements be limited to five minutes.

I give the floor to the representative of Israel.


