Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation thanks the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) for report on its third session
(S/2009/444). Our thanks go to Ambassador Mufioz,
Chairman of the Commission, for his briefing; we
appreciate his hard work over the past year.

Last week the General Assembly considered the
report of the PBC. The broader membership of the
United Nations offered a positive assessment of the
Commission's work over the past year. At the same
time, members expressed their views on the 2010
review of the work of the PBC, including on the need,
inter alia, to consider the linkage between
peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding operations
in an integrated manner, to strengthen the coordination
of the PBC with other United Nations bodies and
agencies, to further enhance the Commission's
fundraising capacity and to expedite the disbursement
of funds by the Peacebuilding Fund. We hope that the
PBC will seriously consider and incorporate those
rational proposals.

I wish to make a number of points about the
future work of the PBC. First, the Commission needs
to optimize its relations with other United Nations
bodies and agencies. Within the United Nations, the
PBC should enhance its interaction with the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council. System-wide, the Commission should
further strengthen its communication and coordination
with the relevant specialized agencies, funds and
programmes; this should be extended also to regional
organizations with a view to establishing a
peacebuilding support and funding network. On the
ground, the PBC should make full use of the resources
of United Nations projects, funds and peacekeeping
missions, so as to avoid redundancy and waste.

Secondly, the PBC should enhance its
partnerships with recipient countries. Recipient
countries bear primary responsibility for their own
peacebuilding efforts. Recipient countries should have
adequate say in identifying peacebuilding priorities. In
implementing peaceful reconstruction strategies, the
PBC should pay greater attention to training human
resources and building the capacities of recipient
countries. It should make full use of recipient
countries' existing human resources and expertise.

Thirdly, the PBC should take the opportunity
afforded by the 2010 comprehensive review and
continue to work towards completing its institution-
building. The Commission is expected to streamline its
meetings, improve its efficiency and ensure the quality
of its meetings. It is our hope that, as it identifies
peacebuilding priorities - beyond security sector
reform, human rights and the rule of law in recipient
countries - the Commission will pay more attention to
deeply rooted problems that are the cause of conflict,
including problems related to economic and social
development.

Sierra Leone, Burundi, Guinea-Bissau and the
Central African Republic are the PBC's country-
specific focus. They are also on the agenda of the
Security Council. Close cooperation between the
Council and the PBC is therefore crucial in
consolidating the peace processes of those countries.
Links between the two bodies should be strengthened.
The Security Council can provide the Peacebuilding
Commission with guidance through formal meetings,
informal consultations and other modalities. In
handling relevant issues, the Council should, to the
extent possible, take on board the professional
suggestions made by the PBC. Moreover, in the light of
conditions in particular countries, the Council should
consider referring new countries for PBC
consideration.

