We are here to discuss a situation that for nine long years has impacted the lives of millions of people: a conflict that has resulted in a devastated and broken country, both physically and emotionally; a conflict which, among other violations of international law, has seen attacks on hospitals and other medical facilities like no other; one that has forced thousands of doctors, nurses, first responders and other medical staff to flee. It is a conflict whose only solution is political and yet, after almost a decade, it is still not on the horizon, due to the inability of the parties to let their decisions be guided only by the legitimate aspirations of the people of Syria to live in freedom, justice and progress. Today, Syrians all across the country might be facing yet another threat, one for which they are not prepared. And they are not prepared because of the conflict. Only 42 per cent of the Syrian population has access to clean water, 50 per cent of their medical infrastructure is not operational and only God knows how many doctors and nurses are still able to work. Even developed countries are struggling to stop the spread of COVID-19. What might happen in Syria, particularly in the north, is just heartbreaking. Although the cases so far are low, it is only a matter of time before COVID-19 spreads. Therefore, we believe that the prevention efforts under way with the leadership of the World Health Organization, in coordination with the Government of Syria, are of utmost importance. Allow me to highlight a few points: ¢ We fully echo the calls by the Secretary-General and the Special Envoy for a complete and immediate ceasefire all across Syria. We recognize the reports that the 6 March ceasefire has held. As we have already said before, we are cautiously optimistic and hope that this ceasefire will be sustainable and long- lasting. This Council must remain attentive to how the situation on the ground develops and follow the signals and movements of the forces present there. We reiterate that a complete ceasefire, as mandated by Security Council resolution 2254 (2015), needs to be in place to allow a credible political process and for the people of Syria to live a dignified life once and for all. We also wanted to touch on cross-border assistance. We just heard from Mark that, in the north-west, the cross-border operation has once more proven to be essential for the survival of millions of people. We greatly appreciate the whole humanitarian community, those on the front lines, mainly Syrians, for dedicating their lives to serve those most affected. We are particularly concerned about the situation in the north-east, where United Nations-coordinated medical assistance is absent, and information that water supply has been disrupted for almost half a million, including in the Al Hol Camp. Therefore, we would like to propose that all relevant parties take all possible measures to expedite the response in that area. If that includes reopening the Al-Yarubiya Crossing, then we should all support it. These are extraordinary times that require extraordinary measures. We must only think of the well-being of the people. ¢ To conclude, the Dominican Republic would like to reiterate its support for any effort to prevent a major outbreak of COVID-19 in an already vulnerable Syria. Syria will not be able to cope with such an outbreak. This is not a situation to sit and wait. This is a situation for urgent, immediate and principled action and, above all, for solidarity.
