Mr. Tello (Mexico) (interpretation from Spanish):
There is no need to repeat at this meeting the text of the
statements of the Government of Mexico contained in press
releases issued on 11 and 28 May 1998, in which we
condemn unambiguously the underground nuclear tests
carried out by India and by Pakistan. Copies of these press
releases were sent to all Permanent Missions accredited to
the United Nations.

The new situation in South Asia is a cause of
profound concern for the entire international community.
We are convinced that India and Pakistan must endeavour
to create mechanisms that will enable them to find solutions
to their historic differences in order to restore trust and
stability between them, and ultimately to the rest of the
region. Mexico is convinced and will remain convinced that
dialogue and negotiation are the best means for resolving
differences.

The legacy of horror of 50 years of nuclear tests is
just starting to be known. Some of the damage is
irreversible. The nightmare history of the impact on vast
areas where enormous quantities of nuclear materials,
especially enriched uranium and plutonium, have been
stored remains to be written.

On the threshold of the twenty-first century, to allow
a new nuclear arms race to begin in any part of the world
threatens the objectives and the spirit of the treaties of
Tlatelolco, Rarotonga, Bangkok and Pelindaba, which
establish nuclear-weapon-free zones. It also violates the
commitments contained in the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and in the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and those reflected
in the consolidation of the southern hemisphere and
adjacent areas as a single nuclear-weapon-free zone.

People often forget that until recently the entire world
was a nuclear-weapon-free zone. The goal for the
international community should be to restore that situation
as soon as possible. Neither in 1945 nor now can there be
any legal or moral justification for acquiring or using
atomic bombs. Let us remember that the history of mankind
covers more than 100,000 years. The nuclear age, which
covers the past 53 years, barely constitutes a minuscule
cancer, which must be removed.

Conducting nuclear tests imperils what the vast
majority of States support: the strengthening of the
nuclear non-proliferation regime and the complete
cessation of nuclear tests as an essential part of nuclear
disarmament. Once again we appeal to all - all -
countries that have not yet done so to accede to the Non-
Proliferation Treaty and to the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty.

In addition, the possession and stockpiling of nuclear
weapons endangers international peace and security.
Existing arsenals do not strengthen security; on the
contrary, they weaken it.

All States, and particularly the nuclear-weapon
States, have an obligation to undertake and conclude
negotiations on nuclear disarmament until the world is
free of such weapons. The non-proliferation regime is
directed towards facilitating the cessation of the
manufacture of nuclear weapons and the dismantling and
elimination of existing arsenals, as well as of the delivery
systems for these weapons.

The joint communique issued on 4 June in Geneva,
at the conclusion of the meeting of the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of China, France, Russia, the United
Kingdom and the United States, indicates that these
nuclear-weapon States are resolved to fulfil their
obligations under article VI of the Non-Proliferation
Treaty. This commitment, if put into practice, will surely
help revive the stalled nuclear-disarmament negotiations.

The commitment of all States to nuclear
disarmament does not stem solely from the provisions of
the Non-Proliferation Treaty. In fact, the historic advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice, of 8 July
1996, establishes unambiguously the obligation to pursue
in good faith and to bring to a conclusion negotiations
leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under
strict and effective international control.

Mexico firmly believes that the international non-
proliferation regime must be preserved and its credibility
restored. Given current circumstances, it can no longer be
argued that nuclear disarmament concerns only the
nuclear Powers. As a result of that limited interpretation,
the nuclear-disarmament agenda item in the Conference
on Disarmament is in a state of virtual paralysis.

It is urgent and essential to establish an ad hoc
committee on nuclear disarmament in the Conference on
Disarmament. With political will and without hesitation,

 

negotiations on nuclear disarmament must be initiated
immediately, in order to dispel any doubts about the
inescapable commitment of all States to the goal of
achieving in the foreseeable future a world free of nuclear
weapons. We must take measures commensurate with the
gravity of the current situation. Remaining indifferent
would only encourage others to follow the extremely
dangerous path to nuclear arms build-up.

