Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): At the outset, please
allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month and to
thank you for having convened this meeting. Your
Foreign Minister's presence here today reflects
Mexico's enduring commitment to advancing the
international agenda on this issue. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2010/ 181)
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict for her
briefing this morning.

More than half of Afghanistan's 30 million
people are under the age of 18. This is a half of the
country whose earliest memories are of violence and
war and who have grown up amidst a decimated
economy, shattered institutions and a broken society.
But these children are also the best and only hope for
the future of Afghanistan, and my Government is fully
committed to protecting them and to developing their
potential.

A country of youth poses unique challenges.
Thirty years of warfare have left thousands orphaned or
disabled. Mines and unexploded remnants of war kill
or injure hundreds more every year. Many children are
the primary breadwinners for their families. Poverty,
unemployment and weak national institutions create
unrest and particularly disadvantage children, putting
them at risk of disease and malnutrition and making
them easy victims for crimes and extremist ideologies.
But more than this, children in Afghanistan suffer from
the terrorism and violence of the Taliban, Al-Qaida and
their allies. These groups are responsible for heinous
acts against civilians, including the recent
heartbreaking murder of a 7-year-old boy, hanged as a
Government spy. Their complete disregard for human
life is well documented, and they continue to bear
overwhelming responsibility for the danger to children
across the country.

The Government of Afghanistan has taken many
legal, institutional and practical steps to promote
security, development and good governance and to
fulfil its national and international obligations to
protect children. In addition, as part of an ongoing
dialogue with the Office of the Special Representative,
and in line with the recommendations of the Security
Council Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, the Government of Afghanistan has taken
further steps to address the particular needs of children
in armed conflict. Many of these are not fully reflected
in the current report, so I will give a number of
examples.

First, my Government welcomed the recent
creation of the monitoring and reporting mechanism in
the country and established an international and
inter-ministerial steering committee to develop a
governmental action plan on children and armed
conflict.

Second, the Government has established a
commission to oversee the needs of children and
juveniles, and another to ensure the observance of
human rights during detention and interrogation, as
required by law.

Third, the Government is working with civil
society and religious leaders to address sexual
violence, which is contrary to both Islamic teachings
and national law.

Fourth, because of the threat from the Taliban,
the Ministry of Education has instructed that schools
will no longer be used as polling stations in elections.

Fifth, the Government is engaged with
international forces to improve protection of civilians
and has welcomed recent tactical directives in that
regard.

Sixth, focal points for child recruitment have
been identified in the Ministries of the Interior and
Defence, and the Ministry of the Interior has tasked its
unit on human rights, gender and children to address
any allegations of children serving in the police, as
well as allegations of sexual violence.

Seventh, the recruitment process for both the
army and the police is being increasingly centralized
and standardized, including through the introduction of
biometric verification procedures. Records are kept of
underage applicants who are turned away.

Eighth, the Interior Ministry recently released an
executive directive reinforcing the existing legislation
by banning recruitment by the police of anyone under
18, requiring that any children found be reintegrated
into society within 30 days and mandating disciplinary
measures for those responsible.

Given those steps and others that we have taken,
my Government is disturbed by the decision to list the
Afghan National Police force in annex I of the report
of the Secretary-General. As the Special Representative
herself has recognized, our recruitment policy is
clearly designed to prevent children from being
involved with the security forces. This decision creates
an unacceptable equivalence between the police and
the intentionally abusive practices of the Taliban and
their allies and undermines the efforts of the Afghan
Government and the international community to build
strong, effective and responsible security forces in very
challenging circumstances.

I have outlined my Government's concerns more
fully in a letter to the Secretary-General on this
subject, which will be published as an official
document of the Security Council. In particular, my
Government was not provided with any evidence to
support the report's allegations of child recruitment in
the police or of mistreatment or torture in Government
facilities in violation of international law. We are not
satisfied with the partial and anecdotal nature of the
report itself.

However, despite our reservations, my
Government remains ready as always to engage fully
with the Office of the Special Representative and with
the monitoring and reporting mechanism to ensure the
full implementation of resolutions 1612 (2005) and
1882 (2009), among others, and to continue to improve
our capacity and procedures for the protection of
children.

Earlier this week we became aware of vast
mineral resources in Afghanistan that have the power
to transform the country's economy. Likewise, the
millions of children in Afghanistan are an untapped
wealth of human potential who will grow into an
economic, political and social force that will remake
the future of the country. My Government is fully
committed to educating those children, protecting
them, providing them with a bright and promising
future and building a country that they can be proud to
inherit. That is not just a moral and legal duty; it is also
the only way for Afghanistan to fully and finally
emerge from conflict.

