Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (Spoke in Spanish): Bolivia is grateful to the
French presidency for convening this briefing. It has
been a long time since the Security Council held a
public meeting on the situation in Abyei, and this
format makes it possible for the entire membership to
learn in greater detail about the work being done in the
Area by the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei (UNISFA). We also thank Assistant Secretary-
General Alexander Zouev and Special Envoy Nicholas
Haysom for the important information they have shared
with us today.

Bolivia believes that the current state of relative
stability in Abyei is a reflection of the efficient work of
UNISFA, which is as important for the Sudan as it is for
South Sudan, given the difficult time that the latter is
experiencing due to the civil war afflicting the country.
In that connection, we would like to commend the
Ethiopian troops as well as United Nations personnel
for their great work in Abyei.

Although we acknowledge the stability in the Area,
we also recognize that the political, humanitarian
and security situations continue to pose challenges.
UNISFA responds where it can, but its abilities to
respond are limited by various factors outside of its
control. It is clear to us that it is up to the Governments
of both countries to make headway in the development
of measures allowing for the implementation of the
2011 agreement and the final status of the Area.

In that connection, we underscore the good
offices role played by UNISFA in terms of mediation
to encourage dialogue and rekindle the political
process between both countries, as well as to promote
understanding and reconciliation between the Misseriya
and Ngok Dinka communities. The coexistence of
those two communities, whether through commercial
activities or the setting up of community protection
committees, helps to establish the bonds of trust that
are fundamental among the inhabitants of the Area.

Although the security situation is relatively stable,
it continues to be unpredictable. Despite the reduction
in the number of violent incidents in comparison with
the period covered by the present report (S/2017/870)
of the Secretary-General), and taking into account the
update provided by the Assistant-Secretary-General
at this meeting, we must continue working to further
reduce the tensions in the Amiet common market. As
we know, it is the economic heart of the Area and helps
to improve the relationship between the parties.

As reported by the Secretary-General, there are
many needs that must be met to provide humanitarian
aid. The arrival of displaced persons from South Sudan
has led to an urgent situation that UNISFA and other
humanitarian actors are struggling to grapple with.
There are still problems in terms of access to education,
health, safe drinking water and food security. Headway
needs to be made in consolidating the institutions that
should properly administer the Area and guarantee
the provision of basic services to the people of Abyei.
UNISFA cannot, and should not, substitute the role that
the State.

Despite the problems being experienced, we
underscore the fact that educational activities are
currently under way to provide training to mitigate the
risks posed by explosive remnants of war. Such efforts,
which have reached almost 65,000 Abyei inhabitants,
constitute an important component in establishing
lasting peace in the Area. Moreover, we would highlight
the joint work of UNISFA and the United Nations Mine
Action Service to confiscate and destroy weapons,
detect and eliminate explosive munitions and destroy
explosive remnants of war along priority routes. The
two latter are essential for delineating the terrain
coordinates of border transport corridors.

In a joint letter we received on 23 September, the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan publicly
expressed their willingness to implement resolutions
1990 (2011) and 2352 (2017). That seems to us a
positive sign of the rapprochement between the two
parties, but it is vital that this commitment be put into
practice. We hope that these issues will be the subject
of consensus at the summit between the Presidents
of the Sudan and South Sudan, which we hope will
take place as soon as possible. We urge the parties to
demonstrate leadership and political determination to
move forward with serious negotiations that will ensure
the operationalization of the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism, as called for in resolution
2352 (2017), as well as determine the final status of the
Area in line with the 2011 agreement.

Finally, we see that there are still many challenges to
overcome in Abyei. We hope that the Security Council
will remain unified on this issue, while listening to the
positions of the parties involved, the troop-contributing
country, regional organizations and the Secretariat.
We must not lose sight of our principal mandate and
continue to work to help these countries achieve peace,
stability and well-being for their inhabitants.

