Mr. Ney (Germany): Let me express my gratitude
to you, Mr. President, for convening and preparing this
useful debate during your presidency. Your recent
concept paper (S/2008/528), in particular, has been
very helpful and merits our praise. It provides a
concise overview of where the Council stands in its
efforts to implement the 63 measures set out more than
two years ago. We also fully support the approach you
have suggested for today's debate, that is to focus on
those measures of great interest and relevance to
non-Council members in the fields of transparency,
interaction and efficiency.

As a staunch proponent of Security Council
reform, Germany welcomes the ongoing discussion on
the Council's working methods and appreciates the
open format that the Belgian presidency has chosen for
that purpose. We would also like to thank the group of
five small countries - Costa Rica, Jordan,
Liechtenstein, Singapore and Switzerland - for their
continued commitment to this significant issue.

Let me also thank the former chairs of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions for their efforts, as well as the
present chair Ambassador Arias.

As the United Nations increasingly accepts
responsibility for conflict resolution around the world,
both between and within States, the face of the Council
has dramatically changed. Its role has become ever
more prominent in recent years. Take but a short look
at the tremendous increase in the number of meetings it
has held and resolutions it has adopted. Now that the
United Nations Member States and the world watch
with growing interest, transparency, more than ever, is
of paramount importance if the Council is to meet
expectations. We, therefore, welcome the progress thus
far achieved in that field. Regular briefings by the
presidency to non-Council members at the beginning of
each month, for example, nowadays provide a useful
forecast of and information about the monthly
programme of work. Allow me to remark,
Mr. President , that you set a very good example in that
respect when you assumed the presidency of the
Security Council at the beginning of this month.

With regard to enhanced interaction with and
involvement of non-Council members, we strongly
support the notion that affected parties should have
facilitated access to the Council. That should include
first and foremost Member States that have a vested
interest in the item on the agenda under discussion,
such as major troop-contributing countries and
financial contributing countries, for instance. At the
next stage, however, it may be fruitful to consider
improved access to stakeholders other than Member
States as well. Such direct consultations may provide
the Council with a sounder basis for and increased
legitimacy of its decisions. Interaction should also be
strengthened within the United Nations, for example
between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission.

It should be noted, however, that such
considerations must not undermine efforts to make the
working of the Council more efficient. Keeping in
mind that statements in public meetings definitely need
to be shorter, as you, Mr. President, so aptly pointed
out in your concept paper (S/2008/528), I shall limit
myself to one more aspect that is central to the German
position.

Previous achievements to improve the Council's
working methods are laudable, and further efforts are
essential in times of the tremendous increase in the
prominence of this body. And yet, those efforts cannot
be but small steps. Let us not lose sight of our actual
goal: comprehensive Security Council reform. Let us
continue to regard working methods as one, albeit a
significant, aspect in a much wider context. Let us
embrace today's debate as an important step in our
endeavour to make the Council more transparent,
interactive and efficient, but also more legitimate,
representative and reflective of today's political
realities.

To conclude, let me affirm Germany's strong
support for any efforts aimed at improving working
methods. They send a clear message by the United
Nations membership that comprehensive Security
Council reform is urgently required. Improving
working methods alone will not bring about the
necessary change. We must address the fundamental
issue - the necessity to bring the Security Council in
line with the political realities of today's world. If we
were to improve working methods without reforming
Security Council structures, we would risk increasing
the political frustration in large parts of the
membership and eroding the authority of the Security
Council.

