Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: I welcome this
opportunity to address the Security Council on the
activities and planning undertaken by my Office since
the adoption of resolution 1593 (2005).

Immediately following the adoption of the
resolution, we established a Darfur team with staff of
the three divisions of the Office and initiated an
extensive process of information-gathering and
analysis.

On 5 April 2005, my Office collected more than
2,500 items, including documentation, video footage
and interview transcripts that had been gathered by the
International Commission of Inquiry on Darfur. On that
same day, I personally collected a sealed envelope
containing the list of 51 individuals identified by the
Commission as potentially bearing responsibility for
crimes. My Office will conduct its own independent
investigation in order to determine those persons who
must be prosecuted. The list is for advice purposes and
will remain sealed.

Prior to the commencement of a formal
investigation, the Rome Statute requires the Prosecutor
to determine whether there is a reasonable basis to
proceed with an investigation. That determination is
made following consideration of the three factors set
out in the Statute: first, whether the information
provides a reasonable basis to believe that a crime
within the jurisdiction of the Court has been, or is
being, committed; secondly, whether the case is or
would be admissible under article 17; and, thirdly,
whether, taking into account the gravity of the crime
and the interests of victims, there are nonetheless
substantial reasons to believe that an investigation
would not serve the interests of justice.

In addition to the Commission's material, my
Office has collected more than 3,000 documents from a
variety of other sources, has been in contact with more
than 100 groups and individuals and has interviewed
more than 50 individuals with specific expertise on the
situation in Darfur.

There is a significant amount of credible
information disclosing the commission of grave crimes
within the jurisdiction of the Court having taken place
in Darfur. Those crimes include the killing of
thousands of civilians and the widespread destruction
and looting of villages, leading to the displacement of
approximately 1.9 million civilians. The living
conditions resulting from those crimes have led to the
deaths of tens of thousands from disease and
starvation, particularly affecting such vulnerable
groups as children, the sick and the elderly.
Information also highlights a pervasive pattern of rape
and sexual violence.

In addition to those crimes, my Office has
received information showing the persistent targeting
and intimidation of humanitarian personnel.

In the light of the complementarity regime and
article 53(1)(b) of the Statute, I am required to consider
whether there could be cases that would be admissible
within the situation in Darfur. The Office has studied
Sudanese institutions, laws and procedures. We have
sought information on any national proceedings that
may have been undertaken in relation to crimes in
Darfur. We have also analysed the multiple ad hoc
mechanisms that were created by Sudanese authorities
in 2004 in the context of the conflict in Darfur,
including the committees against rape, the special
courts and the specialized courts that replaced them,
the national commission of inquiry and other ad hoc
judicial committees and non-judicial mechanisms.

Following that analysis, I determined that there
are cases that would be admissible in relation to the
Darfur situation. That decision does not represent a
determination on the Sudanese legal system as such but
is essentially a result of the absence of criminal
proceedings related to the cases on which my Office
will focus.

The admissibility assessment is ongoing. Once
specific cases are selected, my Office will again assess
whether or not those cases are, or have been, the
subject of genuine national investigations or
prosecutions.

The Office also examined issues relating to the
interests of justice. Taking into account all those
factors, on 1 June 2005 I decided to initiate an
investigation in relation to the crimes committed in
Darfur.

After my decision, the Government of the Sudan
provided my Office with information relating to the
establishment of a new specialized tribunal to deal with
some individuals considered to have been responsible
for crimes committed in Darfur. As part of the ongoing
admissibility assessment, my Office will follow the
work of the tribunal.

The full support of the international community
will be essential to carry out our investigation.
Paragraph 2 of resolution 1593 (2005) requires the
Government of the Sudan and all other parties to the
conflict in Darfur to cooperate fully with and provide
necessary assistance to the Court and the Prosecutor. It
also urges all States to cooperate fully with the
Prosecutor and the Court.

Specific requests for assistance were not issued to
the Government of the Sudan or other parties to the
conflict during the preliminary analysis phase.
However, since the referral, I have two exploratory
meetings in April and May in the Netherlands with
officials of the Government of the Sudan. Members of
my Office have also held exploratory meetings with
other parties to the conflict in Darfur in order to
establish channels for communication and future
cooperation.

Paragraph 3 of resolution 1593 (2005) invites the
Court and the African Union to discuss practical
arrangements for facilitating the work of the Prosecutor
and the Court, including the possibility of conducting
proceedings in the region. Following the referral of the
situation, a delegation of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) went to Addis Ababa to finalize the
negotiations of a relationship agreement with the
African Union, which had started in 2004, and to meet
with officials of the African Union. The discussions
successfully ended in an agreed text, which the Court
hopes will be signed soon.

In May, I also met with President Obasanjo, in his
capacity as President of the Federal Republic of
Nigeria and President of the African Union. At that
meeting, I recognized the importance of traditional
mechanisms for justice and reconciliation.

My Office is in the process of concluding
necessary agreements and arrangements with various
other organizations. The United Nations Relationship
Agreement concluded in October 2004 provides an
existing framework for cooperation with the Court. In
addition, my Office has developed contacts with other
organizations, such as the Arab League, that are
playing a role in seeking an end to the conflict in
Darfur.

The International Criminal Court received the
referral of the situation in Darfur in the capacity of a
well-developed institution. Preparations for
investigations relating to Darfur are advancing rapidly.
The recruitment of additional personnel is well under
way and the selection process will conclude in July.

Analysis and planning related to evidence
collection and legal strategies are already at an
advanced stage. A database has been created and key
analytical and research tools have been developed for
the investigation. Protocols and systems have also been
developed to handle disclosure obligations and the
investigation of exonerating circumstances, as well as
the storage of evidence and the use of information from
sensitive sources. It is vital to take all available steps to
preserve information and materials that may form part
of the evidence in future proceedings.

The protection of victims and witnesses is a
major challenge in any conflict situation and a core
responsibility shared by my Office and the Registry.
The information currently available highlights the
significant security risks facing civilians and local and
international humanitarian personnel in Darfur. Those
issues will present persistent challenges for any
genuine investigations, international or national.

Communication of the ICC's activities will be
vital to ensuring understanding of and participation in
the process. We will take all possible steps to bring the
proceedings closer to those affected by the crimes.
That may include the establishment of ICC presences
and the conduct of proceedings at places within the
region.

In the coming weeks and months, my Office will
request the cooperation of the Government of the
Sudan and all other parties to the conflict in Darfur. We
will also request the assistance of other States and
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations.
The language of resolution 1593 (2005) must be
converted into reality as soon as possible. The
continued reporting to and engagement of the Security
Council on those matters will be vital.

We are also vigilant to the ongoing commission
of serious crimes in Darfur. The commencement of the
investigations marks an opportunity for all parties to
take all possible steps to prevent the continuation of
such offences.

The referral of the situation in Darfur to the
International Criminal Court has brought an
international, independent and impartial justice
component to the collective international and regional
efforts to end the violence in Darfur. My Office will
identify those individuals who bear the greatest
responsibility for the crimes and assess the
admissibility of the selected cases. My Office will
work expeditiously to those ends, conscious of the high
evidential threshold for criminal responsibility imposed
by the Rome Statute.

Additional efforts will be required to bring other
offenders to justice and to promote the rule of law and
reconciliation. That has particular significance in the
context of Darfur, where tribal and traditional systems
exist for the promotion of dispute resolution. My
Office will cooperate with and support such efforts, the
combination of which will mark a comprehensive
response to the need for justice in Darfur.

