Mr. Srivihok (Thailand): I am honoured to speak
on behalf ofthe 10 States members ofthe Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). ASEAN would also
like to align itself with the statement delivered by the

representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

I thank the presidency of Indonesia for convening
this timely debate. Continued dialogue and debates
on the subject are key to ensuring that the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative will succeed after achieving
near consensus on the shared commitments last
September. I would also like to express my appreciation
for the useful briefings delivered by the Secretary-
General and others.

United Nations peacekeeping is crucial to advancing
peace and security, safeguarding human rights and
laying the foundation for development. It would
therefore be essential for all stakeholders to ensure
optimum support for United Nations peacekeeping
operations in today's increasingly challenging operating
environment. In the light of that, ASEAN would like to
offer the following points.

First, we need stronger partnerships and a more
coordinated approach. We support strengthening
partnerships at all levels. We further emphasize the
importance of regional and subregional collaboration
in training and capacity-building efforts to enhance
missions' peacekeeping competencies.

For example, the ASEAN Defence Ministerial
Meeting-Plus Experts' Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations meets annually to discuss key challenges
faced in peacekeeping and share ideas on how member
States could strengthen mandate implementation in the
field. We also have continued efforts among the ASEAN
peace operations institutes to promote innovation,
capacity-building and training collaboration for
peacekeeping deployment.

Secondly, the efficient and effective achievement
of mandate outcomes depends on the quality
and capabilities of peacekeepers. Ensuring that
peacekeepers meet United Nations standards before
and during deployment is everyone's priority. ASEAN
countries are hosting the inaugural Triangular
Partnership Project training on a rotational basis for
Asia-Pacific participants, with the aim of providing
high-quality peacekeeping operational training.
Moving ahead, Indonesia will replace Viet Nam in
hosting the Triangular Partnership Project training in
2020.
Collectively, we pool resources and expertise by
effectively leveraging one another's competencies,
capabilities and shared experiences to achieve the desired
Triangular Partnership Project training outcomes. There
is no debate about women's pre-eminent qualification
for any aspect of peacekeeping operations, including
in the highest posts. ASEAN therefore supports the
Secretary-General's call to increase the number of
women in peacekeeping.

Thirdly, the safety and security of our peacekeepers
areasharedresponsibilityamongus all.Allpeacekeeping
stakeholders share and own the responsibility to ensure
realistic mission mandates, adequate resourcing,
effective training and efficient administration for the
success of peacekeeping missions.

Every stakeholder has its share of responsibility to
ensure the safety of peacekeepers while undertaking
their duties. The most direct and effective way is
primarily to ensure training competency and the
provision of adequate equipment to meet the demands
of the mission. While reaffirming the basic principles
of United Nations peacekeeping, it is of paramount
importance to ensure the safety and security of
peacekeepers on the ground so that they can perform
competently and confidently. The Security Council
can rest assured, ASEAN remains committed to
strengthening the work and quality of its peacekeepers,
and we will contribute effectively to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

I will now speak in my national capacity.

First, Thailand is committed to ensuring that
Thai peacekeepers are properly prepared, trained and
equipped to meet the challenges that they will face in
the field. In July, by working closely with the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Thailand is preparing to
organize the regional training course on the issue of
children and armed conflict.

Secondly, Thailand will continue to View
peacekeeping through a comprehensive and
people-centred lens. Peace is not a stand-alone agenda.
It is co-dependent on sustainable development and
respect for human rights.

In conclusion, good planning, adequate resourcing
and competent personnel are imperative to the success
of any peacekeeping operation.

