Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg is both a State party to the Rome Statute
that has strongly supported the International Criminal
Court (ICC) since its establishment, and a long-
standing partner of Africa. We recognize and respect
Africa's commitment to the fight against impunity,
which is illustrated by the fact that 34 African States are
today parties to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court.

Two weeks ago, members of the Security Council
met with the Contact Group of the African Union to
discuss the latter's request for a stay of proceedings
against the President and Deputy President of Kenya.
This dialogue was an important opportunity for the
Council to hear the concerns of the African Union
and Kenya, a State party to the Rome Statute. We take
these concerns very seriously, and we said at that time
that we were eager to find solutions of benefit to all
stakeholders. We reiterate that position now.

Unfortunately, we did not have an opportunity to
do so. While differences of opinion within the Security
Council continued, a vote was cast. We did not support
the draft resolution asking the International Criminal
Court to suspend the investigation and prosecution
of President Kenyatta and Deputy President Ruto for
a period of 12 months, under article 16 of the Rome
Statute. There were two reasons for this. First, resort
to article 16 was not necessary because there are other
resources available to address the concerns of Kenya
and the African Union. Secondly, article 16 is, in our
opinion, not applicable in this case.

First, there are indeed other means available to
address the legitimate concerns of Kenya that its elected
leaders should be allowed to conduct the affairs of their
country, despite their trial before the International
Criminal Court.

The first method available is that of cooperation
with the Court. At the request of President Kenyatta's
defence team, the Court decided on 31 October to
postpone by three months the onset of the President's
trial. In addition, the Court has already taken the
necessary steps to arrange the two trials so that at any
time either the President or the Deputy President will
be fully available to manage the affairs of Kenya. Other
defence motions currently await a decision of the Court.
This shows that the ICC takes the concerns of Kenyan
leaders into account.

The second way is that of resort to the Assembly
of States Parties to the Rome Statute. At the request of
the African Union, the twelfth session of the Assembly,
which begins in five days in The Hague, shall include a
special segment on charges against Heads of State and
Government. The Assembly is the appropriate forum to
consider amendments to the Court's rules of procedure
and evidence addressing the concerns of Kenyan
leaders. Kenya and other States parties are already
engaged in this process with the aim of achieving
tangible results in The Hague.

Secondly, we have come to the conclusion that
article 16 of the Rome Statute is not applicable in the
case before the Council. Article 16 of the Rome Statute
gives the Security Council the authority to request
the ICC to suspend investigation or prosecution for
12 months, through a resolution adopted under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations. The reference
to Chapter VII means that the Security Council must
assume the existence of a threat to peace due to the
very fact of the proceedings under way in the ICC. We
understand the challenges Kenya must deal with. We
recognize the real value of the efforts and sacrifices
that Kenya has agreed to in order to help maintain
regional peace and security, particularly in Somalia
and in combating terrorism. But in our View, pursuing
the suit in the ICC against the President and Deputy
President of Kenya does not of itself create a threat to
regional or indeed international peace and security.

We remain willing to continue our dialogue in order
to respond to the legitimate concerns of Kenya and the
African Union. Next week's session of the Assembly of
the States Parties to the Rome Statute provides for that
possibility.

