Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I should like to thank the United Kingdom
for having convened this open debate on justice and the
rule of law and, in so doing, enabled us to have an
exchange of views on a topic that Switzerland deems to
be essential and of priority interest.

Switzerland thanks the Secretary-General for his
report on the rule of law and transitional justice in
conflict and post-conflict societies, dated 23 August
2004. The report addresses questions that are key to
advancing the process of reflection and the efforts
undertaken to allow our Organization to better
contribute to the re-establishment of the rule of law
and to the administration of an effective, impartial and
professional justice in societies in conflict or post-
conflict situations. That concept is just as crucial in the
process of elaborating sustainable development
policies. Let me just say that in both cases, we are
speaking of the "rule of law" - not "rule by law".

The report recalls the crucial importance of
respect for the international norms recognized by the
Charter of the United Nations as well as in the context
of human rights law, humanitarian law, international
criminal law and refugee law. No lasting peace is
possible without unconditional respect for those norms.
Switzerland recalls, in that respect, that, according to
article 1 common to the Geneva Conventions, all States
have a duty to respect, and to ensure, respect for the
fundamental standards of humanitarian law.

In his report, the Secretary-General rightly
stresses the need to base efforts to promote justice and
the rule of law on processes that take account of local
realities, and to support them by making better use of
existing competences and capacities in the countries
concerned. However, strict respect for the rule of law
by United Nations organs and Member States in all
their activities and their interactions at the international
level remains indispensable if the Organization is to
maintain its credibility in the process of the promotion
of the rule of law at the level of individual States.

I would like to highlight two particular aspects of
the question of the rule of law: international criminal
justice and the rule of law as an essential factor in the
promotion of peace.

The ad hoc international criminal tribunals for the
former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda have made a
considerable contribution to re-establishing justice and
combating impunity in the regions concerned. The
tribunals have also played a historical role in the
development of international criminal law. It is
essential that they receive the means necessary to
discharge their mandates, as was eloquently stated
earlier by the Permanent Representative of Jordan.

Furthermore, Switzerland agrees with the
Secretary-General's assessment that

"the most significant recent development in the
international community's long struggle to
advance the cause of justice and rule of law was
the establishment of the International Criminal
Court". (S/2004/61 6, para. 49)

With the recent accessions to the Rome Statute,
more than half the States Members of the United
Nations are now States parties to the Statute. The Court
embodies the hope for a definitive end to impunity.
Nevertheless, as the Secretary-General stated in the
course of his address to the General Assembly,

(spoke in English)
"the rule of law starts at home" (A/59/PV.3, p. 3).
(Spoke in French)

That consideration is underlined by the principle
of complementarity incorporated into the Rome
Statute.

In this context, we would like to call on those
States that have not yet done so to ratify the Rome
Statute and fully to collaborate with the Court.
Switzerland also invites the Security Council to assume
its responsibilities and to exercise its particular
competence as recognized by the Rome Statute, namely
that of bringing before the International Criminal Court
situations in countries that are not parties to the
Statute.

The Secretary-General's report underlines the
importance of the rule of law for the stabilization of
post-conflict societies. It is thus necessary to clarify
what the rule of law means in terms of concepts,
policies and operations. Democratic legislative
procedures; equality before the law and fairness in the
application of the law; a humane penal system and a
police force anchored in civil society - all these are
elements of a transition process which deserve
increased support. Furthermore, those elements must
be given greater weight in the context of the efforts of
the Security Council, the Economic and Social
Council, the General Assembly, the Secretariat, and in
particular the United Nations funds and programmes.
In that context, we would note that the preliminary
recommendations made in the report of the Secretary-
General do not go as far as the text itself had led us to
hope.

Switzerland calls on the Security Council and all
Member States to ensure that adequate means are
available to better meet the challenges posed by the
promotion of justice and of the rule of law.

Finally, we should not lose sight of the fact that
steps to promote the rule of law and transitional justice
are less costly, and their results longer-lasting, than the
consequences of conflict, insecurity and impunity.
Switzerland plans actively to participate in the process
of reflection undertaken with regard to these questions.

