Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, allow me
to express our appreciation to the Kuwaiti presidency
for having convened today's timely and important
debate and for the excellent briefing by Mr. Ian Martin,
Executive Director of Security Council Report. Let me
also pay tribute to all those who have contributed to
date to the improvement of the working methods of the
Security Council.

In particular, I would like to express our gratitude
for the excellent work of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions
in recent years under the dedicated chairmanship of
the Permanent Representative of Japan, Ambassador
Koro Bessho. The adoption of consecutive presidential
notes, including the most recent comprehensive note
S/2017/507, marks an important step in the steady
development of the Council's working methods. Several
of the recently adopted provisions are of particular
importance to the elected members. We especially
welcome the provisions that adjust the working methods
for the early election of non-permanent members,
providing the latter with more time to observe the work
of the Council and enabling a smoother transition of the
chairmanships of its subsidiary organs.

Allow me also to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the role of Chair of the Informal
Working Group and to wish you the greatest success
in that capacity. I would like to assure you of our
future dedication to the group's work. We are ready
to cooperate and support efforts to implement the
provisions of the most recent note 507 and to further
improve the Council's working methods. We look
forward to the meetings of the group.

I would also like to thank you, Mr. President,
for your intervention, in particular the elements
concerning the way forward. Poland would greatly
welcome the full implementation by the Council of the
provisions of note 507. We are committed to working to
that end. In the spirit of solidarity, we would propose
considering in addition a few ideas to further increase
the transparency, inclusiveness, effectiveness and
innovation of the working methods.

First, we would welcome developments in
response to the need for a strategic overview and a
prevention-oriented approach within the Council so
that matters that may threaten the maintenance of
international peace and security could be identified
early and addressed appropriately. We see the need
to fully utilize the potential of the Secretariat in that
respect, including the Department of Political Affairs.
Briefings on situations that may escalate would help the
Council discharge its primary responsibility effectively.

Secondly, I would like to underline the role that
the elected members of the Security Council play in
making the Council more transparent and effective.
They can bring fresh perspectives and ideas to be
developed. In that context, I would like to mention the
most recent initiative of the elected members, on a way
of enhancing the inclusiveness and effectiveness of the
Military Staff Committee.

Thirdly, since one of the areas that Poland intends
to focus on during its time on the Security Council is
strengthening respect for international law within the
context of international peace and security, we believe
it would be worthwhile to exchange views on ways to
ensure that the Council's outcomes are connected to
applicable international law. In our opinion, it could help
to make sure that its decisions are broadly considered
and that Member States are willing to cooperate in
their implementation.

Fourthly, I would also like to underline the
importance of hearing briefers from civil society,
including representatives of women's organizations, in
Council meetings. We believe that they can contribute
useful added value to our discussions.

In conclusion, I would once again like to thank
Kuwait for convening today's meeting and reiterate
Poland's commitment to improving the working
methods of the Council.

