Mr. Lasdous: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council once again on
the crisis in South Sudan.

The current situation in the country remains fluid
and uncertain. Since I last briefed the Security Council
on Sunday, 10 July, a unilateral ceasefire declared by
President Salva Kiir on the evening of 11 July, and
endorsed by First Vice-President Machar, appears to
be holding in Juba, although there is some sporadic
shooting in different parts of the city. It appears now
that the Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA) is in
full control of Juba, with a lot of celebratory gunfire
and looting reportedly having taken place overnight
between 11 and 12 July.

Taking advantage of the relative calm yesterday
and today, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) is conducting limited patrolling to evaluate
the situation and the safety and security of our personnel
and assets at various United Nations compounds in the
city. It has been possible to establish thatboth cantonment
sites of the Sudan People's Liberation Movement/Army
in Opposition (SPLM/A in Opposition), which are on

the west side of Jebel mountain, have been abandoned.
Reportedly, Opposition forces are currently scattered
around the areas of Jebel and Yei road, while SPLA
troops are setting up defensive positions along the Yei
and Gudele road, in the western part of Juba. Further
clashes, therefore, cannot be ruled out.

Non-commercial air traffic has resumed at Juba
airport, which is under the control of the SPLA. The
United Nations Mine Action Service yesterday made
an assessment of the ramp, taxiway and runway of
the airport and did not find any shells or unexploded
ordnance. But there is the worrying fact that one of
our helicopters and two of our fixed-wing aircraft
sustained bullet-fire during the fighting. UNMISS
and UNICEF have undertaken to replenish the water
supplies for the troops and the protection of civilians
sites by sending water truck to the Nile River, but I have
to say that securing freedom of movement remains very
challenging because security forces are obstructing
the movement of our people every step of the way,
citing insecurity.

While we welcome the cessation of hostilities, it is
very clear that the Government must allow UNMISS and
humanitarian actors genuine freedom of movement and
unfettered access so that we can provide vital assistance
to the affected civilian population. We have been in
this crisis for six days now and we are still not able to
ascertain a comprehensive assessment of the security,
humanitarian and human rights consequences of what
happened. As of today, humanitarian partners estimate
that at least 36,000 civilians have been displaced by
the recent fighting in Juba. Seven thousands of those
are at the two UNMISS compounds, and the remaining
are sheltering either in the World Food Programme
compound, non-governmental organization compounds
or several churches in the City.

As for human rights violations, the reports are but
it does seem that numerous civilians have been killed.
The initial Government figures indicate at least 272
people, including 33 civilians, have been killed, but I
believe that this is only the tip of the iceberg, given
alarming reports over the past few days indicating that
civilians have been barred from reaching safer grounds,
including United Nations compounds. The sanctity
of our premises has been gravely violated, whether
indirectly or directly. This gives me the opportunity to
state once again that is unacceptable for the belligerent
parties to seek to instrumentalize the sites devoted to
the protection of civilians.

In and around our sites alone, we have identified
eight people killed and several injured. I have to add,
very sadly, that two peacekeepers and one United
Nations national staff member have lost their lives.
Seven other peacekeepers and one international United
Nations staff member have sustained injuries. It has
to be made clear yet again that any deliberate attack
against United Nations forces, personnel and premises
could constitute a war crime, and investigations into the
circumstances of what happened are under way. In this
regard, I note that yesterday President Salva Kiir sent a
letter to Special Representative Ellen Loj and promised
that his Administration would investigate the incident
that resulted in the death of UNMISS peacekeepers. I
urge South Sudanese authorities to do so without delay.

Outside of Juba, on Monday, 11 July, fighting
took place in Laiyna, Kajo Keji, Yei and Mundri in
Central Equatoria and in Torit in Eastern Equatoria. In
Wau, the situation was already very unstable and has
remained so, and on Sunday armed uniformed soldiers
reportedly attacked and looted a neighbourhood near
the Nazareth market south of Wau town. As a result,
some 3,000 civilians sought refuge at a Catholic church
and 6,000 sought shelter in the UNMISS protection
site. Yesterday, we received unconfirmed reports that
SPLA forces had attacked an armed group affiliated
with the SPLM/A in Opposition in the Ngongba area.

In the Upper Nile region the situation remains
calm. That includes Bor, Bentiu and Malakal, but
UNMISS has observed the mobilization of SPLA and
SPLM/A in Opposition forces around parts of Malakal
and Leer. We remain very worried about the potential
for a resumption of violence and spill-over into others
parts of the country, as we have seen in the past.

As Council members are already aware, several
efforts were made by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Loj and various regional and
international leaders - including Ethiopian Prime
Minister Hailemariam Desalegn, Kenyan President
Uhuru Kenyatta, the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, the African Union High Representative
for South Sudan, former President Konare', and the
Chairperson of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, former President Mogae - to engage
President Salva Kiir, First Vice-President Machar and
their respective senior military and political advisers
so as to press them to cease hostilities immediately,
restrain their respective forces, and ensure the integrity
of the protection of civilians sites and the safety and
security of United Nations and other personnel.

In addition to the immediate response of the
Security Council to consider the situation in South
Sudan on 10 July, on 11 July the Council of Ministers
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) met in an emergency session in Nairobi and
issued a communique condemning the violence,
stressing accountability for the breakdown of the rule
of law, and demanding a revision of the UNMISS
mandate to establish an intervention brigade and
increase the number of troops from the region to secure
Juba, among other decisions. Following suit yesterday,
the African Union Peace and Security Council also met
in Kigali and endorsed the IGAD communique in full.

Following that, the IGAD Chiefs of Staff met in
Addis Ababa on 12 July and called for the reinforcement
ofUNMISS by regional troops. Of course, we are fully
ready to work with IGAD to refine the modalities of
that concept, the goal - as I understand it - being
to secure Juba and, if possible, its airport through
demilitarization so that the transitional Government of
National Unity can get to work without worrying about
security issues. We are going to work with them, and I
think that the Chiefs of Staff are travelling tomorrow,
before the African Union Summit in Kigali, to refine
the concept.

We can now clearly see the results of the deliberate
attempts of the parties to stall the implementation of
the peace agreement, which we must not forget was
signed almost one year ago, in August 2015. We can
afford less than ever to sit idle as the people of South
Sudan yet again bear the brunt of the intransigence of
their leaders. Yesterday, media outlets reported that
President Salva Kiir had dismissed Deputy Foreign
Minister Cirino Hiteng, allegedly because he was
present at the IGAD ministerial meeting in Nairobi.
Council members will recall that the Deputy Foreign
Minister was an appointee of the former detainees
party to the peace agreement. The unilateral dismissal
is in itself a breach of the peace agreement. If this is a
forewarning of what is yet to come, clearly only a strong
political and coordinated approach can still salvage the
peace process.

I told the Council three days ago, concerted action
by the Security Council is required. As the Secretary-
General himself has stated, the Security Council must
urgently consider the question of an arms embargo.

Clearly, the threat of that has done little to deter the
parties, but I think it has to be as clear as possible.
Likewise, additional targeted sanctions on leaders
and commanders who block the implementation of the
peace agreement must be enacted immediately. The
never-ending cycle of devastating violence in South
Sudan must come to an end now.

In concluding my remarks, let me recall that today's
consultations were meant to be held in the context of
the progress report of the Secretary-General on South
Sudan (S/2016/552) issued in mid-June and the UNMISS
mandate renewal. While we were cautiously optimistic
about the formation of the transitional Government of
National Unity back in April, it is unclear now what
further progress can be made under current conditions.
In this regard, the Secretary-General's recommendation
for a technical roll-over of the UNMISS mandate
remains valid and necessary while we do an assessment
of the requirements to address the situation on the
ground. I would suggest that the technical rollover
could be for one month, so that we would have time to
carry out the assessment, consult with the region and
the African Union and make recommendations to the
Council. In addition, should the Mission need to be
reinforced - and it probably will - including through
additional troops and more robust capabilities, such
as attack helicopters and unmanned aerial vehicles,
to fulfil our mandate to protect civilians, it would be
imperative that such reinforcements be devoted to
implement the same mandate as all other troops and to
answer to the same chain of command.

