Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): South Africa joins
others in congratulating you, Mr. President, and your
country on assuming the presidency of the Council for
this month. We thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing to
the Council earlier today. We welcome the opportunity
to participate and share our views in this important
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

Recent events, in particular the resumption of
negotiations between Israel and Palestine, have been
encouraging. We welcome the efforts of United States
Secretary of State John Kerry in meeting with the
leadership of both countries, and the current diplomatic
efforts in Europe and the Middle East aimed at promoting
peace in the region in general and a lasting solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conundrum in particular. We
hope that all those involved in the negotiations will find
wisdom in the Arab proverb: "Be not so soft as to be
squeezed dry, nor so stiff as to be broken".

We believe that the only way a solution to
that protracted conflict can be found is through a
peaceful and fair negotiation process carried out in an
environment conducive to fruitful deliberations - that
is, an environment free of intimidation, fear, violence
and other obstructionist activities.

We all know that the construction of settlements
by Israel remains the biggest obstacle to progress in
the peace talks. But Israel continues its settlement
activities with impunity. We all know that the continued
settlement construction changes the geographical
make-up of Palestine and could make impossible the
creation of two States, in line with the overwhelming
call for the creation of a sovereign, independent,
democratic, viable and contiguous Palestinian State,
coexisting peacefully alongside Israel, on the basis of
the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

We condemn the settlement construction activities
and call on those with the wherewithal to make them
stop, including the Council, to do the necessary without
delay. We know too well if it were not Israel that was
engaging in those illegal activities, quick condemnation
and threats of the use of force would have ensued.

Recent positive developments have yet to translate
into progress on the ground, especially in the occupied
Palestinian territory. The reality is that the Palestinians
continue to live under an occupation that they have
endured for decades. They face daily hardships
compounded by many checkpoints that restrict their
movement and access. The violence meted out by Israeli
settlers against the Palestinians continues unabated,
and the separation wall continues to be extended in
spite of international condemnation. While we welcome
Israel's decision to free some Palestinian prisoners
as a confidence-building measure and a gesture of its
commitment to the peace talks, at the same time we
condemn the capture and imprisonment of Palestinian
citizens, especially children.

South Africa is also deeply concerned about the
plight of the Palestinians illegally imprisoned in Israeli
jails and continue to live in horrendous conditions. We
once again call on Israel to respect the human rights
of all Palestinian prisoners and to abide by relevant
international human rights and humanitarian law,
including the Fourth Geneva Convention Relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War (1949).

We reiterate our deep concern about the abuse
of human rights of Palestinian children and their
detention. We are all very aware of the long-lasting
adverse effects that this will have on that vulnerable
group and its negative effect on their potential to
becoming responsible and productive adults. Again,we
call on Israel to fulfil its obligation under international
human rights and international law and protect the
rights of children.

South Africa welcomes the reconciliation efforts
among the Palestinians, including agreements reached
between Fatah, Hamas and other parties in Cairo in
2011, as well as the agreement reached in February
2012 in Qatar. Those are most welcome developments.
South Africa congratulated and encouraged all the
parties involved in both these agreements to seek
reconciliation and unity as an important ingredient for
long-lasting and sustainable peace. South Africa will
continue to support all efforts towards democracy,
peace, stability and the advancement of human rights
and human dignity in Palestine.

The development of the Palestinian Economic
Initiative by the United States and the Quartet is
commendable. We hope that it will be able to revive
the economic potential of Palestine and help alleviate
the current financial pressures the country is facing.
We call on the international community, including
the private sector, to lend a hand to this critical
socioeconomic programme. The measures enacted by
the Israeli Government to ease the implementation of
the Initiative, including "approval for the importation
of greater quantities of construction material and
water into Gaza", are welcome. Those measures would
contribute to the revival of the enclave that has suffered
a great deal under the blockade, which continues to
frustrate the lives of the inhabitants of Gaza, and has
contributed directly to the increase in unemployment
and poverty.

Despite those positive developments, we still call
on Israel to end the illegal blockade of Gaza in respect
of international humanitarian law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention and resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 465 (1980), 681 (1990), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003)
and 1860 (2009).

The need to deliberately link development and
peace with security has never been as clear as it is
today. The former Secretary-General Kofi Annan was
right when he stated that
"we will not enjoy development without security,
we will not enjoy security without development,
and we will not enjoy either without respect for
human rights. Unless all those causes are advanced,
none will succeed." (A/59/2005, para. 17)

Finally, we look forward to the International Day
of Solidarity with the Palestinian People to be held on
29 November with the Palestinian Arab Idol winner,
Mohammed Assaf, as the key feature of the celebrations.
We wish the Palestinians all the best in their quest for
self-determination and pledge our support for the noble
cause.

