Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I would like
to begin by reading out the text of a statement which
has been agreed by the Foreign Ministers of China,
France, Germany, Russia, the United Kingdom and the
United States of America, with the support of the High
Representative of the European Union (EU). The
statement reads as follows:

"Today the United Nations Security Council
adopted resolution 1803 (2008), reflecting the
international community's ongoing serious
concerns about the proliferation risks of the
Iranian nuclear programme. This is the third time
that the United Nations Security Council has sent
a strong message of international resolve to Iran
by adopting a sanctions resolution under Article
41 of Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations on Iran's nuclear programme. We deplore
Iran's continued failure to comply with its United
Nations Security Council and IAEA Board
requirements, in particular by expanding its
enrichment-related activities. We note the
progress made in implementing the IAEA-Iran
work plan and the IAEA's serious concerns about
the 'alleged studies', which are critical to an
assessment of a possible military dimension to
Iran's nuclear programme. We call upon Iran to
heed the requirement of the United Nations
Security Council and the IAEA, including the
suspension of its enrichment-related and
reprocessing activities.

"We remain committed to an early
negotiated solution to the Iranian nuclear issue
and reaffirm our commitment to a dual-track
approach. We reconfirm the proposals we
presented to Iran in June 2006 and are prepared to
further develop them. Our proposals will offer
substantial opportunities for political, security
and economic benefits to Iran and to the region.
We urge Iran to take this opportunity to engage
with us all and to find a negotiated way forward.
We reiterate our recognition of the right of Iran to
develop, research, production and use of nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes in conformity with
its NPT obligations. We reconfirm that once the
confidence of the international community in the
exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear
programme is restored it will be treated in the
same manner as that of any non-nuclear-weapon
State party to the NPT. We remain ready to
negotiate future arrangements, modalities and
timing in this respect once the conditions for
negotiations have been established.

"This will require further diplomatic efforts
and innovative approaches. To that end, we have
asked Dr. Javier Solana, the High Representative
of the European Union for Common Foreign and
Security Policy, to meet with Dr. Saeed Jalili,
Secretary of Iran's Supreme National Security
Council, and to address the interests and concerns
of both sides in a manner which can gradually
create the conditions for the opening of
negotiations."

That concludes the statement on behalf of the six
Foreign Ministers.

I should like now to make some remarks in my
national capacity.

First, I welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Iran. Many points he has made in his
statement are open to clarification, argument and
correction, but that would take a long time. Let me
confine myself to the following points.

The British Government welcomes the very broad
support for this Security Council resolution. Its
adoption sends a clear message to the Government and
the people of Iran. It underlines yet again that the
international community is profoundly concerned that
Iran might be intending to use its nuclear programme
for military purposes. The United Kingdom does not
have confidence that Iran's programme is for
exclusively peaceful purposes. On the contrary, to us
their nuclear programme only makes sense as part of
plan to develop, at the least, a nuclear weapons
capability.

This resolution is a necessary response to Iran's
continued failure to comply with the requirements of
the IAEA Board and the Security Council that, while
we try to build confidence in Iran's nuclear intentions,
Iran has to suspend all enrichment-related and
reprocessing activity and work on all heavy-water-
related projects; has to resolve all outstanding
questions; and has to implement and ratify the
Additional Protocol.

The progress that Iran has made with the IAEA
addresses only one of those issues, and then only
partially. Iran has refused to answer the most difficult
questions about its past programme or to meet IAEA
requests to interview named Iranian officials. And, as
the IAEA reports, far from suspending its enrichment
activities, Iran has intensified its efforts, including by
trying to develop a new generation of centrifuges.
Overall, Iran has clearly failed to abide by its legal
obligations under successive Security Council
resolutions.

The political statement agreed by the Foreign
Ministers of the European Three (E3) plus Three, with
the support of the EU High Representative, makes
clear that we remain committed to a negotiated
solution on the basis of the far-reaching proposals that
the six countries agreed in Vienna in June 2006 and
which, since that time, we have consistently urged Iran
to accept.

Our offer would give Iran everything it needs to
develop a modern civil nuclear power programme,
including legally guaranteed supplies of nuclear fuel.
The offer provides Iran with a basis for a transformed
relationship with all members of the international
community, including with the United States. It is a
matter of great regret that for the past 20 months Iran
has ignored our offer.

Iran's leaders should listen to what the
international community is saying rather than
misleading their people by misrepresenting our actions
and misrepresenting the reports of the IAEA on their
nuclear programme. I commend the efforts of the
Director General and the officials of the IAEA, but
Iran's failure to do what is required of them, as clearly
stated by the IAEA, left us no option but to seek
further measures in the Security Council.

These further measures today strengthen the
restrictions on individuals and entities closely
associated with Iran's proliferation-sensitive nuclear
activities and with its ballistic missile programme.
They increase vigilance over the activities of Iranian
banks, particularly Banks Melli and Saderat, which we
believe are engaged in proliferation-sensitive activities;
they introduce a provision for careful scrutiny of new
commitments for export credits and guarantees to Iran;
and they encourage Member States to inspect cargo to
and from Iran where there are grounds to believe that
prohibited items are being transported.
By adopting this resolution, the Security Council
has continued its incremental and proportionate
approach, gradually increasing the pressure on Iran to
address the widely shared concerns about its nuclear
programme. Despite Iran's refusal to engage thus far,
the British Government urges Iran's leaders to take the
opportunity to suspend its enrichment-related and
reprocessing activities and to cooperate fully with the
IAEA, paving the way for the suspension of sanctions
and for the start of negotiations which would bring
far-reaching benefits to the Iranian people and greater
stability to the Middle East. If Iran does not take this
opportunity, then, as the resolution makes clear, the
Security Council is committed to implementing further
additional measures.

With this new resolution, the Security Council is
reaffirming the clear choice confronting Iran's leaders:
to cooperate with the international community and
enjoy the benefits of normal relations with the rest of
the world or to pursue their nuclear programme in
disregard of international concerns and worsen still
further their international isolation. The choice is for
Iran's leaders to make. The British Government hopes
they take the positive path. The Iranian people deserve
no less.

