Mr. Gomersall (United Kingdom): My Government
condemns without reservation all attacks on the personnel
of the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) and
shares in the grief of France at the loss of two of their
valiant peace-keepers. The death of these two French
soldiers last week amounts to deliberate murder. The
parties concerned have a responsibility to ensure that
these kinds of attacks stop, and the perpetrators of these
attacks should be brought to justice.

These attacks underline the dangers which
UNPROFOR and others working on the ground, such as
the aid agencies and the European Community monitoring
mission, face on a daily basis. UNPROFOR works to save
lives in Bosnia, both by securing the delivery of
humanitarian aid and by trying to contain the fighting.

My Government has consistently argued that
UNPROFOR should remain as long as it is able to carry
out its mandate at an acceptable level of risk. If
UN PROFOR were to withdraw, the consequent escalation
of the fighting would result in a humanitarian tragedy and
seriously increase the risk of a wider and more terrible
conflict.

Britain has been working to prevent this, and hopes
that neither side in the conflict wants it either. There has
to be a point at which troop contributors, including
Britain, can no longer reasonably be asked to accept the
sacrifices that their continued presence involves. We have
not yet reached that point, but we do need to address
urgently how the safety of UNPROFOR troops can be
improved and how we can improve their ability to carry
out their tasks. We shall consider seriously any proposals
to these ends. They will need to take into account
UNPROFOR's peace-keeping, not its peace-enforcement
role. We look forward to receiving the Secretary-
General's report on these issues.

 
As in all peace-keeping operations, the only real
guarantee of UNPROFOR's safety lies with the parties
themselves. They must be brought to realize that war is no
solution. Neither side can win a military conflict. In the
end, they will have to return to the negotiating table.
Meanwhile, it will again be the ordinary people of Bosnia
who will suffer needlessly.

It is vital that both sides agree to extend the cessation-
of-hostilities agreement and cooperate with UNPROFOR in
implementing it fully. The alternative is renewed bloodshed,
in which UNPROFOR's continued presence will be called
into question. In that case, leaders on both sides would bear
a very heavy burden of responsibility.

My Government, however, recognizes the Bosnian
Government's concerns about freezing the existing
confrontation lines. We agree that a cease-fire can only be,
and must be, the first step towards a negotiated settlement.
The Contact Group plan remains the starting point for
further negotiations. We deplore the Bosnian Serbs'
stubborn refusal to accept this and urge them to reconsider.
We call upon the Council to continue its support for the
Contact Group's efforts to take the political process
forward.

