Mr. El Othmani (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate the President
on his sisterly country's assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of May. I also
wish to thank him for choosing an important subject,
namely, combating terrorism in Africa in the context
of the maintenance of international peace and security,
as the central topic of Togo's presidency. By the
same token, I should like to thank His Excellency the
Secretary-General for his statement and to commend
his ongoing commitment to fostering international
and regional cooperation with a View to averting and
combating security threats.

Our meeting today is being held at a delicate
juncture, as the international community is preoccupied
by the political transformations and security challenges
witnessed by Africa. In addition to the consequences of
those challenges at the local, regional and international
levels, the recent developments and frequent incidents
on that continent indicate that, despite the efforts
made, those threats continue to loom over regional and
international peace and security, leading to the suffering
of millions of innocent civilians. Related alarming
phenomena include the growing interconnection among
terrorist groups, secessionist movements and criminal
networks involved in the trafficking in persons, drugs
and weapons, as well as in piracy and abduction.

That interconnection has enabled terrorist networks
to acquire the financial and technological resources
necessary to bolster their capacities and threaten, in
some cases, the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States, particularly in certain regions that face internal
conflicts and socio-political difficulties. Morocco
is in the forefront of those States that have for years
expressed their deep concern at the terrorist activities
and security threats in certain parts of our continent,
particularly in the Sahel region, West Africa, the
Gulf of Guinea and the Horn of Africa. The Security
Council's response and those of regional organizations
have had encouraging outcomes, and collective efforts
have led to the dismantling ofa number of criminal and
terrorist networks.

Yet, those efforts remain insufficient and must
be harmonized and coordinated, as those networks
continue to expand to additional areas of our continent,
adopting new methods and sophisticated techniques,
particularly following the proliferation of weapons by
the defunct Al-Qadhafi regime.

The ceaseless efforts deployed by the United Nations
have been positive insofar as they have supported the
African States in their combat against terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations, in addition to promoting
peace and security on the continent and strengthening
the capacities ofStates in the field oftechnical assistance
so as to face this looming threat. We look forward to
the adoption of the United Nations Integrated Strategy
on the Sahel and express our readiness to contribute
effectively to its implementation and success.

Morocco has taken a firm stance against terrorism.
It has adopted a national strategy in that respect that
converges with the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy. The Kingdom's strategy reflects
its commitment to the values of coexistence, human
rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule of law.

I should like to take this opportunity to reiterate
once again Morocco's categorical rejection of any
connection between organized crime or terrorism with
any religion, faith or ethnic group. Those phenomena
by nature constitute a rejection of all religious,
ethical and human values. We reiterate our support
for all of the initiatives designed to foster dialogue
and understanding among civilizations and cultures,
respecting the characteristics of each one, as a positive
response to attempts to fuel radicalization, hatred,
exclusion and racism.

In that connection, we believe that the considerable
success of the Moroccan counter-terrorism strategy is
the result of its multidimensional and comprehensive
approach, which includes preventive law-enforcement
measures as well as its national initiatives that address
the socioeconomic and cultural imbalances at the root
of violent and extremist ideologies. The Kingdom will
continue with that series of democratic reforms, with
a focus on development in all its forms as a protection
against the increase in violent ideologies and terrorism.

Morocco joined the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, whose five task forces
have adopted multilateral mechanisms for joint action.
In that respect, we appreciate the adoption of the Rabat
Declaration on best practices in the field of criminal
justice, which will promote the establishment of
criminal justice mechanisms based on the rule of law
and guarantee cooperation with regard to surrendering
criminals and extending mutual legal assistance.
Morocco, as usual, stands ready to share its national
expertise and experience with African States in the
framework of a positive partnership aimed at facing the
prevailing security threats.

Along with our commitment to enhancing security
in Africa, for decades we have engaged in cooperation
efforts with other African States to counter terrorism
and transnational organized crime. We have taken many
initiatives aimed at paving the way for cooperation
and dialogue, including the Ministerial Conference
of African-Atlantic States and the convening of the
Conference of the Ministers of Justice of Francophone
African Countries to combat terrorism.

At the humanitarian level, the initiatives taken
by His Majesty King Mohammed VI of Morocco
to increase the level of humanitarian assistance for
refugees in the Sahelo-Sahara region, Malian refugees
in neighbouring States and internally displaced
persons in Mali are grounded in ethical values and are
humanitarian endeavours aimed at alleviating their
suffering and preventing their children from falling
victim to criminality and terrorism.

Morocco has strengthened its cooperation with the
Sahelo-Sahara States as well as of those the Maghreb
Union, in the context of a decisive and participatory
approach that is based on respect for the sovereignty
of States and their territorial integrity, the principle
of solidarity, the value of positive dialogue and the
principle of the responsibility of all States.

In that connection, in cooperation with the
United Nations, in March 2013 Morocco convened
an international conference that brought together the
Maghreb and Sahel States on cooperation in the field
of border monitoring. Participants emphasized the
need for active cooperation among United Nations,
regional and subregional organizations on information
exchange, expertise, best practices and training.

As Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism
(CTC), Morocco has conscientiously fostered the efforts
of United Nations organs to counter terrorism, with a
View to establishing coordinated and complementary
regional and national counter-terrorism strategies. In
that connection, we are extending further technical
assistance to African States in legal affairs, capacity-
building and information exchange. In the views of
experts, all these areas represent basic priorities in the
fight against the scourge.

From the African perspective, we express our
gratitude to the CTC members for adopting our proposal
to organize a meeting in the final quarter of the year on
strengthening the counter-terrorism capacities of the
Sahel States. In implementation of its full obligation to
back international counter-terrorism efforts, Morocco
will spare no effort in building a genuine partnership
among African States with a view to fostering regional
cooperation in complement to international efforts to
combat security threats.

We are of the view that adopting appropriate
integrated national strategies and guaranteeing their
effectiveness will require seamless and regular regional
and subregional cooperation in order to pave the way for
a cooperative framework aimed at protecting peoples
and homelands against security threats, particularly
terrorism.

