Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to begin by thanking Mr. Nicholas Haysom,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Mr. Yuri Fedotov, the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for
their presentations. I also thank the Ambassador Tanin
of Afghanistan for the statement he has just made, and
associate myself in advance with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

As the Secretary-General's report (S/2014/876)
emphasizes, Afghanistan has entered a decisive phase
in its history. After a period ofintense electoral activity,
we can only applaud the success of the first democratic
transition in the country's history. I too hope that
President Ghani and Chief Executive Officer Abdullah
can quickly come to an agreement on forming a National
Unity Government. The establishment of a new team
will be crucial to achieving the reforms the country
needs, and we took note of the priorities Ambassador
Tanin just described - combating corruption, good
governance and the promotion of economic and
financial stability, in particular. This is encouraging,
and those intentions must now be translated into reality
on the ground. In that regard, we would welcome the
involvement of UNAMA, which gave the Afghan
authorities exemplary support in order to enable it to
bring the electoral process to a definitive conclusion.

On the political front, we would like to welcome the
very encouraging recent developments. However, that
should not let us forget that many challenges remain
during a transition period marked by changes in the
international community's support for Afghanistan. The
main challenge is, of course, security. The insurgents
are trying to make Afghans and their partners doubt the
progress that has been achieved. The terrible attacks
of the past few weeks are a disgusting attempt to
destabilize the process under way. Like some previous
speakers, I have in mind in particular the 11 December
attack on the French cultural centre in Kabul, which
targeted a place of culture and creativity well known
to and much appreciated by Afghansm. But we believe
that Afghanistan is on the right track and that nothing
can undermine the positive developments the country
has seen. We will not renounce the values for which we
fought alongside the Afghans for more than 10 years,
and I am thinking in particular of the place and rights
of women in Afghan society, as the representatives of
Luxembourg and Jordan just emphasized.

In the context of security, featuring an insurgency
that remains resilient, it is vital that regional partners
continue to support Afghanistan. In that regard,
we welcomed the recent Heart of Asia Ministerial
Conference in the framework of the IstanbulProcess, held
in Beijing in October, as a springboard for encouraging
further regional cooperation on Afghanistan. The
London Conference in early December also sent a very
positive signal by enabling the new National Unity
Government to present its economic programme and
its reform plans, to which the international community
has decided to give firm support. The support of the
Alliance partners is evolving along with Afghanistan.
Starting in 2015, NATO's advisory, training and
assistance Resolute Support Mission that the Security
Council recently welcomed in resolution 2189 (2014),
will be present in order to continue to train Afghan
forces.

I would like to conclude by raising a key challenge,
namely, the fight against drug trafficking. We are
particularly concerned by the continuing rise in opium
production, as confirmed by the latest report of the
Secretary-General and highlighted earlier by Mr. Yuri
Fedotov in his briefing. This trend must be reversed.
We encourage the Afghan authorities to implement all
the means necessary to combat drug production and
trafficking, which represents a major threat to stability
in Afghanistan, public health and development. We
must not allow an illegal economy to prosper at the
expense of the country's development.

We believe that UNAMA should play a major role in
leading and coordinating the dialogue with the Afghan
authorities on this topic of importance to the country's
future. We are convinced that all United Nations entities
involved in Afghanistan must consider the fight against
drugs in designing and conducting their respective
actions to ensure the necessary synergy in fighting that
scourge in all its aspects. We particularly commend the
actions of UNODC in that context.

Finally, I likewise wish to pay tribute to Mr. Kubis
for his work and commitment and to all UNAMA
personnel working in what are well recognized as
difficult conditions. The United Nations and UNAMA
will play a major role in Afghanistan in the coming
years on the front line of the commitment of the
international community. Mr. Haysom can be assured
of our continuing full support in his future work.

