Mr. Leffler: Following the terrible events that
took place in Paris last Friday and the carnage in
Beirut just the day before, let me start my intervention
by presenting our condolences to the Governments
and peoples of France and Lebanon. Those attacks,
as well as those on the Russian airliner, in Iraq and
elsewhere where terrorists strike, are an attack on us
all. They are an affront to humankind and a challenge
to the fundamental values that we have committed
collectively to defend.

I have the honour to speak in this debate on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.

The candidate countries the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and
Albania, the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

I would like to start by thanking the presidency
for having convened this timely and pertinent
debate. I would also like to express our appreciation
to the Secretary-General, Ambassador Skoog and
Ms. Bouchamaoui for their opening remarks.

As the Council has stated in the past, security
and development are closely interlinked and mutually
reinforcing. This is recognized very clearly in the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1). We know that poverty,
inequality, weak and ineffective institutions as well
as the adverse effects of climate change are drivers of
conflict. Equally, for sustainable development to be
possible, we need freedom from violence and conflict.
And neither lasting peace nor sustainable development
can be fully realized without respect for human rights
and the rule of law.

As we tackle these global challenges, the role of
security and development actors can and should be
complementary. We welcome the strong message of
the United Nations peace operations and peacebuilding
reviews that sustaining peace should be a unifying
thread running through the work of the United Nations.

Building peace, preventing conflict and
strengthening international security are core objectives
of the European Union, and we remain committed
to taking a comprehensive approach to security and
development issues.

We are pleased to see that the Council is
increasingly looking beyond the immediate symptoms
of existing crises and adopting a more forward-looking
approach. We all need to invest more in prevention. It is
the EU's conviction that sustainable development is an
important preventive element.

The Security Council has intensified its preventive
work and its focus on post-conflict peacebuilding so
as to prevent relapses into violence. The EU believes
that we should continue in that direction through, for
instance, horizon-scanning briefings, ensuring that
longer-term peacebuilding is considered in mission
mandates, and by strengthening and reforming the
advisory role of the Peacebuilding Commission.

For the same reasons, we are pleased that
counterterrorism and fighting illicit flows, drug
trafficking, transnational organized crime and small-
arms proliferation have long been on the Council's
agenda. The Council must now step up its interaction
with other parts of the United Nations system to
maximize coherence in these areas.

The EU has always insisted on the need to prevent
or tackle conflicts and crises comprehensively. In our
interconnected world, our own security relies on human
security around the globe. That includes investing in
human rights, but also mainstreaming that priority
by embracing human rights-based approaches. In that
context, women's empowerment is essential. Women
are crucial agents of conflict prevention, and realizing
gender equality will make a crucial contribution to
sustainable development.

The United Nations is currently engaged in a period
of strategic reflection at several levels. The result must
be comprehensive and ambitious. We should develop
synergies between the 2030 Agenda and the three peace
and security reviews.

Let me finally mention a few recent initiatives that
we have been working on in the European Union. First,
we are refining the sharing of conflict-analyses with
partners, which should lead to coherent approaches to
State-building and peacebuilding. Secondly, we have set
up an EU trust fund for stability and for addressing the
root causes ofirregular migration and displaced persons
in Africa, which will address the causes and effects of
conflict and instability that lead to displacement and
migration. Thirdly, we are developing the EU-wide
strategic framework for supporting security-sector
reform.

Mr. Wilson took the Chair.

The primary responsibility for conflict prevention
and sustainable development lies with Member
States. But the international community has a role
to play, including the Council within its mandate. A
clear message in the 2030 Agenda is the need for a
comprehensive and integrated approach to tackling
global challenges. We must bridge peace, development
and security and work together to achieve a safer, more
prosperous and more sustainable world.

