Mr. McNee (Canada): Today violence rages in
the Middle East once again. It is civilians on all sides
who pay the heaviest price. We extend our deep
condolences to the families of all the victims affected
by this crisis. Canadians have been directly affected by
this crisis. Recently, eight Canadians visiting relatives
were killed in southern Lebanon. As we speak, Canada
is working hard to rescue its nationals and others who
wish to leave Lebanon.

The dynamics in the region must change.
Sovereign, democratic countries like Lebanon cannot
be held hostage by terrorists. As we have all seen to
our dismay, the independent acts of terrorist
organizations, encouraged by countries supporting
them, can quickly embroil neighbouring countries in
hostilities. This serves no one's interests.

The crisis in Lebanon has escalated at an
alarming pace, and the greatest toll has been exacted
upon innocent civilians in Lebanon and Israel.
Hizbollah violated Israel's sovereignty, unprovoked.
Israel's response to the abduction and killing of its
soldiers was an exercise of its right to self-defence.
The G-8 reinforced this principle in its 16 July Saint
Petersburg Declaration - to which Canada adheres
strongly - calling upon Israel to exercise utmost
restraint and seek to avoid casualties among innocent
civilians and damage to civilian infrastructure, and to
refrain from acts that would destabilize the
Government of Lebanon.

It is now clear that Hizbollah's objectives went
far beyond the abduction of Israeli soldiers. It is also
obvious that the abduction was only the prelude to a
major offensive intended to inflict as much pain and
suffering as possible, which is evident in Hizbollah's
indiscriminate launching of hundreds of rockets into
urban areas deep in Israel with devastating
consequences, including the deaths of innocents. It was
also intended to sabotage the internal Lebanese
democratic political dialogue, whose objectives include
fulfilling resolution 1559 (2004). And finally, it was
intended to serve the interests of Hizbollah's backers in
Damascus and Tehran.

This body passed resolution 1559 (2004) in an
earnest effort to disarm the terrorist organization
Hizbollah. It is a tragedy for Lebanon that since that
time Hizbollah has been allowed to operate with
impunity in southern Lebanon. The heaviest costs in
this regard continue to be borne by the Lebanese
people. Canada is already contributing to international
humanitarian efforts to assist them.

Although the Lebanese Government has been
faced with a formidable challenge, Syria and Iran -
countries that aid and abet Hizbollah with financial and
military support - must be held accountable. It is also
essential that any country in the area that has influence
on this terrorist organization should encourage an end
to violence and the recognition of Israel's right to exist.

The key to ending this senseless violence lies
with Hizbollah. It must stop the rocket attacks. It must
release the abducted soldiers.

Canada also reaffirms the G-8's call for the
Security Council to examine without delay the
possibility of deploying an international
security/monitoring presence in Lebanon. This should
be accompanied by the development of a political
framework to create conditions for stability and a
lasting peace. Canada also strongly endorses the G-8's
appeal to the Council to develop a plan for the full
implementation of resolution 1559 (2004). This body
must play a role in the implementation of that
resolution, and we welcome the Secretary-General's
efforts in this regard.

The situation in Gaza is also deeply troubling.
Canada is committed to supporting President Abbas
and continues to call on the Palestinian Authority to
take immediate steps to bring peace and stability to its
people. The resolution to this crisis begins with ceasing
the launching of Qassam rockets into Israeli towns and
immediately and unconditionally returning the young
Israeli corporal to his family.

(spoke in French)

Canada urges Israel to exercise the utmost
restraint in its operations in Gaza and to respect
international humanitarian law, including with regard
to the free flow of basic necessities of life. Civilian
infrastructure in the Gaza Strip has already been
largely devastated, and the civilian victims are more
numerous every day. Ultimately, a negotiated
settlement is the only road forward.

Canada endorses the Quartet's conditions for the
Palestinian Authority - that is, to recognize Israel's
fundamental right to exist, to accept previously signed
agreements, and, finally, to renounce violence. An end
to violence includes recognizing Israel as a legitimate
neighbour and its right to lasting security. It also
includes recognizing the right of Palestinians to their
own State, independent, viable and capable of
achieving the aspirations of their people.

It is the responsibility of all parties to work for
the cessation of violence. Only then can the
international community move towards repairing the
terrible damage that has been done over the past week
and generate a process aimed at a lasting solution to
this conflict that has gone on for too long. Not only the
Security Council, but also all of the United Nations and
its Member States must play a more significant role in
the Middle East if we are to achieve long-term security
and stability in the region.

