Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank the
Malaysian delegation, through you, Sir, for the initiative
in convening this open debate and for the concept
note (S/2016/662, annex) circulated to inspire our
interventions. We also thank the Secretary-General,
Ms. Zerrougui and Mr. Lake for their briefings. We
also thank the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for its work on the report of the
Secretary-General and its annexes (S/2016/360).

Argentina firmly supports the work of the Security
Council in preventing and putting an end to the gross
violations of children's human rights in situations
of armed conflict. That commitment has been
demonstrated repeatedly, as we were one of the first
States to ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the Involvement of
Children in Armed Conflict, which entered into force
in 2002, and supported the adoption of resolution 1261
(1999) and subsequent resolutions.

Likewise, we highlight the progress made in
prevention and in the protection of the rights of
children through coordinated action among the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and
the tasks carried out by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in collaboration with UNICEF
and other United Nations organs. We firmly support the
need to agree on and implement measures to increase
pressure on State and non-State actors who persist in
committing violations and to pursue relationships with
non-State actors with a view to releasing, rehabilitating
and reintegrating the children associated with such
groups. On that last point, we welcome the progress
made during the past year in the framework of the
peace accords in Colombia. Furthermore, we welcome
the commitments made by various Governments in the
framework of the Children, Not Soldiers campaign and
call for the full implementation of the action plans in
accordance with those commitments.

The protection of children under a human rights
approach must remain our priority and should therefore
be taken into account when defining the mandates of
peacekeeping operations and special political missions,
as well as in the Security Council's peacebuilding
actions and the efforts to combat violent extremism.
In that connection, it is essential to maintain and
strengthen the capacity of peacekeeping operations to
document and verify violations of the rights of children.

With respect to the ongoing occurrence of
cases of sexual exploitation and abuse of children in
peacekeeping missions, we cannot fail to note that
the situation is serious and represents the ultimate
challenge for the future of the missions and the image
of the United Nations. Argentina continues to strongly
support the Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy
in that regard and the various measures proposed in
the respective reports and those contained in resolution
2272 (2016), emphasizing the central importance of
prevention and protection efforts concerning victims.

We express our concern about and strongly
condemn the increasing use of schools for military
purposes and the increase in attacks on schools and
hospitals. We believe that the issue deserves particular
attention on the part of the international community in
that it radically affects the right to education and health
of thousands of children worldwide.

In that connection, we highlight the adoption of
resolution 2286 (2016) as it concerns the protection of
hospitals from armed attacks. We reiterate our strong
support for the Safe Schools Declaration adopted in Oslo
in May 2015 and sponsored by Argentina and Norway.
It commits States to implementing the Guidelines for
Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use
during Armed Conflict, thereby ensuring the right to
education and the protection of children and young
people in conflict situations. We urgently call upon
United Nations Member States, especially the members
of the Security Council, to endorse the Declaration, in
view of the celebration in Buenos Aires next March of
the second International Conference on Safe Schools.

In conclusion, we reiterate once again the need
to adopt an unequivocal approach that considers
children associated with armed groups, including
those associated with violent extremist groups, and
children displaced by armed conflict as victims and
not as perpetrators or security threats, since their
recruitment, kidnapping, displacement and other
causes of their alleged involvement in armed conflict
or violent extremism is of a forced manner. States must
endeavour to ensure the full protection of their human
rights and seek alternatives to detention to ensure their
effective rehabilitation and reintegration into society,
based on the principles of international humanitarian
law, international human rights law and international
refugee law.

