The President: I shall now make a few remarks
in my capacity as representative of Pakistan.

Pakistan joins previous speakers in welcoming
His Excellency the Prime Minister of Spain to the
Security Council and in thanking him for his important
address to the Council. We congratulate Spain on
assuming the chairmanship of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC).
For more than 20 years, Pakistan, like Spain, has
been one of the principal victims of terrorism. We
condemn terrorism in all its forms, including State
terrorism. Since 11 September 2001, Pakistan has been
at the forefront of the campaign against terrorism, and
we have made many sacrifices in that struggle. We
believe that the Security Council has a central role in
the campaign against terrorism, and we support the
strengthening of that role. We have listened to the
Prime Minister's recommendations, which all deserve
careful consideration. We believe, nevertheless, that the
principal role of the CTC is to assist States to
effectively counter terrorism.

We believe that there are four other
considerations that need to be taken into account in the
campaign against terrorism. First, we need to address
the underlying causes of terrorism in order to prevent
the emergence of terrorists. We believe that political
and economic justice is essential for that. Secondly, as
Secretary-General Kofi Annan has said, we must
ensure that counter-terrorism measures do not mutate
into measures used to cloak or justify violations of
human rights. Thirdly, the right to self-determination,
where recognized by the international community,
cannot be delegitimized through association with
terrorism. To do so would be to sanction the
strangulation of the very freedoms that we seek to
defend against terrorism. Fourthly, tolerance and
mutual understanding are essential to defeat the hate
and anger on which terrorism thrives. Pakistan has
proposed the adoption of a declaration on mutual
tolerance and understanding among religions and
civilizations, which we hope the General Assembly
will soon adopt.

In September 2001, Secretary-General Kofi
Annan stated:

"[If] the world can show that it will carry
on, that it will persevere in creating a stronger,
more just, more benevolent and more genuine
international community across all lines of
religion and race, then terrorism will have failed."
(The New York Times, 2] September 200], p. A-35)

Spain is well qualified to guide such an effort. It
was, after all, in the land of Spain where three great
religions - Christianity, Islam and Judaism - came
together to create the flowering of freedom and
tolerance in a great civilization to which we must
continue to aspire even today.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I shall suspend the meeting for five minutes to
escort the Prime Minister of Spain from the Council
Chamber. On behalf of the Council, I thank him for
being with us this afternoon.

The meeting was suspended at 6.10 p.m. and
resumed at 6.15pm.

The President: There are no further speakers on
my list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.15pm.

