Mr. Gold (Israel): I would like to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of your important post. Let me also
commend your predecessor on the outstanding manner in
which he conducted his duties previously.

The State of Israel has a deep and historical interest in
the growth, integrity and respect of international
humanitarian law in general and the Geneva Conventions,
in particular. As a nation that lost one third of its
population in the nazi occupation of Europe in the most
heinous case of genocide in human history, Israel's own
birthright in engraved with a particular responsibility to
prevent this crime from occurring again against the Jewish
people, and a universalist commitment to combat genocide,
crimes against humanities and war crimes wherever they
may occur.

In this context, Israel is concerned with what is
transpiring today regarding those international instruments
designed to protect civilians in armed conflict, including the
Geneva Conventions. The world community is facing at
least 20 ongoing armed conflicts across the globe that have
led to acute starvation, ethnic cleaning and the physical
eradication of entire communities. A basic paradox
confronts the international community in this regard, for
while the Geneva Conventions in particular have received
nearly universal support by the accession of 188 countries,
it remains a challenge to ensure that the provisions
regarding civilians in armed conflict are upheld on the
ground and accorded the respect they deserve. That
respect can be widened and advanced if our discourse on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict reflects
historical truths and not politicized distortions.
For the facts in the case of Israel and the West Bank
are that Israeli forces entered these territories during the
1967 Six Day War only after neighbouring States massed
their armies along its borders and Israeli cities came
under fire from artillery positions in Samaria and in the
environs of Jerusalem. History is important, for we are
finding the international community is being forced to
deal almost exclusively with the results of a war of self-
defence from 30 years ago, while ignoring many times
wars of clear-cut aggression. The best proof of this trend
was the decision to convene the High Contracting Parties
to the Fourth Geneva Convention with respect to the West
Bank and Gaza and not with respect to any single conflict
since 1949. Regardless of these circumstances, Israel has
been ready to negotiate a peaceful settlement of the Arab-
Israel conflict through Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), which were passed in this
Chamber in 1967 and 1973, respectively.

In signing the Oslo accords in September 1993,
Israel demonstrated that while it is determined to achieve
secure and recognized borders as a result of final status
talks, it is also determined not to rule over another
people. Today, in fact, more than 97 per cent of the
Palestinians in the West Bank are not under Israeli
occupation, but rather under the administration of the
Palestinian Authority. The Oslo accords are a testament
to the desire of the people of Israel to take into account
the needs of civilians in armed conflict even before that
conflict is fully resolved. Now it is the hope of Israel to
complete the permanent status negotiations with respect
to these territories. Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) are the only agreed basis for
resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

This process has not been without risks for, while
implementing its agreements with the PLO, Israeli
civilians have been directly targeted by terrorist
organizations that have operated out of Palestinian-
controlled areas. It is our hope and expectation that, with
the parties re-engaged in the peace process after the
signing of the Sharm El Sheikh Accord, the Palestinian
Authority will finally dismantle the operational
infrastructure of these terrorist organizations and prevent
attacks against Israeli civilians.

 

In war civilians are in some cases the mistaken
casualties because of their proximity to a theatre of
operations. In terrorist attacks civilians are the intended
target. In war military planners seek to degrade the military
capacity of their adversary by striking other military
formations, airfields or command and control systems. In
terrorist attacks marketplaces, city bus lines or apartment
buildings are deliberately targeted. The most direct means
for protecting civilians in armed conflict is by combatting
the entire phenomenon of terrorism and rejecting any
political excuses intended to provide it with support.

The concern of the international community with the
protection of civilians in armed conflict should be
supported. The protection of civilians goes to the heart of
the common values that underpin the United Nations as a
whole. Through determined action, and fair as well as
balanced implementation of international conventions and
instruments, the Member States of the United Nations can
assure that the protection of civilians in the twenty-first
century can be fundamentally different than the
unprecedented atrocities we faced in this century that is
about to come to a close.

