The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo), took a seat
at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reiterates its grave
concern at the continued violence and instability
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and at
reports of threats to the peace and transition
process. It condemns in the strongest terms any
involvement by outside forces in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

"The Security Council urges all Congolese
parties to remain fully committed to the peace
process of the Global and All-Inclusive
Agreement and to respect the Government of
National Unity and Transition as the sole
legitimate governing authority in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It warns all parties
against any attempt to seize power by force. It
urges all parties to refrain from statements or

actions which might inflame the situation,
including by supporting armed elements.
"The Security Council warns all parties
against any attempt at engaging in belligerent
actions or violations of the embargo imposed by
resolution 1493 (2003) in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It invites the
Secretary-General to further determine the need
for a possible rapid-reaction capability for the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).

"The Security Council calls on the
Government of National Unity and Transition to
begin work immediately with the International
Committee in Support of the Transition and with
MONUC to establish mechanisms for closer
coordination in order to expedite security sector
reform, the adoption of essential legislation and
electoral preparations.

"The Security Council urges the
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda to respond without further
delay to MONUC'S efforts taken under its current
mandate to establish, as soon as possible, a joint
verification mechanism for their common
security, including verification of cross-border
movements.

"The Security Council strongly encourages
the heads of State of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi to work
together to reduce tensions and restore
confidence in the region, in accordance with the
commitments made in the Declaration on Good-
Neighbourly Relations of 25 September 2003,
including by holding meetings at the earliest
possible opportunity.

"The Security Council urges Rwanda not to
provide any practical or political support to
armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in particular those led by Mr. Laurent
Nkunda or Mr. Jules Mutebusi. It further urges
Rwanda to use its influence positively to de-
escalate the current crisis and support the
restoration of stability.

"The Security Council reminds Uganda not
to interfere in the Democratic Republic of the

Congo, including through military support for
armed groups.

"The Security Council calls on Burundi to
prevent any support from its territory to armed
groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
the

It encourages the Transitional Government to
facilitate humanitarian assistance for Congolese
refugees now in Burundi, and the international
community to provide its full assistance.

"The Security Council underlines that any
attempt to disrupt the peace and transition
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
including through support for armed groups, will
not be tolerated.

"The Security Council condemns the deaths
of innocent civilians and human rights abuses in
the East of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and calls for such incidents to be fully
investigated. Those responsible for atrocities and
human rights abuses should be held to account,
and the Government of National Unity and
Transition should take immediate steps, with
support from the international community, to
reverse the current climate of impunity."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2004/21.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 7.45 p.m.

