Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I am
grateful for the convening of today's meeting, which is
timely given the very widespread concerns that my
Government and others have about the future
humanitarian situation in the Sudan following recent
decisions by the Government of that country.

I should like to begin by thanking the Director of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, Mr. Khalikov, for his briefing on the situation
in the Sudan as he sees it now. What he said raises
substantial concerns in our minds about the prospects
for the people in need in the Sudan. It is important to
keep in mind that we are talking about the lives of
millions of vulnerable people who need our support
09-27501
and who have been receiving it in recent years. The
issues concerning the humanitarian situation should not
be mixed up with wider political questions.

The expulsion of the 13 international
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and the
closure of three Sudanese NGOs are completely
unacceptable. We join the Secretary-General and the
leaders of many United Nations Member States in
calling on the Government of the Sudan to reverse its
decision. As the Secretary-General has said, expulsions
will cause irrevocable damage to humanitarian
operations in the Sudan. They also violate both the
humanitarian communiques signed by the Sudan with
the United Nations and the provisions of the recent
Doha agreement, which the Sudan signed only a few
weeks ago.

The representative of the Sudan has said that only
13 out of 118 NGOs have been expelled and claimed
that that represents only 7 per cent. The reality, as I
think we all know, is that some 40 to 50 per cent of
humanitarian capacity in Darfur has now been
removed. All but a few of the 237 international staff
who used to work for the expelled NGOs in Darfur
have left the Sudan. The local staff they have left
behind remain vulnerable to duress and are not in a
position to sustain the relief operations. Supplies of
critical fuel and medicine are not being distributed; nor
are new supplies being ordered, putting at risk the
populations that the NGOs have been supplying for
several years.

In Darfur, within a period of weeks, this will
inevitably mean increased risk of disease and
malnutrition. The lack of water, food and shelter could
increase insecurity, particularly in large, volatile camps
such as the Kalma and Muhajariya camps, in southern
Darfur. We cannot rule out the possibility of this
leading to civil disturbances and mass movements of
internally displaced people.

These decisions have consequences beyond
Darfur. These could include the displacement of
internally displaced people in the Sudan across the
border into Chad. The decision to expel these NGOs
has an even bigger impact in the southern regions of
Blue Nile, Southern Kordofan and Abyie, where the 13
NGOs affected provided the great bulk of humanitarian
assistance.

The United Kingdom is the second-largest
bilateral donor to the Sudan. We have pledged

£36 million to the Common Humanitarian Fund for this
year. It is our single largest humanitarian effort
anywhere in the world. We remain committed to
helping the people of the Sudan. But the actions of the
Government of the Sudan have made it harder for us to
do so in conformity with internationally accepted
principles.

We look forward to receiving the assessment
report being prepared by the United Nations and
officials of the Government of the Sudan on the impact
of the expulsions on the delivery of humanitarian
assistance in the Sudan. The Security Council will need
to return to this issue when the report is available.

One thing is certain: the United Kingdom will
hold the Government of the Sudan responsible for the
suffering that its decision causes. The people of Darfur
have suffered enough from five years of war. It is
inexplicable why their Government would want to add
unnecessarily to their misery. We stand ready to work
with all concerned to find ways to ensure that
vulnerable people in Darfur and other parts of the
Sudan continue to receive the humanitarian assistance
they desperately need.

