Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU)
and its member States. The candidate countries Croatia,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro and Iceland, the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as the Republic of Moldova, align themselves
with this statement.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General, the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Assistant-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and the
Director of International Law and Cooperation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross for their
introductory statements.

We align ourselves with the following quote from
the recent Fourth Committee statement on
peacekeeping made by Cote d'Ivoire, a country whose
citizens were under siege earlier this year and where
peacekeepers implemented their mandate to protect
them with resolve and with results. In his statement,
the representative of Cote d'Ivoire said:

(spoke in French)

"Today, the protection of civilians in armed
conflict undeniably lies at the very heart of
peacekeeping operations and requires the
adoption of concrete effective measures to
properly fulfil that mandate. The widespread
danger to which the civilian population was
exposed during the post-election crisis in C6te
d'Ivoire emphasizes the relevance of that new
mandate and strikingly illustrates the pressing
need for the international community to work

together to adopt urgent and effective measures to
ensure legitimacy and uphold international law."

(spoke in English)

It is estimated that, in contemporary armed
conflicts, 90 per cent of the casualties are civilians and
only 10 per cent are active combatants. In Cote
d'Ivoire, as in Libya and other countries, the Council
saved lives by mandating the protection of civilians. In
doing so, it upheld what the International Court of
Justice has described as one of the intransgressible
principles of customary international law.

Another international court, the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
concluded that the obligation to protect the civilian
population was in force not just during an international
conflict, but also during times of national strife. We
call on all parties to conflict, including non-State
actors, to fully comply with their international legal
obligations to protect civilians and to prevent
violations of human rights and of international
humanitarian law. Compliance with international
humanitarian law also contributes to securing and
sustaining humanitarian space and access. International
law first and foremost tasks sovereign States with the
protection of civilians - it is their job to do it and to
do it well.

At the same time, international law asks the
international community to play a role in ensuring that
the protection of civilians is respected, which for
various reasons is unfortunately not always the case.
For example, in Syria today we see a brazen regime
that is brutally repressing its own people and violating
their human rights. That violence must stop now and
those who wield it in order to hang on to power must
be held accountable. We urge the Council to shoulder
its responsibilities and to take robust action in
situations of human rights violations. As the Secretary-
General has said,

"in many conflicts it is to a large degree the
absence of accountability, and, worse still, the
lack in many instances of any expectation
thereof, that allow violations to thrive."
(5/2010/579, para. 82)

Aside from delivering justice for its own sake,
accountability also acts as a deterrent from future
injustice. Fighting impunity should therefore be an
important priority at both the national and international

11-5866]
levels. When States cannot or will not bring
perpetrators to justice, the international community
should be able to act. In that regard, we continue to call
on those that have yet to accede to the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court to do so, and on all
Member States to extend their full cooperation to the
Court.

Commissions of inquiry can be a helpful tool to
pave the way for national or international prosecution.
That is why, as the Secretary-General recommended
last year, the Security Council should not hesitate to
mandate them. To be sure, accountability is not just
about investigation, prosecution and meaningful
reparations. It is also about assisting countries in
promoting the rule of law, because in the long run that
is the best way to help to promote the protection of
civilians. When the rule of law is strong enough,
civilians do not have to depend on the benevolence of
their rulers or on Security Council resolutions - they
will be protected under the law.

As we have seen over the past decade,
peacekeeping operations can play an important role in
establishing and strengthening a legal and political
framework under which all individuals and institutions,
including the State itself, are accountable. We need to
make that framework also work for vulnerable groups,
including women, children, internally displaced
persons and detainees, thereby ensuring that they have
access to justice.

Aside from the rule of law tasks assigned to most
missions, several are also expressly mandated to
protect civilians. Thanks to the work accomplished by
the United Nations membership in the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and in the
Security Council, we have moved beyond the
conceptual stage. Now it is about further improving the
way that protection-of-civilians mandates are
implemented, building on what certain missions have
already been doing. Missions need clear and practical
guidance.

As the scenario-based training package is rolled
out this fall and as relevant missions translate the
strategic framework operation-specific strategies, we
look forward to seeing concrete results. Let me point to
the landmark resolution 1894 (2009), in the drafting of
which I had the honour to be involved, in my former
capacity. Pursuant to that resolution, all relevant
United Nations operations should develop specific

benchmarks against which to measure and review
progress in the implementation of mandates to protect
civilians. That need is particularly acute in the context
of mission drawdown. To further enhance the
implementation of protection-of-civilians mandates, we
also encourage missions to sharpen and strengthen
their early-warning instruments. All too often, the new
generation of peacekeeping operations still relies on
old-generation tools. The systematic use of modern
monitoring and surveillance technologies could greatly
increase the capacity of the United Nations to prevent
atrocities.

As the United Nations continues to work on
building that capacity, we will keep a close eye on its
efforts, not only because we want United Nations
peacekeeping to become more effective, but also
because we want to draw lessons for our own European
Union missions and to revise guidelines. That will help
us to better protect civilians and to become better
partners in that regard with the United Nations and
other regional organizations, especially the African
Union.

