Mrs. Adeng (South Sudan): We would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your presidency
of the Security Council for the month of May. Our
delegation is pleased and ready to work and cooperate
with you during your tenure.

On behalf of the Government of the Republic
of South Sudan, I would like to thank the Council
for its decision to renew the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA).
We would like to thank the Departments of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations and
the Ethiopian Government for their commitment and
dedication to maintaining peace and stability in Abyei.
Our delegation is encouraged by the open way in which
the text of resolution 2469 (2019) was negotiated. We
would like to thank the penholders for their tireless
efforts and support, and the members of the Council
for the consultations we had with all of them. It is an
experience we should carry forward not only in matters
relating to South Sudan and the Sudan but possibly for
other issues on the Council's agenda.

Even if UNISFA is an interim security force, we are
dealing with an issue that is not interim. It has been on
the horizon for many years, but the many agreements
reached to resolve it have been dishonoured. Upon the
recommendation of the Secretary-General contained in
his report (S/2019/319), the Security Council requested
provision of services from United Nations agency,
programmes and funds for the Ngok Dinka populations
that are returning to their villages, which can only be
delivered through a deputy head of mission, a civilian,
acting as liaison. We therefore welcome the request
in resolution 2469 (2019) for the Secretary-General to
appoint one. However, we regret that the resolution did

not call for the release of the report on the assassination
of the Ngok Dinka Paramount Chief, Bulabek Deng
Kuol, and the peacekeepers.

The joint police experience in Abyei has failed
twice as seen in the double displacement of the Ngok
Dinka communities, in 2008 and 2011. This is what led
the Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council to deploy UNISFA to facilitate the
return and resettlement of the displaced Ngok Dinka
communities into their areas. We believe that paragraph
16 of resolution 2445 (2018), which is the same as
paragraph 17 in the resolution 2469 (2019), answers
the issue of the joint police by permitting UNISFA to
facilitate the coordination of the Juba administration in
Abyei and the Misseriya administration in El-Muglad
so as to deal with security matters that arise in the area
until the final status is determined.

One of the core principles of peacekeeping is
the consent of Member States. We therefore urge the
Council to respect this important rule, especially when
dealing with the deployment of peacekeepers.

The Republic of South Sudan is interested in
finding a clear plan for the determination of the status
of the people of the Dinka Ngok which has already been
spelled out in different agreements and through legal
arbitration. South Sudan therefore urges the Council
to support the parties in achieving the final status of
the region.

In conclusion, once again, we would like to assure
the Council that the Government of the Republic of
South Sudan is committed to the implementation of the
mandate and accordingly to the principle that Abyei
remain our shared sovereign responsibility until a final
status is determined.

The meeting rose at 10.20 am.
