Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Like everyone else, we
deeply regret that today the Council was prevented once
again from establishing a responsibility-attribution
mechanism for the purpose of impartially identifying
the perpetrators and organizers of the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. I am sure we all share a sense ofvery
tragic de'ja vu as we repeat the scenario the Council
faced in November when the renewal of the mandate of
the Joint Investigative Mechanism was blocked.

However - and I apologize to all of those who
are tired of hearing me say this - we will not give
up. Efforts to reach an agreement on a responsibility-
attribution mechanism must continue, and we support
all serious and genuine initiatives that aim to achieve
this objective. We stand ready to help facilitatory efforts
to find a way forward. Accountability for the use of
chemical weapons is crucial. As we have stated before,
the Syrian people suffering from more than seven years
of conflict deserve no less from us. They want peace
and justice, not further military escalation or impunity.

A collective response to the most recent alleged
chemical weapons attack in Douma therefore remains
urgent and critical. The credibility of the Council is at
stake. We must now come together to swiftly condemn
the use of chemical weapons in Syria and express
alarm at the alleged attack in Douma. We must support
an immediate and further investigation through the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
and we must demand full, free and safe access without
any restrictions or impediments to the fact-finding
mission in its immediate deployment to Syria.

Establishing the facts of what has taken place
in Douma remains an essential first step towards
confirming the alleged use of chemical weapons and
finding the truth, and we need independent, impartial
attribution of guilt followed by full accountability.
The Council must remain seized and live up to its
responsibility. That is why we circulated yesterday
a draft text aimed at finding common ground. We
stand ready to work tirelessly to find agreement on
a robust, swift and immediate response. We need to
come back together again after the failure that we have
just witnessed.

