Ms. Zappia (Italy): Italy fully aligns itself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union.

Iwould like to express our gratitude to the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2018/824), and to Special
Representative Yamamoto for his comprehensive
briefing and dedication. I would also like to recognize
Mr. Ramiz Bakhtiar and thank him for sharing his
experience and perspective with us. We, too, will start
following him on Twitter.

Italy supports the ongoing efforts of the
Government of Afghanistan to defeat terrorism and
violent extremism. We remain concerned about the
continuing fragility of the security situation and the
alarming number of civilian casualties. Together with
its allies and partners, Italy has renewed its active
commitment to the NATO-led Resolute Support
Mission as a Framework Nation and will also remain
one of the main contributors to capacity-building
efforts in support of the Afghan National Security and
Defence Forces. Such commitments are underscored
by the shared understanding that the only road to
lasting peace in Afghanistan is through reconciliation
leading to a political settlement. We commend the
Government's courageous initiative in that regard,
which we fully support. However, the fact that the most
recent ceasefire was not reciprocated by the Taliban
demonstrates that the road to peace is still long. Efforts
to bring about peace in Afghanistan will require
patience, determination and unity of purpose.

We underline once again the crucial facilitation
efforts of international and, especially, regional
stakeholders, who can help foster the conditions for an
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned reconciliation process.
The Government's efforts to advance reconciliation
are taking place against a backdrop full of significant
milestones in Afghanistan, with parliamentary elections
on 20 October and presidential elections in 2019. It has
been eight years since the last parliamentary elections.
We cannot overstate the importance that the men and
women of Afghanistan be able to cast their vote in a
credible, transparent and inclusive manner. We hope

that all political forces will remain fully engaged in that
process, and we support the active involvement of civil
society groups in ensuring that the vote is free and fair.

The Government's commitments in the electoral
sphere are part of the broader efforts to effectively
implement much-needed reforms in a wide range of
areas, such as women's empowerment, good governance
and anti-corruption. In pursuing the reform agenda,
the needs and the potential of Afghan youth must be
fully taken into consideration. Evaluating the progress
on that reform agenda will be the cornerstone of the
Geneva Ministerial Conference in November. Italy
looks forward to the conference as an opportunity to
draw a comprehensive assessment of the state of play in
the partnership for peace and prosperity agreed between
the Government of Afghanistan and the international
donors two years ago in Brussels.

In closing, allow me to reiterate Italy's appreciation
for the exceptional work carried out by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, under
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Yamamoto's leadership, in an environment that
continues to pose numerous challenges.

