Mr. Berruga (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to publicly pay tribute to the initiative taken
by Chile in organizing this open debate on a topic as
sensitive and important as this - children and armed
conflict. I would also like to thank, on behalf of my
country, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Otunnu, for his report on children and
armed conflict, prepared in compliance with Council
resolution 1460 (2003), in the negotiations for which
my delegation actively participated.

At the time, Mexico insisted on the importance of
taking advantage of the experience acquired during
peace negotiations and on the inclusion of child
protection advisors in peacekeeping operations and in
the programmes being implemented on demobilization,
disarmament, reintegration and rehabilitation. That is
why we take note, with particular interest, of the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2003/1053). For my country, the protection
and rehabilitation of children must be part of all peace
negotiations and of the ensuing agreements. The
demobilization of child soldiers should also be sought
at every point during the conflict, as well as the
adoption of special measures to prevent the resurgence
of recruitment and any possible reprisals.

Attention must also be focused on special needs,
such as the concrete and specific needs of girls, in
particular young fighters, as well as of disabled
children. The support and commitment of the
international community, in particular of donor
countries, is indispensable in this regard for the success
of our efforts for reintegration.

The complexity of the issue of children and
armed conflicts is a challenge for the United Nations. It
calls for a coordinated and effective response from
several organs and entities in the system, bearing in
mind their respective areas of competence. We must
also create mechanisms for receiving contributions
from civil society, which in many cases is a source of
privileged and direct information on the situation of
children in armed conflicts.

My delegation is prepared to actively participate
in the analysis of the evaluation prepared by the Office
of Internal Oversight Services on the effectiveness of
the United Nations system's response to the problem of
children and armed conflict.

There has undoubtedly been progress in the
attention given by the Security Council to the question
of children in armed conflict. There are, however,
conflicts under consideration by the Council in which
the necessary attention to this issue has been lacking.
In compliance with resolution 1460 (2003), the
Secretary-General could include, in his reports to the
Council on conflict situations, a separate section on the
use of minors, which might perhaps point to those
responsible. Such an analysis should include the
repercussions of the illicit exploitation of natural
resources, trafficking in small arms and light weapons
and the use of anti-personnel landmines.

In Mexico's opinion, the Council has an
important part to play. As determined by resolution
1460 (2003), it can contact the parties to the conflict
when missions are being carried out in the field and
can support the Secretary-General in the dialogues he
may undertake. It can also adopt measures to promote
compliance with international law and international
humanitarian law, in particular relating to children in
armed conflicts, and put an end to impunity for those
who continue to recruit children in violation of these
provisions. At the same time, we must recognize the
progress achieved by parties that have committed to
put an end to the recruitment and the use of children in
conflicts and to take all required measures to alleviate
the suffering of children.

Without a doubt, under the leadership of the
Chilean delegation, we are sure these types of issues
will be undertaken.

