Mr. Tarragfi (Brazil): This debate is taking place
against the backdrop of an increasingly grave situation
in the Middle East. The stalemate in the peace process
keeps the whole region under permanent instability, as
once again proven by the recent tragic developments.

This situation of virtual diplomatic paralysis
fosters the escalation of tension and hostilities and
poses a renewed challenge to the Security Council as
regards the effectiveness of its reaction, its methods of
work and its transparency. It also highlights the need to
urgently address the underlying causes of the conflict.
Unless prompt and concrete measures are adopted, the
Council may be faced with a full-scale crisis beyond its
control.

Brazil has often expressed its condemnation of all
acts of violence, particularly all forms of terrorism. We
have voiced our dismay at the spiral of brutality
predicated on retaliation and revenge that characterizes
daily life in parts of the Middle East. Too many
innocent lives have already been claimed.

In line with that, we call upon the Israeli
Government to cease all military operations in Gaza
without delay, and on the Palestinian side to also halt
attacks against Israel. We call for a full investigation of
the incident that took place yesterday in Beit Hanoun,
which, through the constant use of disproportionate
force, provoked the death of many innocent civilians.

Peace will not be achieved by merely trying to
force a final capitulation. Only the resumption of
negotiations that involve all interested parties can
result in a just and comprehensive agreement capable
of paving the way for a lasting peace to the Arab-
Israeli conflict in all its aspects.

Brazil calls upon the international community to
lend its continued support for prompt humanitarian
action to the Palestinian people, who are now facing
one of the most serious humanitarian crises ever.

Particular attention must be paid to the sensitive
issue of the large number of Palestinian prisoners
detained in Israel. It is critical, as a confidence-
building measure, that the Palestinian political leaders
now detained in Israel should be promptly released.

Furthermore, we call for the return of the
abducted Israeli soldier and the setting up of conditions
for achieving a durable solution of the crisis, including
the end of the launching of Qassam rockets against the
Israeli population.

The creation of a free, democratic and
economically viable Palestinian State, in accordance
with the legitimate aspirations of its people, living side
by side in peace and security with the State of Israel, as
established in Security Council resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), and within
internationally recognized borders, is a sine qua non
condition to ensure lasting peace and stability in the
Middle East. Brazil stresses the need to put in motion a
political process for the development of a strategy and
its pertinent timeline to implement the vision of two
States. Such a strategy should take into account the
Quartet Road Map, the principle of land for peace
derived from the Madrid Conference and the
recommendations of the Beirut Arab League summit.

The international community should seize this
opportunity to put back on track the Middle East peace
process and to end, once and for all, the conflicts that
have caused so much suffering and despair. In this
regard, I wish to reiterate President Lula's proposal
made at the beginning of the current session of the
General Assembly to call a broad conference sponsored

by the United Nations, with the participation of
countries of the region and others that could assist,
through their capacities and successful experience, the
Middle East countries and peoples in finding ways to
live peacefully despite their differences.

