Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): First of all,
I would like to thank you, Sir, for convening today's
briefing with the President of the Central African
Republic. The Senegalese delegation welcomes
Mr. Faustin Archange Touadera, who, during his visit
to the United Nations here in New York, wanted to
take time out to inform us about developments in his
country, in particular the resolute action that he and his
Government are taking to restore lasting security and
peace to the country in an effort to put it squarely on
the path to development.

The Council recalls that it has already had the
honour to welcome the President of the Central African
Republic a few months ago, in June 2016, under
the French presidency of the Council, to address the
very important issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (see S/PV.77ll). I would like to thank
Ambassador Omar Hilale, Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission's Central African Republic configuration.
We also thank Mr. Herve Ladsous and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga.

My delegation would like to pay a well deserved
tribute to the leadership of President Touadera, in
particular for his efforts to engage the various armed
groups in the quest for a political solution to the crisis in
his country, through the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme and its advisory and
monitoring committee, in which we hope all parties
concerned will participate in short order. We believe
that a return to peace and security requires commitment
and perfect synergy among all institutions in the Central
African Republic - including the National Assembly,
guided by the President himself - as they each fully
play their individual roles in the national reconciliation
and reconstruction processes.

In addition to this much-needed domestic
mobilization, active support must be maintained at the
subregional and regional levels through he involvement
of regional organizations in the stabilization process
in the Central African Republic. In that regard, the
Security Council is particularly interested in the
African initiative for a peace and reconciliation
agreement between the Government and armed groups.
It is an initiative put forward by the African Union,
the Economic Community of Central African States
and the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, with the support of other organizations, such
as the European Union and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference. It is because of that interest that the
Security Council held an interactive informal dialogue
early this week with the Special Representative of the
African Union in the Central African Republic, who
provided clear details of the initiative.

Like the majority of Council members, Senegal
expressed its support for the initiative, especially given
that it was presented as a way to shore up support
for the courageous and coherent efforts in the areas
of security, stabilization and national reconciliation.
As the delegation of Senegal understands it, there
must be synergy between regional initiatives and the
policies implemented by the Government of the Central
African Republic, which must all fulfil the hopes of
the Central African people that were expressed at the
Bangui Forum and be supported by the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).

We are mindful that the Government of the country
is expected to rise to the occasion on all fronts because
the challenges are daunting and multifaceted. The
Government must address disarmament, demobilization

and reintegration, security sector reform and national
reconciliation, and provide emergency responses to the
urgent social and humanitarian needs of the population.
That is why we echo the President's call to strengthen
international commitment in order to assist in reviving
the country's economy and meeting the growing needs
of the Central African people, including the large
number of refugees and internally displaced persons.

In that regard, international partners must urgently
honour the commitments they made during the
Brussels Conference on the Central African Republic,
which are estimated at $2.2 billion. It is important to
note that without adequate financial resources, suitable
technical training and coherent logistics, efforts to
sustain peace in the Central African Republic could
be jeopardized. In the same vein, we believe that the
partnership between the Central African Republic and
MINUSCA is essential to the normalization process,
in particular with regard to restoring State authority.
For us, the efforts under way in Bambari show the
relevance of that partnership, especially as regards the
return of administrative and judicial authorities to that
strategic area.

We recall that Senegal is also involved in MINUSCA.
It has deployed a formed police unit, a protection and
security unit, an attack helicopter unit, as well as a
Commanding General to the military component, which
brings the total number of members of the Senegalese
armed forces within MINUSCA to 420. We believe that
the Mutual Engagement Framework that Mr. Ladsous
just described is particularly important in that regard.
I can assure the President that my country will remain
committed to the Government and brotherly people
of the Central African Republic in their tireless quest
for national reconciliation and reconstruction under
his leadership.

My delegation supports the recommendations put
forward on the basis of the MINUSCA review carried
out in October 2016, in particular those noting that the
holding of local elections and ongoing decentralization
will help to strengthen the peacekeeping and
peacebuilding processes.

