The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is a global challenge unprecedented in its scale and impact. A collective response is essential. Ireland is therefore grateful to Germany for bringing this critical issue, with significant consequences for international peace and security, to the Security Council. We also congratulate France, Tunisia and all members of the Council for the unanimous adoption yesterday of resolution 2532 (2020), which firmly endorsed the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and humanitarian pause. Prior to the crisis, the world was already facing record levels of humanitarian need, with conflict as the primary factor. COVID-19 has made the outlook more challenging and complex. In addition to the immediate health crisis, we are also very concerned about the secondary impacts of the crisis, particularly the enormous economic shock that COVID-19 will cause. In conflict situations, humanitarian access is a significant challenge that has been exacerbated by the pandemic. While countries have necessarily introduced movement restrictions to prevent the spread of COVID-19, we should ensure that these do not hamper the ability of humanitarian or health workers to reach those in greatest need. Those most impacted by conflict before a pandemic - internally displaced persons, refugees and migrant workers - are hit hardest during a pandemic. Without access to health and humanitarian workers, pandemics cannot be tackled. We are seeing that, where conflict continues, preventing the spread of a pandemic, mitigating its impact and protecting civilians is more challenging than ever. Disasters and crises are highly unpredictable. If national and local systems are ill-prepared to deal with a crisis, the vulnerability of both individuals and communities becomes even more pronounced. The sudden increase in demand for essential health services brought on by a crisis often overwhelms health systems, rendering them unable to provide necessary services. Triggers such as political instability and poor governance can often cause a breakdown of trust from society towards the powers that govern and, in a worst-case scenario, can lead to outbreaks of violence and, ultimately, a security crisis. Lessons can be learned in relation to this breakdown of trust by looking at the response to the Ebola outbreak in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. Engaging communities, influential figures and civil society was critical to ending the crisis, and showcased the importance of community approaches to crisis, especially in conflict settings. Just as COVID-19 increases the risk of conflict, it also presents major challenges for ongoing peace and crisis management efforts. Ireland strongly supported the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire early in the pandemic. While there had been some initial examples of conflict subsiding, in too many other contexts conflict has continued and even intensified. COVID-19 has slowed the implementation of peace agreements in Yemen and South Sudan. Ireland calls on the Council to step up support to the work of all United Nations Special Representatives and political missions, regional organizations, national actors and local communities to build and maintain peace. COVID-19 requires us to recognize the complex interlinkages where a coherent response built around local ownership will be key. Ireland has strongly supported the work of the United Nations to become more coherent. The guidance of the World Health Organization (WHO) to all countries on the response to the COVID-19 pandemic, its global coordination efforts throughout the crisis and its assistance to the most vulnerable countries have been crucial. Recognizing that and as an expression of Ireland's global responsibilities to tackle COVID-19 in countries with less advanced public health systems, Ireland has increased its contribution to WHO fourfold this year. In considering the link between pandemics and security, we need to also be conscious of how the pandemic is a multiplier of other risks and pressures. Global warming and the destruction of habitats are among the factors that raise the risk of health crises. COVID-19 places additional pressures on already vulnerable regions, such as East Africa, where existing challenges are already exacerbated by the impact of climate change and the locust outbreak. United Nations Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed has highlighted the heightened vulnerability of women and girls to the impacts of the pandemic, but has also pointed out the potential of women and young people to support effective response in their own communities. We have numerous examples of that in the Ebola response in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sierra Leone and Liberia. Supporting local ownership, improving leadership and broadening inclusion in conflict and fragile settings, with special attention to gender and youth, will be critical to an effective COVID-19 response and recovery. Ireland's work on the women and peace and security agenda informs our support for women and the critical role they play in response efforts for pandemics and security. Globally, COVID-19 has seen unprecedented restrictions on human rights and fundamental freedoms in order to save lives. However, the implementation of emergency measures should not compromise human rights, which must remain at the heart of our global response to the pandemic. Early evidence shows that the COVID-19 pandemic is exacerbating existing trends of social exclusion among certain groups, thereby increasing their vulnerability. We are seeing worrisome trends in how, for example, older people, people living with disabilities, members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer and intersex community and ethnic minorities are being disproportionately affected. Ongoing response and recovery efforts, as well as future policy and programmes, need to be focused on building a more inclusive future that is tolerant, respectful to human diversity, resilient and sustainable. COVID-19 presents unique and complex challenges to peacekeeping missions. United Nations contingents must continue to balance mandate-related operational requirements with host nation and local population sensitivities. It is critically important that the United Nations be seen as part of the solution, rather than as part of the problem. It is also important that the pandemic be viewed through a protection-of-civilians lens. For Ireland, that does not mean that United Nations peacekeeping operations simply continue to conduct operations to ensure the physical safety of vulnerable population groups. It is clear that such operations must continue. Rather, missions must leverage all capabilities, including strategic communications, outreach and engagement, civil-military cooperation, medical assets and key leader engagement, to address protection-of-civilian concerns in a holistic and integrated manner.
