Ms. McBride (South Africa): At the outset, let me
join others in thanking Mr. Djinnit for his briefing and
for his excellent work during his time as Special Envoy.

South Africa welcomes the progress registered
in the implementation of the commitments under the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
which was signed on 24 February 2013. We further
welcome the cooperation between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Uganda and Rwanda, as well
as the support provided by the guarantors in the
repatriation of a large number of disarmed combatants
of the Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda
and dependents. South Africa encourages those
Governments to complete the repatriation of the former
combatants of the Mouvement du 23 mars in accordance
with human rights principles and international and
refugee law. South Africa underscores the importance
of the cooperation of all countries in the Great Lakes
region in eliminating armed groups, which continue
to pose a persistent threat to regional stability
and integration.

My delegation welcomes the consensus reached by
the signatories to the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic through
the mediation of the African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security, Mr. Sma'il Chergui. We
are particularly heartened by the agreement of the
formation of an inclusive Government in the context
of article 21 of the Agreement (see S/2019/145, annex).
We further welcome the peaceful holding of elections
and the peaceful transfer of power in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

In that regard, South Africa supports the extension
of the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) as part of the efforts to deliver
greater stability to the country and the region. South
Africa hopes that the new MONUSCO mandate will
help the new Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to determine its priorities, assert its
authority throughout the entire territory, including the
eastern part of the country, concentrate on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and encourage
reconciliation in the country. Accordingly, South
Africa calls on the international community to provide
assistance to the newly inaugurated Government of
President Fe'lix Tshisekedi and to help in building that
nation's institutions, which are critical to peace and
security as well as democracy and development.

Burundi remains an important part in the stability
of the Great Lakes region. As such, South Africa
continues to support the intra-Burundi dialogue,
including the facilitation process led by the East
African Community in the spirit of the Arusha Peace
and Reconciliation Agreement, with the support of the
African Union and the United Nations. In that regard,
the efforts of the mediator, President Yoweri Museveni
of Uganda, and the former facilitator, former President
Benjamin Mkapa of the United Republic of Tanzania,
are acknowledged and commended. My delegation calls
for the continued support and mediation efforts of the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy, Mr. Kafando. South

Africa also calls for the global ceasefire agreement
and the Arusha accords to be implemented together, in
pursuit ofa lasting solution to the current impasse.

Ultimately, a region that is politically stable serves
as a foundation for regional economic integration.
There is therefore a need to curb the persistent illicit
exploitation of, and trade in, natural resources, which
undermines the proper management of those resources.
South Africa commends the progress towards economic
and regional integration, including the Democratic
Republic of the Congo-Zambia road project, the joint
development road-rail bridge project linking Kinshasa
to Brazzaville, as well as the completion of 12 of the 15
one-stop border posts aimed at boosting regional trade.

In conclusion, we call on the Security Council to
reaffirm calls for all signatories to the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework to implement their
commitments under the Framework to ensure long-
term sustainable peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region.

