Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President,
I would like to begin by congratulating your country,
Uruguay, on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month, and I wish you the
greatest success in your work. I should like also to
thank the delegation of the United States for its work
during its presidency of the Council last month.

The protection of civilians and their property
as well as that of civilian facilities in cases of armed
conflict is a common ethical and legal obligation.
This responsibility entails not targeting civilian
installations during times of war or conflict. Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham fighters are systematically
and intensively targeting innocent, defenceless
civilians in the following ways: summary executions,
sexual violence, kidnapping, trafficking in women
and children, rape, the recruitment of child soldiers
by force, the desecration of religious sites and places
of worship, the sacking and destruction of cultural
property, and attacks on fundamental freedoms. Such
groups use the civilian population as human shields in
fighting the security and military forces.

Iraq and its partners are waging war against
terrorism. But we are also committed to ensuring
the protection of civilians, in other words, respecting
their rights and their property, in accordance with
international humanitarian law. We wish to spare
civilians the dangers of war and the impact of combat
operations. We seek to prevent harm from coming to
them by opening safe corridors to evacuate them from
combat zones at opportune times. That is what we did
in Tikrit, Beiji and Ramadi recently, evacuating 3,700
families under siege.

Security, military and air forces are urgently called
upon to target only hostile military targets with the
greatest precision. We are looking to open centres for
displaced persons and provide them with housing, food
and medical care while the areas from which they were
evacuated are liberated from terrorist groups, and to
facilitate their return following reconstruction.

We are committed to protecting civilians, and
the Government of Iraq is working to provide care
to the victims of terrorist operations and compensate
those who have suffered losses as a result of military
operations.

Daesh has committed reprehensible actions against
women, children, civilians, the elderly, minority
populations, indeed all components of Iraqi society,
to whom the necessary assistance must be extended
during the war against terrorism. Iraq calls on the entire
world and the forces of the international coalition and
their partners in the war against terrorism to help us as
quickly as possible and in a stable manner to counter
terrorist groups. We must also facilitate the return
of displaced persons and the reconstruction of the
infrastructure of those cities that have been destroyed.

Iraq thanks the international humanitarian
organizations for the assistance provided to displaced
Iraqi civilians. Those organizations should continue
to work with Iraq to provide for the humanitarian and
medical needs of wounded Iraqi civilians.

