Mr. Lukwiya (Uganda): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of my Permanent
Representative, Ambassador Ruhakana Rugunda. I
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate. I also thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe for his briefing this morning.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict has remained
unresolved for far too long, despite protracted
international and regional efforts. The situation is not
sustainable. We recall the international community's
optimism following the resumption of direct talks
between Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and
President Mahmoud Abbas, and are deeply concerned
about the loss of momentum in the peace process in the
wake of the breakdown of the talks.

It is now more urgent than ever for both parties to
redouble their efforts towards the achievement of a
comprehensive peace based on the vision of the two-
State solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by
side in peace and security. We encourage Israeli and
Palestinian leaders alike to resume negotiations
without further delay. We call upon both parties to
summon the necessary courage to take bold decisions
in a spirit of give and take.

In that regard, it is essential to refrain from
unilateral actions that prejudge final status issues and
undermine progress. It is also important to bear in
mind that the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinians
to statehood cannot be delayed much longer and that
the legitimate security concerns of Israel must be
addressed.

We remain deeply concerned about the continued
construction of settlements by Israel and call for a
complete freeze on all settlement activity, which not
only hinders progress in the negotiations, but also
undermines Israel's security. We salute the Palestinians
for their continued efforts to fulfil their obligations
under the Road Map, particularly in the security and
economic development sectors. We also commend
President Abbas on his initiative to resolve the current
divisions among Palestinians, and encourage him to
intensify efforts on that important component.

The humanitarian situation in Gaza remains dire,
and we reiterate our call for a complete lifting of the
blockade on Gaza. We deplore the continued firing of
rockets into Israel by Hamas and the airstrikes on Gaza
by Israel during the reporting period. We call on all
parties to exercise maximum restraint, to avoid further
escalation and to fully implement resolution 1860
(2009).

In conclusion, while the primary responsibility
for negotiating and reaching a comprehensive
agreement lies with the Israeli and Palestinian parties,
the efforts and support of all international and regional
partners must be stepped up for that goal to be attained
sooner than later.
