Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): Your presence among us, Mr.
President, is a clear sign of the importance that your
Government attaches to easing the hardships of those
caught in humanitarian crises. We are grateful and
honoured to see you presiding over the Security Council
today.

It is a tragic truth that humanitarian crises recur all
too frequently these days. They frequently derive from
irrational human choices and epitomize the prevalence of
violence over dialogue, the triumph of conflict over
negotiation. The history of crises in places such as
Somalia, Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is well known.

The gloomy situation of disregard for basic rights
and the outright neglect that characterizes so many
humanitarian emergencies could instill a great deal of
pessimism in those who worry about such tragedies.
Although many situations are truly discouraging, to say
the least, a generous movement of non-governmental and
other organizations has not lost its impetus.

The complexities of assisting people in conflict
situations are so daunting that we need to go beyond the
spontaneous and - I insist - laudable work of
non-governmental entities. The role the United Nations is
to be a catalyst for international solidarity, so as to
translate spontaneity into a comprehensive and
coordinated effort to alleviate the suffering of those
caught in distress and desperation.

We should ask ourselves a couple of questions. First,
how can the United Nations as a whole improve
effectiveness in humanitarian assistance? Secondly, what
is the role of the Security Council in this context, and
what are the limits and constraints on the Council in
acting in this field?

In order to respond to the first question, we should
recognize that any given complex emergency is a
multifaceted phenomenon. In a sort of vicious circle,
humanitarian crises not only and the consequence of
armed conflicts but can also contribute to fuelling
tensions that provide fertile ground for more violence.
The flow of refugees and internally displaced persons is,
to a great extent, a consequence of a combination of
interrelated factors: disregard for humanitarian and human

 

rights law, extreme poverty, the disruption of the social
fabric and the lack of State institutions and basic public
services. This list shows why such situations are called
complex emergencies. The overlapping of a vast array of
problems demands that efforts undertaken by the United
Nations be coordinated.

Conflict resolution efforts must be coupled with
short-term relief assistance, rehabilitation and long-term
development programmes. The prerequisites to cooperation
among all organs and agencies involved in humanitarian
affairs are clarity of goals and effective coordination. By
the same token, the interrelation of humanitarian affairs and
security issues should not entail an automatic involvement
of the Security Council.

Thus, the answer to my first question could be
summed up in a word: coordination. The second question
requires a more cautious answer, one that can hardly be
summarized in one word.

The basis for the Security Council's action is, above
all, the recognition that flagrant, grave and systematic
violations of universally accepted international humanitarian
and human rights law may pose a real threat to
international peace and security. Security Council-mandated
operations can contribute to improving the security of
humanitarian personnel, but peacekeepers and civilian
police are no substitutes for humanitarian agencies.

Whenever the word "humanitarian" is invoked, we
should not forget the principles of humanity, neutrality and
impartiality, which are all the tenets of humanitarian
assistance. The Council has the responsibility of addressing
the political side of conflicts and, while doing so, it should
bear in mind the humanitarian aspects related to conflicts.

A tentative answer to my second question should take
into consideration a few points. First, the role of the
Security Council is to add to the work of the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the United
Nations Development Programme, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the World Food
Programme and other humanitarian bodies and organs
without trying to replace them.

Secondly, the convening of open debates like today's
is useful and may be an opportunity to mobilize public
opinion in donor countries and create a synergy among
humanitarian agencies. In this regard, international
attention, we hope, could be a vehicle to obtain more funds
for the relief, reconstruction and development of the
countries suffering from humanitarian crises.

Thirdly, the Council must take action only on
extreme cases that pose real threats to international peace
and security - which, unfortunately, are not infrequent.
It is clear that the use of force can be allowed only by the
Security Council, pursuant to the Charter of the United
Nations.

Fourthly, the Council's decisions can contribute to
improving the environment for humanitarian assistance,
but the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council keep the primary responsibility in providing
policy guidance for the efforts deployed by the system.
Fifthly, if the Council is to preserve credibility while
dealing with humanitarian issues, it must avoid selectivity.
The focus of its decision should not be determined by the
level of media exposure, but by the real humanitarian and
security situation on the ground.

Finally, Security Council decisions should take into
account the need to preserve the neutrality and
impartiality of humanitarian assistance. Many
organizations have been concerned that the use of the
military for humanitarian activities, particularly in the
context of Chapter VII operations, affects their ability to
assist victims on all sides of the conflict.

Having said that, allow me to highlight a few
concrete ways in which the Council might contribute to
solving pressing humanitarian problems.

Through diplomacy, the Council may persuade
warring parties to accept in practice the principle of safe
and unimpeded access to those in need. When diplomacy
and negotiations are not effective, the Council has at its
disposal deterrent measures, such as indicating the
possibility of bringing to justice those responsible for
abuses. The Tribunals for Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia are good examples. The establishment of the
International Criminal Court will be a leap forward in
combating impunity for crimes that are at the heart of
today's humanitarian crises.

As a last resort, the Council may adopt enforcement
measures, such as arms embargoes. It is essential that the
Council set up reliable mechanisms with a view to
monitoring the flow of weapons to regions torn by armed
conflicts. The developing of "smart sanctions" is also an
important alternative that should not be ruled out. By

 

definition, such sanctions target the individuals who are
directly responsible for wrongdoing.

I could go on and touch upon other areas, such as the
use of troops or civilian police to prevent the diversion of
aid for political or military purposes, but there is no need
to be exhaustive. It is the rationale behind such examples
that is important to retain in this context. The Council's
actions can be conducive to a climate of compliance with
international humanitarian and human rights obligations,
which would have an obvious positive impact on the
humanitarian situation.

The main challenge for the Security Council is to take
measures, within the purview of its mandate, to bring the
dire reality of modern conflict closer to the lofty ideals
enshrined in international humanitarian and human rights
law.

