Mr. Naranjo Trujillo (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Before I proceed, on behalf of the Colombian
people, I would like to extend our condolences on the
death of the Ambassador of Cote d'Ivoire, Mr. Bernard
Tanoh-Boutchoue, who was a unconditional friend of
peace and a pillar of support for Colombia. We deeply
regret his passing.

I would like to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on
your efforts and those of your delegation during your
presidency of the Security Council. Similarly, I thank
all of the members of the Council for their unwavering
support for peace in Colombia. That support has been
confirmed through the holding of today's meeting.

I also thank the Secretary-General for his balanced
and objective report (S/2018/279). I also thank his
Special Representative, Mr. Jean Arnault, for his
committed, professional and admirable leadership, for
which the Colombian people and the entire region will
be forever grateful.

Peace in Colombia also means peace in the
continent, our Latin American region. Rather than be
discouraged about the underlying challenges to building
peace, we reiterate our willingness to persist. Now is
not the time to give up. Now is the time to continue to
build peace. We have always said that seeking peace is
a complex and difficult task. It took decades to create
an environment conducive to negotiations. We also said
that building peace through a negotiated solution to the
conflict was also a complex and difficult challenge,
but we achieved it. We now declare that building peace
requires maximum energy and national will to ensure
that it is not just a phenomenal value but an indelible
one. Such peace is built day by day.

To that end, with the leadership of the President of
Colombia, we reiterate before the Council today, based
on the situation on the ground and on the conclusions
of the Secretary-General when he underscored in his
report that considerable progress had been made - for
example, the laying down of weapons and the move
towards legality by those who had posed a threat to
Colombian institutions in the past - as well as when
he pointed out the remaining challenges, that those
challenges are being addressed as a matter of priority.
During today's meeting - and we very much appreciate
such impartiality - several problems that could be
viewed through the prism of the glass being half empty
were raised. What we still must do to consolidate
peace begins with safeguarding the lives, integrity
and freedom of our country's community leaders and
human rights defenders throughout our territory.

That situation highlights a major contradiction in
Colombia. We note that, although we have achieved the
lowest murder rate in the past 42 years, there has been
an increase in the number of leaders being killed. Now
the conflict has ended, they have called for respect for
the rule of law and speak out against illegal activities
conducted during the armed conflict. It is sad to see
the rural leaders who promote crop substitution being
threatened by drug-related transnational crime. That is
why I would like to reiterate that, instead of lowering
our guard, undermining institutional capacity in an
attempt to control the entire country and continuing to
combat crime, Colombia is building capacity with the
help of its long-standing allies. We do so because we
understand that the principle of shared responsibility
can work to rid the region of organized crime.

However, we face challenges that go beyond
security itself and that pertain to those who laid
down their weapons and chose democracy. Political
participation is at the very core of consolidating
peace. That is why we support many of the statements
made by Ambassadors here in the Council today.
They underscored the fact that, for the first time, an
organization that has become a political party and
laid down its weapons after half a century of fighting
is taking part in elections and playing by the rules
of democracy. It is true that the Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Comun, the political party, in its
first elections, received fewer votes than expected
but, at the same time, it is also true the institutional
participatory framework has broadened considerably
and has led to unprecedented parliamentary elections,
with more than 2 million additional votes, as compared
to previous elections. That points to a genuine and
inclusive democracy, in particular with regard to those
who laid down their weapons and embraced democratic
values and principles. The Government will continue
to provide such guarantees for political participation.

However, the report on the Mission also underscores
the need to move forward so that the conditions exist
for employment, social and economic reintegration.
Another key issue is that of land. I would like to state
here that we are moving towards the issuance of a
final decree that states that those who reintegrate into
society after laying down their weapons will be on
equal footing with members of communities that were
most affected by the conflict in order to have access
to land and receive support for productive ventures as
former fighters-cum-farmers. We are making progress
to ensure that this transition to lawful order is a
resounding success.

In that regard, today we can say that approximately
12,000 former combatants of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) have opened bank accounts, received their
basic monthly income and signed up for the national
health-care, social and pension systems. Five thousand
of those ex-combatants have laid down their weapons
to take up paper and pen as they commence training
and schooling processes. That means that we already
have a significant group undergoing a real process of
transformation.

We are moving forward in that, irrespective of the
succeeding Government in a democracy, today, with our
elections forthcoming, regardless of the Administration
that succeeds us, it will have a clear and sound road map
towards entrenching an irreversible peace in Colombia,
the benefits of which will extend to the entire region.
We cannot deny that we face challenges and difficulties
of a historic magnitude - I am referring to the great
tragedy that our nation suffered as it endured the
scourge of drug-trafficking. For almost 40 years, we
witnessed how the mafias undermined institutional
stability, compromised the safety and security of
communities and instigated, supported and promoted
illegal crops and requisitioning.

Before the Council, I would like to say that
Columbia has channelled its capacities, which were
previously limited to containing the war machine
during the conflict with FARC-EP, to make organized
crime a joint priority. That is how we are able to reach
areas that, over decades, had no Government presence
and expel the ruthless drug traffickers who have caused
so much damage. In that regard, I would like to reaffirm
our commitment in solidarity to our neighbouring
and friendly countries that they can rest assured that
Colombia fully assumes its responsibility to not allow
or tolerate such crime.

Furthermore, we are making strides in
peacebuilding, which means bridging the gap between
the rural parts of the country and its urban parts, for a
strong Colombia that was, as I mentioned, confined by
the armed conflict, leaving in its wake gaps ofinequality
that we need to bridge. For that reason, to build peace in
Colombia today it is not enough to only comply with the
peace agreements, but we must also adopt an agenda
of reform and change, led by President Juan Manuel
Santos Calderon, that would enable the Colombian
people, with their silent revolutions, to succeed. For
example, presently 30,000 young people - from the
humblest of backgrounds but also the brightest of our
country - have received full scholarships to the best
universities in our country. That revolution has also
seen 5 million Colombians lifted out of abject poverty,
as we have been negotiating and building peace over
the years. We believe that peace should translate to
greater equality, prosperity and education.

In that connection, I would like to express my
appreciation for the various forms of support we have
received. I reiterate that we hope to be able to continue
to count on a Council that, in the face of difficulties,
understands those difficulties and that does not rest on
its laurels but, rather, encourages us to continue moving
forward in overcoming challenges.

