Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to begin by thanking you, Madam President,
for convening today's meeting. I would also like to
welcome His Excellency President Boris Tadie of
Serbia to today's meeting, as well as to thank
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing. I have also listened
carefully to the statements by Mr. Hyseni and Mr. De
Kermabon.

Last Friday there was a mass incident of
explosions in North Mitrovica that resulted in human
causalities. We condemn such an act of terrorist
Violence and would like to express our profound
sympathy with and condolences to the families of the
Victims. It is our hope that the parties concerned will
make concerted efforts to ensure the stabilization of the
situation on the ground and the safeguarding of the
legitimate interests of all ethnic communities. The
parties concerned should at once initiate an
investigation into this incident and bring the
perpetrators to justice in order to avoid any repetition
of such incidents.
The situation in Kosovo remains delicate and
complex, and it has a bearing on the peace and stability
of the Balkans and of Europe as a whole. The Chinese
position on the issue of Kosovo has been consistent
and clear-cut. We respect and support the maintenance
of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia and
support the Government and people of Serbia in their
endeavour to achieve the goals of long-lasting peace,
stability and prosperity.

It is obvious that the best way to solve the
Kosovo problem is to reach a settlement acceptable to
both parties through their negotiations. Unilateral
actions will not only be unhelpful in solving the
problem but will instead complicate the situation,
negatively impacting the peace and stability of the
region.

Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) remains
the legal basis for solving the Kosovo problem, and
thus it should be honoured. We support the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) in its continued implementation of its
mandate in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999). It
is our hope that UNMIK will give its attention to the
causes of this incident and take corresponding
measures to address the situation. The parties
concerned should continue to support UNMIK in the
conduct of its work.

