Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I wish to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council and to convey our gratitude
to Ambassador Wang and his delegation for their
effective and competent guidance of our work last
month.

I wish also to thank High Representative
Lord Paddy Ashdown for his comprehensive briefing
on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We also
welcome the presence among us of Mr. Adnan Terzic,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

As is highlighted in Lord Ashdown's report,
significant progress has been achieved in the
entrenchment of the rule of law, economic recovery
and the strengthening of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
institutional capacities with a view to enabling it fully
to play its role as a sovereign State. Clearly, my
delegation can only welcome those developments.

The results achieved in the reform process during
the period under consideration serve to bolster our
common objective of making Bosnia and Herzegovina
a strong and stable State and of ending the
fragmentation of its powers and prerogatives. In that
respect, my delegation welcomes the fact that certain
powers have been transferred from the two entities to
the central State through the launching of an integrated
defence policy with the establishment of joint
command and control of the armed forces and a State-
level Ministry of Defence for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Another element of the substantial progress made
towards strengthening the State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is undoubtedly the adoption of the Law on
Indirect Taxation, the abolition of the entities' customs
administrations and the creation of a State-wide,
unified indirect taxation system.

Bosnia and Herzegovina will surely be able to
consolidate those precious achievements further by
adopting a law on intelligence reform with a view to
addressing effectively the threats of terrorism and
organized crime, to the benefit of all the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. In the same vein, we believe
that Lord Ashdown's decision to reunify the city of
Mostar will put an end to 12 years of division and offer
all inhabitants the opportunity to participate
collectively and equitably in the management of their
city's affairs. The reunification of Mostar, in addition
to being highly symbolic, is clearly helping to bring
about the consolidation of the State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the establishment of unified
structures and of a tolerant, multi-ethnic society that
will overcome the ethnic divisions that have prevailed
in that city.

The actions recently undertaken in the area of
judicial reform have also enabled us to assess the
progress made in building the rule of law in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in recognizing the primacy of law and
justice. Bosnia and Herzegovina's new judicial system
intends both to guarantee respect for the law and to
create a national system capable of taking over from
the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia and of ensuring the success of its work
completion strategy. In that regard, it is absolutely
imperative that war criminals still at large be actively
sought out, arrested and prosecuted.

That said, the reconstruction of Bosnia and
Herzegovina also requires the development of an
economic and social development strategy based on
economic recovery and the promotion of foreign
investment. We hope that the Bulldozer Initiative will
be able to overcome the obstacles to liberalization of
the economy and economic growth and to ensure job
creation.

Furthermore, the reconstruction and consolidation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina require genuine
reconciliation and coexistence among the country's
various communities. In that regard, it is essential that
mutual understanding and trust be developed among all
the components of Bosnia and Herzegovina and that
ethnic resentments and reflexes be overcome. From
that perspective, it is encouraging to note that nearly 1
million refugees and displaced persons had returned to
their places of origin by the end of 2003. We hope that
the 350,000 remaining refugees will be able to do so
swiftly.

The people of Bosnia and Herzegovina must
transcend their differences and must prepare to take
sole responsibility for their future. In that context, the
joint declaration made recently by all parties
represented within Bosnia and Herzegovina's House of
Representatives - in which they announced their
readiness to find a consensus to attain the objectives set
out by Lord Ashdown - is a very strong positive sign
that we should support.

Finally, my country wishes every success to the
High Representative in his efforts. We encourage him
to continue to implement his programme.

