Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I thank my colleague the Ambassador of
Britain for her question on that issue and for requesting
further clarification.

First, the Council knows of course that I have
frequently said on behalf of my Government that Idlib
is a beloved part of Syria. We are not talking about
Florida, Glasgow or Marseilles. We are talking about
Idlib, an area that is part of the Syrian Arab Republic.

Secondly, when terrorism threatens a member State
of the Council, it is natural for its Government to step in
immediately to combat it. There are thousands of such
examples. Yesterday, every TV channel in America
was reporting on the terrorist act in which nine parcels
containing bombs were mailed to prominent people and
public institutions in New York and talking about the
gravity of that terrorist act. Fortunately, it did not result
in any loss of life. We all think that the United States
Administration is doing the right action in investigating
the matter because it is an act of terrorism. And what
about the 30,000 foreign terrorist fighters in Idlib?
Of course they are all moderates - and they belong
to the Al-Nusra Front, Da'esh, Alwiya Al-Furqan and
Turkmen and other groups. They are all moderate
by nature, those 30,000 foreign terrorist fighters
who shelled Aleppo two days ago, killing scores and
injuring dozens. They shelled Aleppo from Idlib, which
constitutes a breach of the Russian-Turkish agreement.
That has nothing to do with our intention of retaking
Idlib, which is a beloved part of our country that is
currently under terrorist control.

Thirdly, we will retake Idlib and restore our
sovereignty over Idlib when the Government deems it
appropriate to do so. What does that mean? It means
that we will do it when we are sure that diplomatic and
political efforts have failed to restore that beloved part
of our territory to national sovereignty. That issue is
governed by diplomatic and political protocols. We
know how to address it and naturally we have friends
and allies to help us analyse the situation. It is therefore
no surprise ifI say on behalf of my Government that we
will restore our sovereignty over Idlib when we see fit
to do so, because it is part of our lands.

