Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Costa
Rica thanks you, Sir, for having convened this meeting
and Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.

Not all options for finding a solution to the tragic
situation in Venezuela are open. I repeat - not all
options are open. In order to find a solution to this
crisis, the well-being ofthe Venezuelans must be our top
priority. Costa Rica therefore reiterates its irrevocable
commitment to mechanisms for the peaceful resolution
of conflicts, diplomacy and dialogue as fundamental
tools, as well as the mechanisms of international law
and multilateralism. Our position has always been and
always will be one of firm rejection of any course of
action that implies the exercise of violence, the use of
force or military intervention in Venezuela.

In that vein, Costa Rica repudiates the regrettable
use of force and acts of violence committed under
the authority of Nicolas Maduro in recent days - in
particular on 23 February, a regrettable day for the
Venezuelan people, who are suffering the most serious
consequences of that regime, resulting in a population
that is beset by hunger, lack of health care and the most
basic sanitation services, and that now finds itself
deprived of its most fundamental rights and freedoms.

Costa Rica strongly encourages the safe and
effective delivery of humanitarian assistance - in
line with the international principles of humanitarian
aid, humanity, neutrality, impartiality and operational
independence - that reaches those who need it the
most. We request the cooperation of the relevant United
Nations agencies in this effort.

We reiterate our concern over the distressing
situation of the Venezuelan people and, above all, the
violations of human rights in that country, which have
already been extensively documented by the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights and analysed
by the Human Rights Council. Costa Rica has been
and will continue to be consistent in its support for the
efforts of the international community in this regard.

We reaffirm our conviction that the solution to
the crisis facing the brotherly country of Venezuela
must be peaceful, democratic and defined by the
Venezuelans themselves. As we have said before,
we believe that in order to restore democratic and
constitutional order in Venezuela, elections must be
free, fair, transparent, open to the participation of all
political actors, take account of all sectors, adhere to
international standards and convened in the shortest
possible time. This is consistent with Costa Rica's
position of non-recognition of the electoral process of
20 May 2018, which, we reiterate, fell short of standards
for transparency and inclusiveness and did not enjoy
the international guarantees and norms necessary for it
to be considered legitimate. Costa Rica therefore does
not recognize the legitimacy of the regime that was
inaugurated on 10 January. As Mr. Maduro's regime
lacks that democratic capacity, Costa Rica recognizes
Mr. Juan Guaido as interim President of Venezuela.

Costa Rica will remain committed to participating
in all efforts and measures aimed at bringing the parties
together and supporting the peaceful restoration of
constitutional order and respect for human rights in
Venezuela. We call on the international community
to continue and increase diplomatic efforts towards
opening effective avenues of negotiation for a peaceful
solution to the crisis in Venezuela.

