Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing today's debate and the work of the Council
on resolution 2457 (2019), which we are very happy to
co-sponsor.

We are here because we think that this debate
matters. Ireland believes that cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations is critical to conflict resolution and
prevention; to building peaceful, inclusive societies;
and, of course, as we have heard from many speakers, to
achieving our shared Sustainable Development Goals.

We have seen first-hand direct evidence of the
instrumental role that regional organizations in Africa
can play in ending crises and building lasting peace. The
role ofthe Economic Community ofWest African States
in mediating the post-election crisis in The Gambia and
the recent peace accord in the Central African Republic,
achieved after intense negotiations led by the African
Union, are for us both excellent examples of the success
that we can all hope for when regional efforts deliver
with wider international support.

On the island of Ireland, our own locally led peace
process has benefited hugely from the sustained,
generous and sensitive support of our own regional
organization, the European Union. Indeed, simply put,
our membership of the European Union played a key
role in putting us on the road to ending violent conflict.
Ireland applauds the African Union's recent advances
towards silencing the guns through the development
of continental early warning systems, the Panel of the
Wise, special envoys and ad hoc mediation panels. We
see that such steps make a tangible and incremental
difference to conflict resolution and peacebuilding.

As Chair of the Commission on the Status of
Women, I want to recognize the unique role African
women play in silencing the guns. I am pleased to see
that role cited in resolution 2457 (1019), adopted today.
Specific reference to FemWise-Africa, the Network of
African Women in Conflict Prevention and Mediation
and the African Women Leaders Network strengthens
and gives force to our message. We know from our own
experience in Ireland that when women get involved,
things start getting done.

Peacekeeping operations are the most visible and
among the most powerful tools the United Nations
has to promote peace and stability. As the Member
State with the longest continuous service to United
Nations peacekeeping, of more than 60 years, Ireland is
acutely aware of the challenges facing United Nations
peace operations in different countries and regions.
The diversity of such challenges underscores the
importance of the work of coordinating with regional
partners, such as the African Union, and of empowering
local stakeholders.

The Secretary-General's reform efforts to bridge
the peace-security-humanitarian nexus should also
be an ambition for our partnership with the African
Union. It is, of course, in step with the effective
implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.

We all know that the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons continues to inflame and prolong
conflicts. Our colleague from the International
Committee of the Red Cross underlined that point in his
remarks earlier today. We share the Secretary-General's
goal of restoring disarmament to its central role in
building international peace and security. As a concrete
manifestation of Ireland's support to the agenda for
disarmament, yesterday our Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, Simon
Coveney, announced that Ireland will act as a champion
for three important actions outlined in the agenda. One
of those actions is specifically aimed at silencing the
guns by building understanding of the impact of arms
on conflict management. We look forward to working
with all States Members of the United Nations, and
particularly with the African Union, to make progress.

Through Ireland's current membership of the
Peacebuilding Commission and as a sincere candidate
for a seat on the Security Council in under two years
from now, in 2021-2022, we want to reassure members
of our support. We would also like to say today that we
believe that Africa needs greater representation at this
table to correct the historic injustice that has been done
to Africa.

Finally, rest assured, Sir, that Ireland will also work
tirelessly to champion locally led, nationally owned
and internationally supported peace processes. In his
address to the African Union Summit in Addis Ababa,
the Secretary-General said if that you want to see the
winds of hope blowing, look to Africa. I think he is
right. Let me close by underlining Ireland's unwavering
commitment to working closely with the African
Union, the United Nations and all Member States to
seize the momentum to silence the guns and see the
great continent of Africa truly free from conflict.

