Mrs. Moldoisaeva (Kyrgyzstan): At the outset,
I would like to thank the Japanese presidency for
convening today's open debate on addressing the
complex contemporary challenges to international peace
and security in connection with the Security Council's
agenda item on the maintenance of international peace
and security. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his briefing today. Today's meeting is
unquestionably important and timely in the light of the
Council's primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

We should base our efforts to deal with the root
causes of conflicts and the factors that exacerbate
them on a holistic and comprehensive approach. The
Security Council has directed special attention to that
approach with its holding ofa series ofthematic debates
that demonstrate the relationship between security
and development and the need for an interdisciplinary
approach to conflict resolution, policy, security,
development, human rights and the rule of law.

We agree that the Security Council should play
a vital role in decision-making on peacekeeping and
humanitarian actions, as well as in facilitating efforts
to achieve political solutions. In that regard, Kyrgyzstan
supports efforts to increase the Council's effectiveness,
a priority task that can be achieved only if members act
with unanimity, respond quickly to emerging threats
to international peace and security and implement
decisions effectively. We must not ignore the importance
of ensuring that other international institutions play an
increasingly active role in solving problems that can lead
to instability and conflict. The United Nations system,
which itself is in need of reform, has an important role
to play in this. In that regard, we support the initiative
of the Secretary-General aimed at reforming the
Organization's entire peace and security architecture
in order to strengthen our ability to prevent and resolve
conflicts, as well as to improve development reform.
We hope to see strengthened cooperation between the
United Nations and Member States, thereby enhancing
the effectiveness of the United Nations system,
including in the fight against terrorism. We are pleased
that progress has been made in many areas.

In conclusion, we would like to emphasize that
the successful resolution of the challenges we face to
peace and security, conflict resolution and development
issues will depend first and foremost on improving the
effectiveness of the activities of the United Nations and
its entities.

