Mr. Bennouna (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Permit me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. As you know, the Kingdom of
Morocco is convinced that, thanks to your wisdom and
experience, the Council's deliberations will be crowned
with success in the interests of international peace and
security. I wish to take this opportunity to express the
Moroccan delegation's gratitude to your predecessor,
the Permanent Representative of France, for the
remarkable way in which he presided over the
Council's work last month.

Unfortunately, the Security Council is meeting
once again to debate the grave situation prevailing in
the occupied Palestinian territory with the continuation
of extrajudicial executions targeting symbolic figures
of the Palestinian resistance. Less than a month after
the assassination of Sheikh Yassin, the Israeli
occupation forces have just perpetrated a cowardly act
of aggression by assassinating Mr. Abdel Aziz
Al-Rantisi and two of his companions. The Kingdom of
Morocco formally condemns those assassinations and
forcefully denounces this type of act, which is banned
by all divine religions and by all international
conventions.
The international community cannot fail to
unequivocally condemn this new assassination, which
was committed in violation of international law and
which could seriously jeopardize the prospects of a
negotiated peace. The policy followed by the Israeli
Government could further aggravate the situation and
cause a new cycle of violence, leading the region into
conditions that are dangerous to international peace
and security.

Morocco urges the international community to
fully shoulder all its responsibilities following this
dangerous escalation and to make every effort to put an
end to this downward spiral. It is incumbent upon the
Security Council, which has the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
to take a clear stance by condemning the Israeli policy
of occupying a territory, implanting it with settlements
and then suppressing all those who speak out against
such actions and against the daily humiliations of
which the Palestinians are victim.

The Kingdom of Morocco is convinced that
strengthening peace by resuming negotiations remains
the only way to achieve a just and comprehensive
settlement in the Middle East, on the basis of the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, in
particular resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397
(2002), as well as resolution 1515 (2003), in which the
Council endorsed the road map.

In conclusion, we remain committed to the Arab
peace initiative adopted at the Beirut summit, which
made the principle of land for peace the one and only
foundation for the normalization of the situation among
all countries of the region.

