Mr. Pyvovarov (Ukraine): I would like to thank the
delegation of the United States for organizing today's
meeting of the Security Council, which is devoted to
the important issue of protecting journalists in armed
conflicts.

Ukraine aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union.

We express our gratitude to Mr. Eliasson for his
comprehensive briefing, as well as to the representatives
from the leading media entities present here today.

No one doubts that today information directly
impact the key global political processes. Over the
past two years, the world witnessed a steady increase
in the number of journalists killed or injured while
performing their professional duties. Unfortunately, a
key reason for that unacceptable situation is the increase
in zones of instability, inadequate international legal
mechanisms to protect journalists, the impunity of
those committing crimes, the creation of obstacles
to journalists' professional activities, and the state of
global information campaigns.

The events of the Arab Spring, especially in Syria,
and the alarming news from other countries in the region
demonstrate the true price we pay for being informed of
the real situation inside conflict zones. While ordinary
people try to escape and save themselves from chaos
and bloodshed, journalists, in contrast, attempt to
reach such areas in order to provide us with the latest
news. Unfortunately, their courage and professionalism
sometimes cost them their lives or their health.

I would like to recall that, thanks to a successful
escape attempt a few months ago, the Ukrainian
journalist Anhar Kochnyeva was able to return home
from captivity in Syria, where she had spent almost six
months. Over the past 10 years, more than 20 Ukrainian
journalists have died while performing their duties in
the line of fire.

That is why, in our view, today's debate should
answer the question of how the United Nations, in
particular the Security Council, can contribute more
effectively to protecting journalists from violence
and safeguarding them from danger when working in
conflict zones.

Strengthening the freedom of expression and
developing a solid framework of international
humanitarian law, one that would guarantee journalists
the right to work in an environment free from fear of
persecution and aggression, is one ofthe main priorities
of Ukraine's 2013 chairmanship of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, and of its
vice-presidency of the United Nations Committee on
Information.
Ukraine believes that free, independent, responsible
and professional journalism is the basis for a modern,
democratic civil society. Our country supports all
international mechanisms aimed at strengthening the
global protection of j ournalists throughout the world, in
particular those promoted by the Human Rights Council.
We supported the resolution adopted by the Council in
September 2012 to improve the situation in this domain.
Ukraine is also actively engaged in UNESCO's work to
strengthen the intergovernmental response to violent
and aggressive acts againstjournalists working in high-
risk areas and danger zones.

My country strongly supports the full
implementation of the principles set out in the United
Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists
and the Issue of Impunity, We consider it an important
document in the global fight against the impunity of
persons and criminal entities that threaten media
personnel directly in conflict zones.

Strengthening the activities of professional
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) worldwide
could also become an important part of efforts aimed
at improving journalists' security in general. Such
NGOs should continue to draw Governments' attention
to the shortcomings of the existing physical and legal
protections for media personnel. We believe that
close cooperation between different governmental
agencies and NGOs could provide a positive impetus,
including revising the list of new areas of informational
activity - for example in the blogosphere - where
journalists would have the same rights as when they
worked in conflict zones.

Ukraine believes that one of the most problematic
aspects in protecting journalists in armed conflicts is
not the absence of an international legal framework,
but of specific implementation mechanisms. A case
in point is the difficulty in bringing to account those
responsible for acts of aggression against media
representatives in conflict zones. In our view, it is also
extremely important, at the level of the United Nations,
to make a clear distinction between journalistic activity
during armed conflicts and espionage. Unfortunately,
in some States accusations of spying often serve as a
legal basis to deny journalists access to conflict zones
and as a reason for their illegal detention.

In that context, Ukraine is extremely alarmed by
the current tendency of increasing media confrontation
that could deepen the crisis of mutual confidence
between States and affect some positive trends
elaborated at the United Nations to protect the freedom
ofjournalists and freedom of speech. We again stress the
unacceptability of spreading manipulative and biased
information, especially that obtained illegally, in order
to achieve situational political benefits. Supporting and
empowering journalists who are involved in covering
events in conflict zones serves as an essential tool for
a healthy and high-quality media environment in the
world.

Ukraine strongly believes in the necessity of
improving expertise aimed at upgrading the processes
of investigation and making accountable those who
inhibit the legitimate right of journalists to work in
zones of instability.

Finally, we also pay tribute to journalists who
have died or been injured when performing their
professional duties. Our country will remain an active
supporter of free and safejournalisms. We consider the
United Nations and the Security Council instrumental
actors in strengthening the basic rights and freedoms
ofjournalists.

