Mr. Oshima (Japan): I wish to express my
gratitude for the convening of this timely meeting on
the humanitarian situation in Africa. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General Jan Egeland for his
comprehensive briefing, which follows his briefing to
the Council two weeks ago on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (see S/PV.5319). My
delegation welcomes the practice of regular briefings
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs on behalf of the United Nations humanitarian
community in order to bring the Security Council up to
date on those issues of grave concern to the
international community.

With respect to the situation in Zimbabwe, we
appreciate the sustained efforts of the Secretary-
General to engage with the Government in order to
improve the overall situation in that country. The just-
concluded visit by the Emergency Relief Coordinator,
focused on the humanitarian situation, was also
welcome.

As was made clear by Mr. Egeland, dialogue
efforts with the Government to develop a sound
cooperative relationship between the authorities and
the United Nations and other humanitarian actors have
been difficult, and that is to be regretted. However, we
encourage those efforts to continue, despite the
apparent lack of progress at the present time.

We are concerned at the deepening humanitarian
crisis in Zimbabwe. The crisis is not limited to the
problem of housing those affected by the Government's
Operation Restore Order but includes the ever-
worsening situation in food and non-food areas, where
privations and shortages are reaching critical
proportions. The reported fact that the average life
expectancy of the people has been reduced by almost
half, from 60 to 36 years, is a clear indication of how
bad the situation in the country has become.

We expect the Government in Harare to pay
serious heed to the voice of the international
community and to cooperate effectively and in a spirit
of sincerity with the United Nations and other
humanitarian actors to help those affected by the
eviction campaign and those in need of life-saving
assistance. The international community, for its part,
should respond to that dire humanitarian situation by
stepping up its assistance and engaging with the
Government with a View to promoting dialogue.

For our part, Japan has provided humanitarian
assistance in the form of blankets and food aid. We
strongly hope that the Government of Zimbabwe will
demonstrate a greater willingness to work with the
international community in a joint effort to provide
protection and assistance to its own men, women and
children in need. We would like also to see a more
active engagement on the part of African Governments
in the region with the Zimbabwean Government to
improve the situation.

We remain seriously concerned at the situation in
Darfur, where humanitarian conditions appear to be
worsening, not improving. The only way to alleviate
that situation is to ensure tangible progress in the
ongoing negotiations in Abuja among the parties, and
we hope to see those negotiations lead to concrete
results without delay.

In the meantime, we deeply appreciate the
activities undertaken by the African Union to maintain
security in the region, which is a prerequisite for
humanitarian assistance. We are also concerned at the
fact that Sudanese refugees have fled to neighbouring
Chad, causing many problems there.

The humanitarian situation in northern Uganda
and in southern Sudan, involving close to 2 million
internally displaced persons and where the Lord's
Resistance Army is wreaking havoc on populations, is
equally worrying. We commend the humanitarian
personnel who are engaged in humanitarian aid work
and protection activities there in spite of the adverse
security conditions. We are concerned at the present
stalemate in the dialogue between the Government of
Uganda and the Lord's Resistance Army, and we call
on both parties to work to bring about positive results
urgently.

Here again, neighbouring countries also have
important responsibilities and critical roles to play in
improving the situation. We expect them to exercise as
much influence as possible to that end.

In that regard, Mr. Egeland suggested several
potential practical steps that the Council could take to
help address the regional dimension of the crisis,
including the idea of appointing a panel of experts. I
believe that those suggestions deserve our support and
careful consideration.

Lastly, there is a clear need to do as much as
possible to bring lifesaving humanitarian relief to
people in dire need of assistance - internally
displaced persons, refugees and others who are
affected. The Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and humanitarian
agencies therefore deserve our fullest support - moral,
political and financial - and should be provided with
what they need.

At the same time, it is clear that the root causes
and compounding factors of these more serious
humanitarian crises, whether they occur in Africa or
elsewhere, do not lend themselves to an easy solution.
Conflict, underdevelopment and poverty, the scourge
of HIV/AIDS, poor governance and neglect, policy
failures, criminality and natural disasters are some of
the causes and complicating factors which are routinely
observed. Humanitarian aid agencies and aid workers
are doing excellent work in many areas, but these
problems are beyond the power of humanitarians to
resolve. As Mr. Egeland said, humanitarian aid cannot
be an alibi for unwillingness to address the root causes
of conflict.

Only through the concerted efforts of the entire
international community can the root causes of these
problems be addressed, and the Security Council has
an obvious and critical role to play in that effort. At the
same time, the international donor community - both
traditional and emerging donors - have a shared
responsibility to assist and scale up their contributions
as much as possible.

For its part, Japan will continue to work
bilaterally with the countries affected and
multilaterally, through the United Nations and other
avenues, to play its role in the context of this shared
responsibility. In Africa, our efforts will consist mainly
of promoting good governance and economic
development on the basis of the twin notions of
encouraging Africa's ownership and of promoting its
partnership with the international community,
consistent with the spirit of the New Partnership for
Africa's Development (NEPAD).

The now-established Tokyo International
Conference on African Development (TICAD)
continues to be an important avenue for our
cooperation with Africa. Yet another potential vehicle
for effective cooperation in that regard is the
promotion of the idea of human security, the key
concept of which was endorsed in the September
summit outcome document. Our support for Africa and
our cooperation with African States will be
strengthened, and this includes working through the
United Nations whenever possible and necessary.

