Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation welcomes the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Georgia and his joining in the work of the
Security Council today.

My delegation is obliged to the Secretary-General for
the submission of his report on the situation in Abkhazia,
Georgia, in compliance with resolution 971 (1995) dated 12
January. In that report we are told that, by and large, there
has been no progress in the political negotiations between
Georgia and Abkhazia and that the current situation reflects
a stalemate, which, in our judgement, might, were it to
persist, lead to an open clash between the parties to the
conflict.

According to the report, the opposing positions
involve, on one hand, a solution on the basis of a federal
State within the borders of Georgia and, on the other hand,
the solution favoured by the Abkhazians - one based on
a union between two equal States. As a result, the
repatriation of refugees and displaced persons is paralysed,
because the parties continue to apply different criteria as to
the way repatriation is to take place or the numbers it is to
involve. These differences are preventing compliance with
the stipulations of the Quadripartite Agreement signed in
Moscow in 1994 as to the voluntary return of refugees and
displaced persons - an Agreement designed to guarantee
the safety and security of those individuals. This, in turn,
ties the hands of the Quadripartite Commission, which, as
the Secretary-General's report tells us, has not met since 16
February of this year.

We urgently appeal to the parties to resume political
dialogue to prevent the situation from deteriorating further.
As the Secretary-General rightly says in paragraph 44 of his
report,

"tense political stalemates in which neither peace nor

war prevail do not allow the creation of the stability

and public confidence essential for economic
assistance, reconstruction and a return to normality

for the people concerned." (S/1995/342, para. 44)

We therefore feel that it is necessary for the de'marches
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
vis-a-vis the Government of Georgia and the Abkhazian
authorities to be continued, with the assistance of the
Russian Federation as facilitator and the involvement of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.

One element contributing to the exacerbation of
difficulties is the situation of insecurity spawned by
offences committed in the Gali region and the kind of
weaponry in the hands of the local residents, which, in
turn, makes possible the violation of the provisions of the
Agreement on a cease-fire and the separation of forces,
signed in May 1994 in Moscow.

Another difficulty is to be found in the restrictions
being imposed by the Government of Georgia and the
Abkhaz authorities on the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) military observers, which
are keeping them from doing their job of supervising
weapons stockpiles and patrolling. So long as the parties
do not show themselves determined to improve the
situation in those zones and to cooperate extensively with
UNOMIG, we believe it will be difficult to create
favourable conditions for the voluntary return of the
refugees.

However, we are pleased that the cooperation
between UNOMIG and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the peace-keeping force
of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) is continuing to develop
satisfactorily.

In conclusion, we take the view that the international
community in general and the Council in particular must
continue to pay close attention to the negotiating process
in order to ensure that the parties comply fully with their
political commitments and, especially, to ensure that they
guarantee full respect for international humanitarian law,
particularly as it relates to protection for refugees and
displaced persons.

My delegation has taken due note of the report of
the Secretary-General and endorses his recommendation

 

to extend the mandate of UNOMIG for another six months,
bearing in mind that the States members of the
Commonwealth of Independent States seem ready to extend
the mandate of the peace-keeping force with a view to
preventing open confrontation and any resumption of the
conflict.

