Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset allow me to congratulate you, Madam, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of May. I would also like to
thank you for convening this open debate to consider
the work of the sanctions Committees whose activities
are related to the fight against terrorism. Likewise, I
would like to thank the Permanent Representatives of
Mexico, Turkey and Austria for their briefings.

Argentina welcomes the adoption of resolution
1904 (2009) last December. The establishment of the
post of Ombudsperson is a positive step for bringing
the sanctions regime into greater conformity with the
minimum requirements of due process and thus
strengthens respect for jus cogens, human rights and
the rule of law. In that regard, I express my
delegation's appreciation to the members of the
Committee, to its Chairman, the Permanent
Representative of Austria, and to the delegation of
Denmark, which proposed the appointment of an
Ombudsperson during the period 2005-2006, when my
country, Argentina, chaired the Committee.

Resolution 1904 (2009) must be implemented as
soon as possible, with the urgent appointment of an
Ombudsperson possessing the highest moral and
professional qualifications and with the immediate
implementation of appropriate Committee guidelines
for the new institution. This is how to provide an
effective and fair system to review de-listing decisions.

My delegation considers it necessary to address
challenges from certain international bodies, courts and
parliaments of various States. To that end, we hope that
there will be effective and adequate treatment of
evidentiary issues and facts. It is possible and
necessary to strike a balance between security,
confidentiality and respect for due process. Trust in
and the experience of the Monitoring Team can be an
important contribution in this regard.

At the same time it is important to identify an
effective process to review the consolidated list of
individuals and entities associated with Al-Qaida and
the Taliban, pursuant to resolution 1822 (2008). For
that, the Committee must have all relevant information
available to States. It is also vital to remove the names
of deceased persons remaining on the consolidated list.
The credibility and quality of the list are essential.
Thus, it is also essential to continue working to
improve the process for identifying and listing
individuals and entities.

Regarding the work of the 1540 Committee,
allow me to reiterate Argentina's commitment to the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery. Argentina has submitted its
national report and the relevant updates, in fulfilment
of its obligations under the relevant resolutions. On the
domestic front, among other measures, we have
established a technical group to train national and
foreign experts in the identification of sensitive items.
Argentina's non-proliferation policy is enhanced by our
membership in the five control regimes for sensitive
exports.

At the same time, Argentina reaffirms the
inalienable right of States to develop research,
production and peaceful use of nuclear energy. In this
regard, I would like to highlight, as was recently done
by my Minister for Foreign Affairs during the general
debate of the Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
that in 2010 Argentina is celebrating 60 years of
peaceful nuclear activity. This activity has contributed
to the improving the quality of life of the people of
Argentina, in particular through its applications in the
field of medicine.

In concluding, allow me to reiterate that
Argentina believes that terrorist acts are a threat to
international peace and security and to human life and
dignity and that they endanger the stability, the
democracy and the social and economic development
of countries. Argentina reaffirms that the fight against
terrorism must be based on respect for international
law, international humanitarian law, international
human rights law and the principles and purposes of
the United Nations Charter.
