Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to thank Mr. Shearer, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for South Sudan, for his
intervention. I shall comment on three points.

First, on the peace process, the current priority is
to form a transitional Government of national unity
by 12 November. France welcomes Riek Machar's
visit to Juba last week. It is an important step that has
strengthened trust between him and Salva Kiir. We
encourage them to repeat such in-person meetings as
often as possible. Time is running out. The end of the
pretransition period is looming, in two months' time,
and a further postponement would be unacceptable. The
top priority must be the formation of the Government
of national unity, but, in parallel, it is important,
as the Special Representative has stressed, to make
progress on the delineation of internal borders and on
security arrangements.

France welcomes the efforts of the countries of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development to
support the peace process. Indeed, the subregion's
investment is absolutely essential to helping the parties
to move forward, and we encourage them to continue in
this direction. It is also necessary to respect the quotas
for women provided for in the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan and to allow them to participate actively
and meaningfully in the peace process, at all levels
and on all issues. The visit to Juba by the Security
Council next month will be an opportunity to repeat
those messages.

Secondly, the humanitarian situation remains
alarming and can be improved in the long term
only through the creation of lasting peace. While
the increase in the number of voluntary returns is
encouraging and directly linked to recent political
progress, intercommunity violence continues to drive
people into exile. These forced displacements, it should
be recalled, take place in a context of extreme poverty,
characterized by particularly high food insecurity. All
parties must ensure safe and unhindered humanitarian
access throughout the country in order for growing
humanitarian needs to be met. Naturally, this involves
protecting humanitarian personnel, medical personnel
and civilian and humanitarian infrastructure and
equipment. It is an obligation on which we must
not compromise.

The fight against sexual violence must also remain
a priority. We commend the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten, on her work in the field. As a
result of those efforts, the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement in Opposition has adopted an action plan
to combat sexual violence in its ranks. France is
also concerned about the human rights violations
reported by the commission mandated by the Human
Rights Council.

France reiterates its commitment to the fight
against impunity and the importance of prosecuting
and bringing to justice perpetrators of violations.
Accordingly, we call on all parties to establish the
hybrid court for South Sudan, with the support of the
African Union. The Security Council also has a role to
play and must systematically use sanctions to punish
and coerce those who commit such crimes.

Thirdly, France is committed to ensuring that the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
pursues its efforts to protect civilians, in particular
women and children, as that must remain the first
priority of the mission. France commends the Mission's
efforts to ensure the proper functioning of protection
of civilian sites, whose opening in 2013 has undeniably
saved thousands of human lives. But it is also essential
to protect all South Sudanese who need it, wherever they
are in the country. France supports the Mission's new,
more robust and mobile stance and the strengthening
of early warning mechanisms. Those efforts must be
continued in order to make areas of return safer.

In conclusion, on behalf of France, I would like to
offer my sincere thanks to the United Nations teams
and humanitarian actors who are conducting, often in
difficult conditions, a vital mission in the service of the
people of South Sudan.

