Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, let me thank the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, and his team for the
comprehensive and detailed briefing on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
which shed light on the overall situation in the Middle
East, and on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in particular.

On 18 December 2017, Mr. Mladenov briefed the
Security Council (see S/PV.8138) and stated, inter alia,
that no significant progress had been made in the peace
process. In the briefing we just heard, not only has
no progress been made on the situation in the region,
but, owing to developments in 2017, we are witnessing
heightened tensions and a worsening of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict.

Equatorial Guinea has been following with
particular attention the latest developments in the
Middle East, specifically in the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, more so now than ever as a member of the
Security Council, because this region is ofgreat strategic
importance for stability not only in the Middle East but
in the entire world. I therefore express the wholehearted
commitment of Equatorial Guinea to ensuring stability
and peace throughout the region. Equatorial Guinea has
always been in favour of a solution based on dialogue
to any conflict or problem that could arise, and in this
specific case we abide by the same principle.

To achieve the desired stability and peace in this
long-suffering area, Palestinians and Israelis must
commit themselves to direct, frank dialogue without
any preconditions, because only through direct
negotiations can an understanding be reached. Such an
understanding must lead to the only just solution: that the
aspirations of both parties be fulfilled in the framework
of two States in which both Israelis and Palestinians
live in peace and security. Such negotiations must be
conducted in the framework of the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council and the Arab Peace Initiative.
The final status of Jerusalem will have to be decided in
the framework of these negotiations.

Equatorial Guinea is therefore in favour of a two-
State solution that is the result of direct negotiations
between Israelis and Palestinians. A just solution
based on dialogue may perhaps mean that neither of
the two parties will see its aspirations met and claims
recognized entirely. That is precisely one of the key
aspects of dialogue.

Equatorial Guinea believes that the historical
demands of the Palestinians are justified, in line with the
various statements of the African Union, but we believe
also that Israel is entitled to live in peace and security.
Israelis must recognize thatjust as Israel's right to exist
cannot be denied, neither can that of Palestinians to the

same. Violence must cease immediately once and for all,
and the parties must comply with international legality
as enshrined in the various relevant resolutions of the
United Nations. The parties must also refrain from any
unilateral actions that could undermine dialogue.

We call on the international community to continue
with its efforts to promote dialogue between the parties
and to eschew steps that could be counterproductive to
achieving peaceful coexistence between Palestinians
and Israelis.

Given the current situation, it is vital that the
Security Council take all necessary initiatives and
that no effort be spared to bring the parties involved in
the conflict to the negotiating table as the only way to
resolve the situation.

