I thank High Commissioner Grandi for his briefing, although I regretfully missed it because I was carrying out my democratic duty to elect new members of the Security Council. I thank him for the tremendous efforts that he and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) are undertaking across the globe to help those most in need, particularly in the light of the huge impacts of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). The United Kingdom is a strong and steadfast supporter of UNHCR, and last year we contributed $122 million in core and country-level funding. I wish to echo the concerns expressed today about COVID-19's impact on refugees and internally displaced persons. We have provided $184 million for the new United Nations appeals, including $25 million for UNHCR, as part of an overall $1 billion contributed to the COVID-19 response since the crisis began. That money for UNHCR and the United Nations appeals will help install handwashing stations and isolation and treatment centres in refugee camps, provide protection and education services to forcibly displaced children and increase access to clean water for displaced people in areas of armed conflict. As the High Commissioner set out, efforts to build and sustain peace are the key to resolving displacement. The COVID-19 crisis is therefore an opportunity for us to redouble our conflict-prevention and peacebuilding efforts in support of the Secretary-General's vision of building back better. We agree that a continued focus on solutions remains critical. We have consistently emphasized the importance of longer-term development measures that increase refugee self-reliance as well as the importance of access to key services and opportunities, including education, work and training, delivered in a way that also looks to support generous host communities and countries. In this respect, I wish to commend Jordan's recent announcement that, in its continued support for refugees across all sectors, it will allow all registered refugees, regardless of nationality, access to subsidized public health care. Indeed, we commend the generosity of all countries in the region that have hosted Syrian refugees for so long. The entrenched conflict in Syria and the failure to reach a political solution, or even a lasting nationwide ceasefire, continues to prevent large-scale returns. While we hope that Syrians will ultimately be able to return to their homes, we agree with the United Nations assessment that conditions in Syria do not currently allow for this to occur. We continue to look to UNHCR to uphold the principles and the thresholds that should be met before facilitating returns, and we agree with the High Commissioner on the importance of measures to avert the ongoing acceleration of forced displacement. In north-west Syria, where over | million civilians were displaced because of the most recent chapter in the conflict, preserving the ongoing ceasefire and extending the mandate of the United Nations cross-border aid mechanism are our priorities for averting further displacement. In Myanmar, the recent escalation of violence in Rakhine and Chin states has led to significant new displacement. This uptick in violence risks setting back efforts aimed at creating conditions conducive to the safe, voluntary and dignified repatriation of Rohingya refugees. We welcomed Myanmar's recent announcement that the memorandum of understanding with the United Nations Development Programme and UNHCR has been extended until June 2021. However, more progress is required on creating conditions to allow for Rohingya repatriation. This remains important and urgent, given the increasing desperation in the camps in Cox's Bazar, the threat posed by COVID-19 and the perilous boat journeys that refugees continue to risk in the Bay of Bengal, facilitated by ruthless traffickers, for which a recent regional solution is essential. We have urged the Government of Myanmar to set up a transparent and credible long-term plan to advance those priorities. We hope they will use their report to the International Court of Justice to do that and will publish it as part of the commitment to transparency. Let me pay tribute to, and again thank, the Government and the people of Bangladesh for their incredible generosity in supporting so many refugees on their territory. Finally, let me say that the United Kingdom remains committed to doing its part to meet the needs of the 50 million internally displaced persons across the globe, 90 per cent of whom are displaced as a result of conflict and violence. We are a long-standing advocate and supporter of the Secretary-General's High-level Panel on Internal Displacement, which we believe represents a critical opportunity to galvanize political attention, tackle the growing challenge of internal displacement and find solutions that all countries can take forward.
