The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Council for the month of August 2011, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Peter Wittig, Permanent
Representative of Germany, for his services as
President of the Security Council for the month of July
2011. I am sure I speak for all members of the Council
in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Wittig
and his delegation for the great diplomatic skill with
which they conducted the Council's business last
month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern at the deteriorating situation in Syria, and
expresses profound regret at the death of many
hundreds of people.

"The Security Council condemns the
widespread violations of human rights and the
use of force against civilians by the Syrian
authorities.

"The Security Council calls for an
immediate end to all violence and urges all sides
to act with utmost restraint, and to refrain from
reprisals, including attacks against State
institutions.

"The Security Council calls on the Syrian
authorities to fully respect human rights and to
comply with their obligations under applicable
international law. Those responsible for the
violence should be held accountable.

"The Security Council notes the announced
commitments by the Syrian authorities to reform,
and regrets the lack of progress in
implementation, and calls upon the Syrian
Government to implement its commitments.

"The Security Council reaffirms its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Syria. It stresses that
the only solution to the current crisis in Syria is
through an inclusive and Syrian-led political
process, with the aim of effectively addressing
the legitimate aspirations and concerns of the
population which will allow the full exercise of
fundamental freedoms for its entire population,
including that of expression and peaceful
assembly.

"The Security Council calls on the Syrian
authorities to alleviate the humanitarian situation
in crisis areas by ceasing the use of force against
affected towns, to allow expeditious and
unhindered access for international humanitarian
agencies and workers, and to cooperate fully with
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to update the Security Council
on the situation in Syria within seven days."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/20l 1/ 16.

I now give the floor to those representatives who
wish to make a statement.


