Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I would first like to thank
the briefers for their comprehensive presentations. I am
still thinking about Mr. Zenenga's description of the
demoralized United Nations staff after the attack on
the compound on 1 January, the expulsion of Special
Representative Haysom and, also with regard to the
United Nations staff, the treatment of the Coordinator
of the Panel of Experts. I hope that the morale of the
United Nations troops and staff and their cooperation
with the Government have improved. For our part, I
want to affirm Germany's commitment to Somalia and
to all of the United Nations and international efforts
there. I would like to make six brief points.

First, I want to echo what several speakers, including
my Belgian colleague, said with regard to federalism.
Both Belgium and Germany are federal countries, and
we know about federalism. We also know that a strong
federal Government does not preclude the possibility
of strong federal member state Governments. On the
contrary, in Germany we have a strong Government
in Berlin and a strong Government in Munich for
Bavaria, and I am sure that is also possible for Somalia
and Puntland or Somaliland, I believe it can work. It is
unfortunate that the first meeting in Garowe was not
successful, and I would like to know ifa second meeting
is scheduled, because we believe those conversations
must be had and must see results. That is important for
my next point.

Secondly, I want to emphasize the importance of a
successful constitutional review, the establishment of
an electoral legal framework and security reform.

Thirdly, as several speakers, including the
representative of the Dominican Republic, have
mentioned, I want to highlight the importance of
the protection of women and children. The point I
specifically want to make in that context is about sexual
Violence in conflict. We encourage the Government to
strengthen the legal framework to protect victims and
prosecute perpetrators, which the Secretary-General
recommends in his report (S/2019/393) and which we
believe should also be reflected in the mandate of the
African Union Mission in Somalia.

Fourthly, the implementation of the security
transition plan is urgent. We need a comprehensive
approach with joint and coordinated planning, Somali
ownership and the buy-in of all stakeholders. In that
context, with regard to the first successful Somali-led
operation in Lower Shabelle, I would like to know what
lessons were learned in the operation. On the security
front we also want to plead for strengthening the police,
which is very important for the relationship between the
State and its population. A strong police also allows the
military to perform the tasks that it is supposed to do.

Fifth1y, with regard to the various transition
processes, in general, we urge the Government to invite
and include women and young people.

Lastly, I was struck by what Assistant Secretary-
General Mueller said in her briefing in connection with
the humanitarian situation. She and the other briefers
emphasized the problem of the severe drought and its
consequences. It is not just that the number of people
in need of humanitarian aid has increased, it is that
the drought affects fragile communities and has the
potential to generate conflict. We therefore believe
that issues related to the consequences of climate
change should be incorporated into the Mission's
future mandate.

