Mr. Wittig (Germany): I thank you, Mr. President,
for scheduling this very important debate today and for
inviting my country to participate.
10-42851
Germany fully aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of the European Union.

Respect for the rule of law is a fundamental
requirement for the maintenance of international peace,
security and justice and remains at the very core of
Germany's foreign policy. I would like to highlight
three key issues with regard to the Security Council
and the rule of law: first, the role of the International
Court of Justice and other international courts;
secondly, the rule of law and sanctions; and thirdly, the
rule of law in peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

First, on the International Court of Justice, in a
world of 192 States, differences do occur, but avoiding
threats to international peace and security will be
possible only if disputes can be addressed by peaceful
means. For this purpose, the international community
has developed a wide range of mechanisms. There are
strictly judicial mechanisms, such as the International
Court of Justice or - to name but one of the more
specialized courts - the International Tribunal for the
Law of the Sea. It is of course first and foremost up to
States to make use of that system and to submit their
disputes to these procedures.

As a first step towards advancing the rule of law,
more States should accept the compulsory jurisdiction
of the International Court of Justice and of other
independent tribunals. International treaties could, as a
rule, contain dispute settlement clauses that provide for
an independent adjudication of disputes on their
interpretation or application. The Security Council
could further encourage States to make use of the
existing judicial institutions, in particular the
International Court of Justice.

Secondly, on the rule of law and sanctions, the
rule of law also entails the obligation of international
organizations to act in accordance with international
law, internally and in their relations vis-a-vis Member
States and the international community. One important
example in this regard is respect for the rule of law in
international sanctions regimes, in particular in the
fight against international terrorism. Germany, together
with a group of like-minded States, has been strongly
advocating for the improvement of United Nations
sanctions mechanisms to better respect rule of law
principles.

We are very satisfied with the progress made, in
particular through the establishment of a focal point to
receive de-listing requests and the creation of the

10-4285]
Office of the Ombudsperson. We are confident that this
Office will render the de-listing procedure more
effective, thereby enhancing the credibility of the
sanctions regime as a whole.

Thirdly, on the rule of law in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, another field where the rule of law
becomes extremely important to the work of the
Security Council is in the establishment or
re-establishment of the rule of law in societies
emerging from years of armed violence.

Over the past few years, strengthening the rule of
law has become a much more common feature of
peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding efforts.
Building the rule of law is accepted as a core
peacekeeping task today, but this task poses a number
of political and operational challenges. First, the often
limited lifespan of a peacekeeping operation makes it
difficult to truly establish a functioning rule of law
system that can continue on its own once the mission
has left. Secondly, the very different circumstances on
the ground usually require a specific solution. A one-
size-fits-all approach would not deliver sustainable
results or allow for the necessary principle of local
ownership.

The challenge for the United Nations, as well as
for other international organizations and multilateral
and bilateral donors, is how to extend rule of law
support beyond the immediate peacekeeping phase so
as to make reform sustainable. True rule of law support
requires the consistent and long-term engagement of
the international community as a whole. In my capacity
as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, let me also
say that adopting an earlier peacebuilding perspective
in the Security Council would enable us to enhance the
scope and to add value in peacekeeping mandates in
the areas of the rule of law, demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration, and security and justice
sector reform.

In concluding, let me reiterate that my country
will continue to be a staunch advocate of the rule of
law. Our guiding principle here, as on all other issues,
is that of a dialogue among equals. The rule of law will
be accepted by all, both nationally and internationally,
only ifit is the result ofa dialogue.

