The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Liberia in which she requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mrs. 0soa'e
(Liberia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/159, containing the tenth progress
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia. Members of the Council also have
before them document S/2006/202, which contains the
text of a draft resolution prepared in the course of the
Council's prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to document S/2006/184, containing a
letter dated 22 March 2006 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, China, Congo, Denmark, France,
Ghana, Greece, Japan, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America


The President (spoke in Spanish): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1667 (2006).

I give the floor to the representative of France,
who wishes to make a statement following the voting.


