Mr. Viinanen (Finland): At the outset, let me
congratulate Mexico on taking up the topic of
strengthening the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security. Enhancing the rule of
law is a pertinent part of the work of the Security
Council in several ways. Injustice and a weak rule of
law can be consequences of conflict, but they are also
often underlying reasons why conflicts persist or break
out in the first place. Sustainable peace is built on a
foundation of justice and the strong rule of law. We are
therefore encouraged to see that the Security Council is
discussing the Secretary-General's report of December
2006 (S/2006/980). This topic should remain high on
the Council's agenda.

I would also like to thank Deputy Secretary-
General Migiro and Under-Secretary-General O'Brien
for their contributions to our debate today. Finland, of
course, fully aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union to be made shortly.

The concept paper (S/2010/322) you have
provided, Mr. President, outlines a wide range of issues
for discussion today. I would like to concentrate my
remarks on two aspects that we feel are particularly
central to fostering the rule of law: the relationship
between justice and sustainable peace, and
strengthening the rule of law at the national level. It
has become almost a slogan to say that there is no
sustainable peace without justice. I would like to break
this argument into two parts and ask: What makes
peace sustainable, and what do we mean by justice in
the aftermath of the breakdown of the rule of law
during a conflict?

In trying to bring a conflict to an end, the parties
around the table are traditionally those who also have
the means to destroy a peace agreement - the warring
parties, those who carried out or commanded armed
violence or financed it for their own benefit. Reaching
a peace agreement is the first step towards ending the
violence. The next steps towards a positive, sustainable
peace cannot be taken without a holistic approach, and
a much more inclusive group of people: women who
sustained communities while men were fighting,
political parties that did not engage in violence but
have a legitimate interest in how the country should be
run, those who had to flee, and those who were victims
of violence. There must be inclusive ownership of a
peace agreement and reconstruction plans if the peace
is to stick and not unfold into a new conflict.

Justice can also take many different forms, but it
is ultimately about inclusion. Impunity violates
fundamental notions of justice, which is why it is
important to see justice taking place in the form of a
trial and sentences being handed down. In some cases,
reparations may even be awarded.

Here, I would like to emphasize the importance
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) in the
evolution of international criminal justice. In Finland's
view, the ICC and the Rome Statute system clearly
demonstrate that impunity for the most serious crimes
is no longer an acceptable option. We must also
remember that the ICC is a court of last resort. The
system created through the Rome Statute is based on
complementarity. The States have primary
responsibility to investigate and prosecute nationally
the most serious crimes of international concern. That
is why the system has been instrumental in
strengthening the rule of law at the national level.

However, as Judge Patrick Robinson, President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, stated recently to the Council (see S/PV.6342), in order to contribute to lasting peace,
justice must be not only retributive, but also
restorative. For victims of a conflict or long-lasting
social exclusion, it can be more important to have the
opportunity to tell their story on an equal footing with
other members of society or to hear official recognition
of wrongs committed. An essential element of
restorative justice is that the voices of the victims and
their communities are heard. We must not overlook
traditional dispute resolution mechanisms.

Most important for the future of a society
recovering from war, the ground rules that broke down
during the war must be re-established: equal rights for
all citizens, mechanisms for protecting and promoting

10-4285]
those rights and for settling different interests by
peaceful means. This brings me to my second point,
that strengthening the rule of law at the national level
is the most effective way to bring about a more just
society and to prevent a relapse into conflict.

Reform of the rule of law and security institutions
is essential to rebuilding the people's trust in
Government. This has to start even before a conflict
ends. The rule of law, as narrowly defined, has to be
seen as encompassing every link in the chain, from
police to justice institutions to the enforcement of
sentences. Finland has been a strong advocate of
strengthening United Nations resources for supporting
national rule of law authorities in the immediate
aftermath of a conflict, as well as in the later stages of
development.

We are pleased that the Standing Police Capacity
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations is now
complemented with justice and corrections
professionals who are ready to deploy at short notice.
We also hope that the rule of law team foreseen in
resolution 1888 (2009), which is aimed at helping
national authorities to respond to acute situations of
sexual violence, will shortly become operational.

Finland implements that comprehensive approach
in its own crisis management and development
activities. In Afghanistan, for example, Finland
actively participates in the work of the European Union
Police Mission and has been keen to ensure that gender
aspects and wider human rights concerns are fully
taken into account. In order to complement the work
undertaken by the Mission, Finland has a bilateral
programme aimed at strengthening cooperation
between Afghan police and prosecutors.

As I noted in the beginning, the concept paper
covered a wide range of issues. We would need many
debates of this kind to discuss all of them in detail. For
example, the use of targeted sanctions by the Security
Council raises important questions concerning
guarantees of due process and the rule of law. Finland
welcomes the progress achieved in this area, in
particular resolution 1904 (2009) and the recent
appointment of Ms. Kimberly Prost as Ombudsperson
of the Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee. We
call upon the Security Council to continue its work in
that regard.

Finally, we have come a long way in
strengthening the rule of law. The Security Council has

been instrumental in the fight against impunity and has
taken remarkable steps in ensuring that due process
guarantees are also in place in its own functioning. We
should, however, tirelessly look at new ways to
integrate the wider notion of the rule of law into the
Security Council's agenda and in its daily decisions in
the maintenance of international peace and security.

In that regard, we welcome the follow-up report
on the rule of law and transitional justice requested in
the draft presidential statement to be adopted today. We
hope that the report would also assess the impact that
the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group has
had.

