Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Foreign Minister Chikoti for being here today and for
hosting this timely debate on an incredibly important
set of issues. Let me also thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, Commissioner Chergui, Special Envoy
Djinnit and Mr. Pillai of the World Bank for their
remarks and determined work throughout the Great
Lakes region.

The Great Lakes Private Sector Investment
Conference, co-hosted by Special Envoy Djinnit's
Office in Kinshasa last month, spoke to the economic
and security gains made acress the region over the last
decade. That progress is tenuous and fragile, and there
is still a long way to go. The trajectory over the past
several years, however, has clearly been positive.

I would like to use my remarks to underscore
the inextricable connection linking democratic
accountability, human rights and the rule of law, on the
one hand, and economic progress and lasting stability
and peace, on the other.

On the very same day that the Great Lakes
Private Sector Investment Conference began, a court
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo ruled on
the case of six young activists - five men and one
woman - who had been charged with attempting to
incite civil disobedience. They had been arrested eight
days earlier at a private home in Goma at 4.30 in the
morning as they prepared banners for a general strike
to protest potential election delays. One of the banners
read "in 2016 we won the Cup" - in reference to the
African nation's soccer championship - "we can also
win democracy". They were convicted and sentenced
to two years in jail, a term reduced, on appeal, to
six months.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is not
the only country in the region where civil society is
threatened or where democratic processes are being
deliberately undermined. This unfortunately has
been the accelerating trend in recent months, evident
at the top, where leaders make increasingly blatant
power grabs to remain in office, and on the streets,
where their Governments close media outlets, arrest
opposition members, intimidate civil society groups
and otherwise squeeze the political space available
for competing views. This widening disregard for
democratic processes threatens to undermine the
political security and development progress achieved
over the past two decades, and it imperils the progress
still to come. It defies the ability of citizens to freely
choose their leaders and hold them accountable. It
drives them into the streets or out of the country. It
threatens to plunge communities back into the cycle of
poverty and violence, from which many are only now
beginning to emerge.

Let me speak briefly to the situation in four
countries where this trend is most pronounced and
where there is still time to change course.

The economic achievements of President Kagami's
Rwanda are well known and rightly celebrated. Per
capita income has doubled since the year 2000. Rwanda's
advances on the Human Development Index are greater
than any other country in the world over the past 25 years.
It has become a leader in international peacekeeping,
in numbers as well as in performance, with its forces
admired for their bravery and their commitment to
civilian protection. When one reflects on the horrors
of the genocide that killed approximately 800,000 Tutsi
and moderate Hutu 22 years ago next month, one sees
the epic scale of the achievements by President Kagami
and by the Rwandan people. The results on the ground
for Rwandans are remarkable. Unfortunately, despite
Rwanda's progress on economic rights, women's right,
and on so many development axes, its record in the
protection and promotion of civil and political rights
is less impressive. The United States remains deeply
committed to its partnership with Rwanda, but the
continued absence of political space and the inability of
individuals andjournalists to discuss political affairs or
report on issues of public concern pose a serious risk to
Rwanda's future stability. Rwanda can achieve lasting
peace and prosperity through a Government centred
on the principle of democratic accountability, not one
centred on any single individual.

The same applies in Uganda. Uganda is a critical
contributor to peace and security, especially through
its long-time contribution to the African Union force in
Somalia. It is also a generous host to more than 500,000
refugees, providing the right to work and access to
social services to refugees and Ugandan citizens alike.
However, when it comes to democratic accountability,
the run-up and aftermath to last month's elections show
real issues. The Government and its security forces
detained opposition figures without legal justification,
harassed their supporters and intimidated the media.
It passed legislation restricting the operations of
non-governmental organizations, banning them from
acting against the "interests of Uganda". President
Museveni's actions contravene the rule of law,
jeopardize Uganda's democratic progress and threaten
Uganda's future stability and prosperity.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
President Kabila appears to be considering a similar
path. His country remains one of the poorest in the
world, but it has begun to see gains in democracy,
stability and economic growth. In 2014, its economy
grew by 9.5 per cent. Yet as President Kabila's term
nears its end, that fragile progress hangs in the balance.
Continued development depends upon further advances
against armed groups and the extension of State
authority. And, of course, it depends on free and fair
presidential elections in November. There is no credible
reason that the Democratic Republic of the Congo's
elections would not occur on schedule. The Independent
National Electoral Commission said in January that it
would need 18 months to update voter rolls. But election
experts assure us that it can be done in six months. As
the representative of a country that continues to debate
its own electoral processes, I recognize that elections
are not always perfect, and certainly not always easy,
but fidelity to the Constitution - not to mention long-
term stability f means that elections must occur on
time. Not only must ballots be cast, but individuals must
be allowed to campaign for their preferred candidates
and express their opinions freely. There is no excuse for
the harassment and detention of peaceful activists and
opposition leaders in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, like the six activists I mentioned earlier or the 18
other members of the pro-democracy youth movement
known as LUCHA, who were detained last Tuesday
and held for four days. Their offence was peacefully
protesting the Supreme Court's refusal to release two
activists, Fred Bauma and Yves Makwambala, who
were arrested a year ago and still have yet to receive a
trial. It should go without saying that this is not the path
to lasting stability. Fred, Yves, the Goma six and all the
other young people who have done nothing more than
seek a better future for their country should be released.
The Government's attempt to limit its cooperation with
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to
force a reduction of troops is also concerning. Let us
be clear: the Council should not allow peacekeeping
missions to become pawns in political games. When
Blue Helmets are deployed, they must be allowed to
fulfil their mandate, in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo or any place else.
We need look no further than Burundi to see the
dangers of pursuing personal power over the interests
of the people. Burundi's economy grew steadily for a
decade, but contracted by an estimated 7 per cent last
year. President Nkurunziza's decision to stay in office,
in defiance of the Arusha Accords, and his crackdown
on political opposition have swiftly undone the
country's progress of recent years. That is evident in the
widespread reports of sexual violence, the more than
400 people who have been killed, the over 250,000 that
have fled the country and the even more challenging
economic times that, unfortunately, lie ahead. What
remains to be seen is whether President Nkurunziza
will take decisive action to correct course. Some of his
Government's recent commitments are encouraging,
but none have yet been matched by meaningful action.
Ofthe 2,000 prisoners he pledged to free, just 158 have
been released to date, and only 47 ofthose were political
prisoners. Two of the five radio stations shuttered have
been allowed to re-open. But that is just two of the five,
and one of those allowed to re-open is pro-Government.
We will welcome and support constructive steps when
we see them. But rhetoric is not enough.

Let me conclude. The United States has historically
been a strong partner of all four of those countries, as
it has been for others in the region. Those partnerships
are not tied to any particular individual leader, but to the
people of those countries. This has been evident in our
long-standing aid programmes, our efforts to encourage
stability and our commitment to institution-building.
It is evident, too, in our strong support for the Public-
Private Alliance for Responsible Minerals Trade,
which we hope will enable supply-chain solutions that
encourage the legitimate trade in natural resources.
All four of the leaders I have mentioned today have
led their countries through extraordinarily difficult
times, but the choices they make now will determine
whether their countries' gains are sustained and how
they themselves will be remembered decades from now.
President Obama told an audience in Ethiopia last year,

"Sometimes you'll hear leaders say, well, I'm the
only person who can hold this nation together. If
that's true, then that leader has failed to truly build

their nation."

Those nations are ready. If they are given opportunities
to fully participate in democratic processes, to hold
their leaders accountable, to be subjected to and benefit
from the rule of law, they will not merely survive, they
will prosper.

