Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia associates itself with this second
pronouncement by the Security Council within one
week, which shows our firm determination to deal with
the Syrian crisis. It is clear that violence in all its forms
has not ceased and that there continue to be attacks and
incidents that constitute violations of the ceasefire
declared on 12 April. That is why we support the
establishment of the United Nations Supervision
Mission in Syria (UNSMIS), with a mandate to
monitor a cessation of armed Violence in all its forms
by all parties and to oversee and ensure the full
implementation of the six-point plan of the Joint
Special Envoy of the United Nations and the League of
Arab States, Mr. Kofi Annan.

We would hope that the broad presence on the
ground will make it possible for us to follow up and
monitor on an ongoing basis the fulfilment of the
conditions set out in the six-point plan, to which the
Syrian Government and the opposition have committed
themselves. To that end, the resolution requests the
Secretary-General to inform the Security Council
immediately of any obstacles preventing UNSMIS
from doing its job. In that respect, we hope that the
Syrian authorities will assume the responsibilities
incumbent upon them.

The coordination and efforts of the Joint Special
Envoy deserve our full support and gratitude. My
delegation believes that his proposal is an ideal one to
immediately put an end to all violence, ensure access
to humanitarian assistance and to provide for a political
transition, led by Syria towards a democratic pluralistic
political system through the establishment of the
necessary conditions for beginning a broad-based
political dialogue between the Syrian Government and
the entire spectrum of the Syrian opposition. That is
why it is urgent that all parties effectively meet all of
the conditions provided for in the proposal and in the
commitments they have made and that the Syrian
authorities put an end to violent repression and
atrocities.

