Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I greatly appreciate
being included in the discussion today, since Germany
participated in the P5+1 talks, or, as Germany
would say, the E3/EU+3 talks, which led to the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). I would
also like to commend Ambassador Sebastiano Cardi
for his work as Faciliatator and to warmly thank
Ms. Joanne Adamson for her statement. Germany
fully supports the work of the European External
Action Service and that of not only Ms. Federica
Mogherini but also Secretary General Helga Schmidt,
who was instrumental in negotiating the JCPOA and
also oversees its implementation. I will be brief on
substance. Along with most speakers, I think there are
two points to make.

First, the JCPOA continues to hold following
the ninth verification round, and, in my opinion,
continues to represent a huge success in terms of
international diplomacy and the strengthening of the
non-proliferation regime. When the non-proliferation
regime is under threat, I believe that strengthening
and maintaining the JCPOA is very important, but that
has to be done in every aspect. By that I mean that the
people of Iran, who have suffered a great deal under the
regime and because of sanctions, also have to benefit
from the lifting of the sanctions so that they can live in
better conditions.

Secondly, of course, we must look at the full
picture concerning resolution 2231 (2015). To say the
least, Iran's activities are inconsistent with what that
resolution called for. The list is long, and I thank Jeff
Feltman very much for his presentation of the Secretary-
General's report (S/2017/1030), which lists a number of
areas in which Iran is not in compliance. First and most
important, there is the issue of the ballistic missile tests
that are being conducted, and the transfer of arms to
the Houthis. Given how many times that was mentioned
around the table today, I believe that it is very urgent
that the Secretary-General continue to work on that
and subsequently present all the evidence before the
Council so that the recommended actions may be taken.

As I said, we continue to support the JCPOA, but
we are not blind. We see the role that Iran is playing.
The leaders of Germany, France and Britain have
underlined that the regional role of Iran and its ballistic
missile programme give rise to serious concerns, as
they directly affect European security interests. Any
alleged activity involving uranium warrants our utmost
attention. We call on Iran to cease all activities that
might be inconsistent or violate the terms of resolution
2231 (2015) and to ensure its full compliance with
the resolution.

The meeting rose at 5p.m.
