Mr. Mlynar (Slovakia): At the outset, let me
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and for
having taken the initiative to hold this important
ministerial-level open debate to further underscore the
nexus between human and environmental security and
how the Security Council can perform its functions
with respect to climate-related risks to international
peace and security. We are very pleased to see that,
in its work, the Security Council is paying increased
attention to environmental issues.

My delegation had the honour to serve on the
Council as an elected member when the United
Kingdom delegation first introduced this discussion
in 2007 (see S/PV.5663). Since then, there has been
an increase in the Security Council's consideration
of climate change-related security issues. In 2017, the
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2349 (2017)
on the Lake Chad basin, and in March 2018 resolution
2408 (2018) on Somalia, which also incorporated
language on climate and security. Those are important
steps in the right direction.

My delegation fully associates itself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union.
I would like to make a few additional remarks to
complement that statement.

In general, it makes no difference from where the
risk of conflict stems if it is real. Climate change is a
very real phenomenon and a very real threat to all of us
in the twenty-first century. It poses grave risks to our
health, nutrition, economic growth and security and
to the livelihoods of future generations. The impact of
climate change has already contributed to the increased
vulnerability of certain populations around the world.
It is stretching the capacities of Governments and
societies and driving people out of their homes.

We need climate action that is timely, concerted
and sustainable in order to alleviate its negative
consequences, improve energy security and protect
the environment. We need to accelerate actions to
implement the Paris Agreement on Climate Change.

We welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General to
bring the climate to the top of the international agenda
and his sustained political and diplomatic mobilization
at the global level. Indeed, the United Nations should
to the best of its ability lead in facilitating and
coordinating global efforts on climate action, working
with regional partners and other key stakeholders,
including non-State actors such as businesses and local
authorities, which play an increasingly important role
in this field.

My delegation would like to encourage the Security
Council to continue to identify ways of addressing
the impacts of climate change on conflict and to
seek the necessary policy responses in accordance
with its respective purview and mandate to maintain
international peace and security.

Indeed, we need an integrated response from
the United Nations, including its Security Council,
focusing on preventive diplomacy, peacebuilding,
peacekeeping and resilience. Institutional and sectoral
divides must be overcome in order to be able to work
in a more integrated fashion, linking humanitarian,
development, climate-mitigation and peace and
security-related action.

On 27 May 2016, the United Nations Environment
Assembly inNairobiadoptedaresolutionthatrecognized
the role of healthy ecosystems and sustainably managed
resources in reducing the risk of armed conflict. We
have to take further steps to more effectively address
the critical threats that war and armed conflict pose
to the environment and conservation efforts, as well
as the role that natural resources may play in fuelling
armed conflicts.

The final issue that I would like to address relates
to environmental management in peace operations. It is
a well-known fact that large peacekeeping operations
and the number of peacekeepers deployed therein can
have a potentially adverse environmental impact on the
host country. We call for the full implementation of the
Environment Strategy launched by the United Nations
in November 2016 in this particular context. All parts
of the United Nations system involved, including the
Security Council, should closely cooperate to address
such potential risks.

An overwhelming majority of us view climate
change as the defining challenge of this era. The
Secretary-General has warned us that

"Climate change is running faster than we are and

we must catch up sooner rather than later, before it

is too late".
Multilateralism is a key tool that can and should
deliver on global solutions, including climate change.
The motto of the twenty-fourth session of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
held in Katowice, Poland, was "changing together".
With this in mind, we believe that the Security Council
should make its own contribution to managing and
mitigating climate change. I can assure the Council
that Slovakia is fully committed to doing its part in the
context of our collective responsibility in this regard.

