Mr. Jumeau (Seychelles): I should like to thank
you, Sir, for this opportunity to address the Security
Council, the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/590) and Special Representative Ahmedou
Ould Abdallah for his briefing.

Seychelles is by far the smallest and most
vulnerable country to be directly impacted by the
spillover of the instability in Somalia. By spillover I
mean, of course, the piracy that, as the Secretary-
General has pointed out in his report, continues to
spread farther East and South into the Indian Ocean, in
and around the waters of Seychelles and beyond.

To us in Seychelles, the scourge of piracy is not
just affecting the freedom of the seas, maritime trade,
humanitarian aid or the security of international
shipping. To Seychelles, piracy in the Indian Ocean is
severely endangering our national security, territorial
integrity and economic development, stability and
viability.

The greatest handicap Seychelles faces in
combating piracy is that its 115 far-flung islands are
sprinkled over an exclusive economic zone of
1.4 million square kilometres. This vast ocean territory
is larger than France, Spain, Portugal, Belgium, the
Netherlands and Luxembourg combined. Despite
Seychelles having a population of just 85,000 and,
consequently, very limited naval and military
resources, the Government has had to stationed troops
on our outlying islands to protect our territorial
integrity and national security. We are drawing up new
anti-piracy legislation and beefing up our coast guard
and relevant investigative, prosecutorial, judicial and
custodial institutions as best we can within our limited
resources.

While it is true we are receiving some help here
from our bilateral and multilateral partners, including
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
International Maritime Organization, more is needed.
This is because Seychelles is having to divert scarce
funds from its economic and social development to
defend the country against pirates. This is happening at
a time when the country is quickly losing much-needed
revenue and suffering escalating unforeseen costs
because of the pirate attacks, while at the same time
struggling through difficult but vital budget-cutting
economic reforms in collaboration with the
International Monetary Fund.

For example, pirate attacks in and around
Seychelles have slashed our revenue from fishing, the
second most important pillar of our economy after
tourism, by more than half. The tuna catch by fishing
boats operating out of our capital Port Victoria has also
tumbled by 50 per cent to the lowest figure since the
1980s. Several distant-water fishing vessels which
were operating out of Port Victoria have left the Indian
Ocean altogether. The number of boats seeking
licences to fish in Seychelles's exclusive economic
zone is declining, and even our own domestic
fishermen fear putting out to sea. We finally had to
allow foreign boats to take troops or armed security
guards on board to protect them while fishing.

More than 80 per cent of what we consume is
imported, mostly by sea. The cost of maritime
insurance has shot up, and some cargo ships are now
bypassing Seychelles and unloading goods destined for
our islands in other ports. All this has helped push up
prices and the cost ofliving. Some cruise ships
have cancelled their cruises in and around Seychelles,
and private yachting is on the decline. Sea travel to our
most distant islands has to be done by convoy.

Unable to effectively protect such a vast territory
on our own, we have had to turn to our friends abroad
for help. As a result, our population has watched with a
mixed sense of anxiety and reassurance as Seychelles
has fast become an increasingly important hub in the
fight against piracy as it spreads farther and farther into
the Indian Ocean.

A signatory of the Djibouti Code of Conduct,
Seychelles has also signed status of forces agreements
and/ or memorandums of understanding with the United
States, the European Union, France, Britain and
Belgium. Further agreements are being negotiated with

NATO and the United Arab Emirates, and we have
active military cooperation with India, Russia and
other friendly countries. We have allowed the United
States to station unmanned aerial vehicles or drones in
Seychelles to supplement the multinational military
surveillance aircraft flying from our islands to seek out
pirates and alert naval forces and international shipping
as to their whereabouts. Meanwhile, we await various
kinds of assistance that have been promised to us to
help boost our own contribution to the fight against
piracy, and we would welcome more.

In this regard, we welcome the establishment of
an international trust fund by the Contact Group on
piracy to complement the Djibouti Code of Conduct
trust fund. The Seychelles Government would also
support an arrangement whereby pirates convicted in
other countries could serve their prison terms in
Somalia.

As the Council can see, Seychelles is both in the
thick of it and on the front line, but not of our own
choosing. We have no choice, as we are the only
country in the Indian Ocean to be under siege from
pirate attacks, not against us per se, but against
anything they see moving in and around our waters.

Despite the escalating international military
build-up in the Indian Ocean, the biggest in any one
region in recent times, we in Seychelles are under no
illusion that the long-term solution to piracy in the
region and to the security and economic problems it is
causing our islands lies in addressing the root cause -
the unrest in Somalia itself. The Seychelles
Government therefore supports the Secretary-General's
call to strengthen the capabilities of the Somali
Transitional Federal Government and of the African
Union Mission in Somalia, to restore the rule of law,
peace, security and progress to Somalia and, in doing
so, to also help eradicate piracy from its shores.

Peace will not return to the waters of the Indian
Ocean, nor tranquillity to the paradise islands of
Seychelles, until there is peace in Somalia. Until then,
Seychelles will remain committed to and active in the
fight against piracy in the region, but only as far as its
resources allow.

