Ms. Wronecka (Poland): First of all, I should
like to thank the United States presidency for holding
this debate ahead of the upcoming high-level meeting
on action for peacekeeping. Let me also express my
appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre
Lacroix and Ms. Sarah Blakemore for their remarks and
valuable inputs during today's discussion.

Poland would approach performance in United
Nations peacekeeping operations from a holistic
perspective, as a collective effort that is well integrated
into the wider context of the engagement of the whole
of the United Nations system to improve peacekeeping
and as an endeavour of the entire international
community, rather than that of only isolated incidents
involving the actions of inefficient peacekeepers. Thus
we need to address all stakeholders, including members
of the Security Council, and ask how our declarations
and words translate into real action.

Let me focus on three points today.
I should like to begin with one of the key elements in
building an effective and efficient performance culture
in the Organization: information-sharing. We see
information and data-driven analysis as the founding
principle of and entry point to improved peacekeeping.
It serves the efforts of all stakeholders in strengthening
missions' effectiveness and efficiency.

Better situational awareness improves planning and
makes it possible to identify clear and well-understood
benchmarks. Subsequently, realistic plans serve as
precise guides for troop-contributing countries (TCCs)
in their pre-deployment training. This chain reaction is
what leads to the effective implementation of a mandate
and is indispensable in missions' ultimate goal of
protecting civilians and United Nations personnel.

Poland is also a strong believer in tailored
pre-deployment training and the provision of adequate
equipment to our troops. Such mission-specific
preparations are possible only when TCCs are provided
with the full operational, political, geographical
and security picture. Thus we would underline the
importance and necessity of implementing and
integrating peacekeeping intelligence capabilities as
part of the information culture in the field and at United
Nations Headquarters.

The second point I would like to touch upon
today is communication. The role of the Secretariat,
the Security Council and TCCs in this process must
be underscored. In this regard, Poland welcomes the
openness and transparency that characterized the
consultations on the Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
This approach should be adopted as a regular procedure
in discussions on such vital topics as peacekeeping.

Additionally, we should not overlook the power
of communication in the process of putting political
pressure on key stakeholders or the need to include host
nations as they play a pivotal role in and take ownership
of the national political process.

While we all agree on the primacy of politics in
conflict resolution and the leading role of host States
in political processes and the protection of their own
citizens, the process poses a challenge: how to address
the issue of unsatisfactory progress and engagement
by the host State, and how should we, the international
community, address such shortfalls when they become
evident? I believe that the best answer is for the Security
Council to speak in unison, followed by collective and
orchestrated action.

My third point focuses on the steps that should be

taken to ensure the effective involvement of women in
peacekeeping operations.

Education in the basics should be provided so as
to create and develop adequate capacity among women
and girls, which is essential for them to be recruited
for leadership positions. Moreover, as the United
Nations military force depends on Member States'
contributions, it is crucial to focus on the challenges
that women face within individual States' military
recruitment processes.

Women, as they are the main victims of sexual
exploitation and abuse, should have an active role in
the system for monitoring such exploitation and abuse,
including direct access to and full participation in
determining the scope of a perpetrator's punishment.
Poland strongly supports establishing monitoring units
on sexual exploitation and abuse, with the highest
ranks or positions therein reserved for women, as
the best providers of solutions. The special report on
safeguarding children prepared by Keeping Children
Safe highlights current initiatives such as the e-learning
training programme on sexual exploitation and abuse
for personnel deployed on missions. It is strongly
advised that such actions be implemented as a tool for
further reducing the number of related complaints.

In conclusion, I should like to emphasize the
wider context of peacekeeping that is reflected in the
Secretary-General's reform of the security pillar. The
reform process should create a supportive environment
both in the Secretariat and in the missions. Efforts
to improve the performance of the reformed security
pillar should take into account the interconnectivity of
all of the elements of and stakeholders participating in
United Nations peacekeeping.

I should like to underscore Poland's strong support
for the Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping
initiative. Poland was among the very first countries
to endorse the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations.

