Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing today.

Last October, the transition from the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
to the more focused, police-only United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH)
marked a turning point for the country. The Haitians
themselves are truly taking the lead in providing their
own security and law enforcement. The transition from
MINUSTAH to MINUJUSTH set a strong example of
how United Nations peacekeeping operations can and
should change as the political and security situation on
the ground evolves. When peacekeeping works well,
we see countries develop their own capacities to protect
their citizens and we see countries re-establish domestic
political processes. We believe that MINUJUSTH
has the potential to do just that and will continue to
foster the independence and self-sufficiency of the
Haitian people.

We commend the important and necessary steps
that the Government has already taken to achieve long-
term security and stability in Haiti. We are encouraged

by how far Haiti has come in growing the capacity of
the Haitian National Police (HNP) - an institution that
we will continue to prioritize and support as it takes the
lead in ensuring the country's security. We believe that
MINUJUSTH's various components, including formed
police units, individual police officers and corrections
officers, as well as civilian experts in the rule of law,
human rights, political affairs, gender, conduct and
discipline and other key areas, contribute significantly
to the rule of law and justice sector priorities that the
international community and the Government of Haiti
have identified. The United Nations mentoring and
advising of the HNP has been and will continue to be
a key factor in the HNP's ability to ensure public order
and provide security for the Haitian people.

Looking to the future, Haiti's security, political
and development agenda can be shaped only by
Haitians themselves. The Government of Haiti must
focus on strengthening its judicial system and human
rights institutions to help consolidate the long-term
stability and stabilization gains of the past few years.
We hope to see significant progress in many areas,
including addressing prolonged pretrial detention and
prison overcrowding, eliminating sexual and gender-
based violence and achieving the full participation of
women in decision-making. It is critical that Haiti take
the opportunity to advance dialogue on the additional
measures required to strengthen its institutions, such
as adopting the draft penal and criminal procedural
codes and establishing the permanent electoral council,
so that those bodies can be around to serve the Haitian
people long after MINUJUSTH departs.

At the end of the day, Haiti bears the primary
responsibility for making that happen, and it can count
on support from the United Nations, of course from the
United States and from many others in the international
community. We welcome MINUJUSTH's benchmarked
exit strategy and look forward to updates on timelines
for the transition of tasks and responsibilities to the
Haitian Government, in coordination with the United
Nations country team.

That said, crucial work remains in the time that
MINUJUSTH has left to execute its important tasks. We
stress the critical importance of filling the remainder of
the Mission's staffing and vacant United Nations police
positions as soon as possible. The United States is a
long-standing friend and partner of Haiti. We remain
committed to working with the Haitian Government
to ensure the country's long-term security, democratic
development and economic growth. We look forward
to this new chapter of growth and independence in the
unfolding story of the Haitian people.

