Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
member States of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO), namely, Armenia, Belarus,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, the Russian Federation and
Tajikistan.

We express our appreciation to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Tom Koenigs
for the detailed briefing on the current situation in
Afghanistan. We note with satisfaction that the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
continues to perform its important functions
effectively.

The Afghanistan Compact, adopted by consensus
at the London Conference, has showed that the
international community is determined to continue to
provide large-scale assistance to the Afghan people in
the post-conflict rehabilitation of their country. It is
important that in this new, post-Bonn stage the central
role in coordinating international efforts on the Afghan
track continues to belong to the United Nations.

As adopted, the Compact provides for clear time
frames for the practical implementation by the Afghan
Government - with international assistance - of
large-scale tasks in the areas of security, governance,
human rights, development and the fight against the
drug threat in the coming five years. We expect that the
Afghan authorities will act with full awareness of their
broad responsibilities for those tasks.

The Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board is
meant to play a useful role in monitoring the
implementation of the Afghanistan Compact. We
expect that all the key players in Afghan affairs will be
involved in the activities of the Board as permanent
participants. That will contribute to effective
coordination of international efforts in the post-war
recovery and economic rehabilitation of Afghanistan.

To successfully implement the tasks set forth in
London, it is necessary to radically alter the security
situation, which has recently worsened. We are
seriously concerned about the fact that the attacks of
extremists from the Taliban and Al-Qaida are growing
bolder and reaching into ever-larger territories. We
support the broadened activities of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) authorized by
Security Council. Further building the capacity of the
national security forces would contribute to the speedy
stabilization of the situation. That priority will ensure a
stable security situation in Afghanistan in the future.

Given the increasing threat from the Taliban and
Al-Qaida, strict compliance - including by the
Afghan Government - with the sanctions imposed by
the Security Council takes on special relevance. We
share the view that the implementation of the national
reconciliation programme is important for the long-
term stabilization of the situation in the country. At the
same time, that process should not contradict the
decisions taken by the Security Council or the task of
fully eradicating the terrorist threat from the territory
of Afghanistan.

We note with concern that efforts by the
international community and the Afghan authorities to
counter the production and smuggling of drugs have
not yet produced the desired results. Resolving that
problem will be key in achieving success in the fight
against terrorism in economic rehabilitation and in
establishing stable central authority in Afghanistan.
Only determined and coordinated steps by the
international community and the Afghans themselves
can truly put an end to the drug trafficking from
Afghanistan by combining internal measures and
tougher border controls and cutting off drug-trafficking
channels, including through the involvement of
neighbouring States. It is important that a
comprehensive international strategy against the drug
threat from Afghanistan be developed as soon as
possible, with the participation of the United Nations
Mission in Afghanistan.

As a part of the efforts to create anti-drug
security belts along Afghanistan's borders, the CSTO
member States carried out a two-stage preventive
operation, named Operation Channel, from 25 to
31 October and from 5 to 12 December 2005, with
invited observers from Azerbaijan, Iran, China,
Pakistan, Uzbekistan and the Ukraine. That operation
has become more effective every year. This time more
than 11 tons of narcotics and psychotropic substances,
including half a ton of heroin and more than a ton of
hashish, were confiscated. In addition, 1,030 firearms
and more that 37,000 rounds of ammunition were
confiscated from offenders.

Afghanistan remains one of the priorities in the
work of CSTO. A working group on Afghanistan was
launched under the Organization's Council of Foreign
Ministers. A proposal to establish cooperation using
that format was sent to the Afghan side. We regard
multifaceted cooperation between Afghanistan and
neighbouring countries as an important factor in
promoting a comprehensive settlement. In that regard,
the programme of assistance to Afghanistan should
embrace neighbouring countries, possibly including
through placing orders in those countries from donor
countries and international organizations.

The members of the CSTO are ready to continue
to contribute to the process of regional interaction in
key areas of international efforts in Afghanistan,
including economic rehabilitation, security and the
fight against drug trafficking.

