Mr. Guehenno (spoke in French): The eighth
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) was issued on 8 June 2001 as
document S/2001/572. The report describes
developments since the issuance of the Secretary-
General's previous report (8/2001/373), on 17 April,
and contains recommendations for the future activities
of MONUC. The mandate of MONUC is scheduled to
terminate on 15 June.

In his report, the Secretary-General recommends
an extension of the mandate of MONUC for 12 months,
until 15 June 2002. The objective of that long
extension is to demonstrate the commitment of the
Security Council to MONUC and to the resolution of
the conflict in the Great Lakes region. It is also
designed to facilitate the recruitment of civilian staff of
the necessary high quality by ensuring greater
continuity.

The Secretary-General also requests authorization
from the Security Council for a transition to the third
phase of MONUC deployment. The second phase-
deployment to monitor and verify the disengagement of
forces from the confrontation line - is now in the
process of being accomplished, as Front de liberation
du Congo (FLC) forces draw back from their forward
positions. MONUC is in the process of confirming the
withdrawal of FLC units from Befale and Bolomba.
However, the Secretary-General is not yet ready to
submit detailed plans for MONUC activities in phase
III, since the parties have not yet provided the
information required to formulate such detailed plans.
As Council members will recall, that specific military
information was required in accordance with the plans
for the withdrawal of all foreign forces from the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
for the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of armed groups. MONUC is continuing to work with
the parties in compiling and analyzing that information,
so that it will be able to prepare the plans.

The Secretary-General is not at this time seeking
to exceed the authorized troop strength of 5,537, which
was approved by the Security Council in its resolution
1291 (2000). However, it is envisaged to continue to
build up the military contingent of MONUC within the
figure of 5,537. For example, the vastness of the
country and the lack of infrastructure require the
establishment of four helicopter refuelling bases - at
Manono, Ilebo, Boende and Basankusu - which will
need to be protected by armed security units of
approximately 200 personnel each. A second riverine
unit, also of some 200 personnel, has already been
approved. Additional military observers will be needed
to verify and monitor some of the more remote
positions occupied by the parties pursuant to the
disengagement plan, and to staff forward headquarters
locations. A military police unit will also be required,
and there will be a need to reinforce existing
contingents in some areas, including Kisangani.

The demilitarization of Kisangani was demanded
by the Security Council in its resolution 1304 (2000), a
demand reinforced by the Security Council mission
during its recent visit to the region. MONUC will
continue to insist that the Rassemblement congolais
pour la democratie (RCD) withdraw its forces from
Kisangani. To that end, MONUC military planners are
prepared to assist the RCD to draw up plans for an
orderly withdrawal of its forces from Kisangani.

At the same time, MONUC is very much aware of
the political, military and symbolic importance of
Kisangani to the RCD, as well as of the potential
fragility of the economic and security situation there. A
precipitous withdrawal of RCD military forces could
contribute to creating trouble in the city and could have
adverse implications for the peace process. In keeping
with its expectations that the local authorities will
retain responsibility for civil administration and the
maintenance of law and order, MONUC has no
objection to the RCD remaining as the de facto civil
authority in Kisangani. Accordingly, it is vital for local
stability to ensure, prior to the withdrawal of RCD
military forces, that the local police have adequate
capacity to maintain law and order after the departure
of RCD military forces. Although MONUC is prepared
to build up its military strength in order to ensure its
own security, it has no intention of assuming law and
order functions in Kisangani.

(spoke in English)

The Secretary-General envisages an expansion of
the civilian components of MONUC. So far, in view of
the daunting logistical problems of deployment, the
vast majority of the civilian staff of the operation have
been administrative and logistical personnel. As we
contemplate entry into phase III, it will be necessary to
expand the other civilian operations of the mission,
including the political, human rights, humanitarian,
child protection and public information staff. The
Secretary-General also considers that the inclusion in
MONUC, for the first time, of the nucleus of a civilian
police component is of major importance.

The function of many of these civilian staff will
be, in brief, to gather as much information as possible
concerning the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, particularly in the east and, most especially,
in the Kivus. At the same time, through its public
information operations, including radio, MONUC will
explain to the Congolese parties and people what it and
the broader international community are doing in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The information
gathered will supplement the detailed data that the
parties are expected to provide in respect of the armed
groups to be disarmed and demobilized.

The human rights, humanitarian and child-
protection personnel will also have a great deal to do in
terms of helping to improve the quality of life of the
Congolese people. As access to civilian populations in
need increases, and as foreign and rebel armies
disengage and begin to withdraw, the possibilities of
providing assistance will increase. It should be noted
that the risks could also increase, in what has become a
widespread climate of impunity and lawlessness in
many parts of the country.
With reference to the specific question of the
security of the civilian populations in the areas to be
evacuated by foreign forces as they withdraw, the
Secretary-General has made clear his view that this is
primarily the responsibility of the parties.
Nevertheless, where it is safe to do so, the deployment
of MONUC civilian human rights monitors, civil
affairs officers and, eventually, civilian police officers
is intended to mitigate the potential threat that these
populations might face.

During its recent visit, the Security Council
mission became aware of the economic aspects of the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
of the role that MONUC could play in improving the
economic situation. While this is not usually a feature
of peacekeeping operations, its importance in this case
cannot be over-stressed. The reopening of the Congo
River system - which was announced by Ambassador
Levitte, the leader of the mission, during its visit to
Mbandaka - is of central significance, politically,
militarily and economically. As a first step towards the
reopening of the river, two fast Uruguayan patrol boats
with 14 military personnel onboard left Kinshasa for
Mbandaka on 8 June, accompanying a barge loaded
with vehicles and bulk fuel and water containers. That
convoy is due to arrive in Mbandaka on 16 June.
Another barge, loaded with fuel for MONUC and
accompanied by a boat chartered by MONUC, is today
at Lisala, between Mbandaka and Kisangani.

In this connection, we have noted with concern
the reported statement of a senior RCD official that the
rebel group might block the MONUC fuel convoy
before it reaches Kisangani. The official was quoted
yesterday as saying that the RCD would not let the boat
reach Kisangani before MONUC investigates
allegations of ceasefire violations which the RCD
claims have been committed by Government forces.
The RCD also claimed that the reopening of the river
"would only benefit President Kabila and facilitate
infiltration".

Needless to say, we do not accept that
interpretation, and we continue to favour the reopening
of the river system as the most important single step
that can be taken to promote an economic recovery of
the country, to enable the Congolese people to re-
establish contacts, to reinforce the territorial integrity
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and, not
least, to enable MONUC to support its own contingents
throughout the country in a way that would be cheaper
and more easily sustainable. The Force Commander,
General Diallo, is taking this matter up today with the
RCD as a matter of urgency. The Council may wish to
call on the RCD not to link the progress of the
MONUC convoy with its demand for an investigation
of the ceasefire violation claims. MONUC will
investigate those allegations, as it has done in the past,
and make its findings known as soon as possible.

In his report, the Secretary-General welcomes the
announcement by the neutral facilitator of the inter-
Congolese dialogue, Sir Ketumile Masire, of the
convening of a preparatory meeting for the dialogue on
16 July. MONUC will continue to support the efforts of
the facilitator and looks forward to further
developments in the planning and conduct of the
dialogue. Sir Ketumile Masire has now dispatched his
two senior advisers, Mr. Archibald Mogwe and
Mr. Mohamed E1 Hacen Ould Lebat, to visit all 11
provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
preparation for the preparatory meeting to be held on
16 July.

Since the report was completed, there have been a
few developments that I would like to bring to the
attention of the Council. Among those are allegations
from the RCD that the Forces armees congolaises
(FAC) have allegedly occupied positions vacated by
the RCD. MONUC intends to investigate the
allegations, and has taken the matter up with the
Government.

As the Council knows, we had hoped that the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Kamel
Morjane could be with us this week. Unfortunately, on
his way here he suffered a severe bout of malaria and is
currently recuperating in Geneva. En route there, he
visited Libreville for talks with President Bongo. The
Gabonese head of State reiterated his readiness to assist
efforts to find a peaceful solution to the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly
through the inter-Congolese dialogue. President Bongo
informed Mr. Morjane that he had maintained contacts
with many Congolese political leaders, including in the
armed opposition. Speaking of the withdrawal of
foreign forces, the President of Gabon insisted on a
distinction between "invaders" and invited forces.

Ugandan and Zimbabwean troops continue to
withdraw from the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
MONUC has reported further movements of the
Uganda People's Defence Forces from the northern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, though some
Ugandan troops have also been deployed to Beni
following recent fighting there between FLC troops
and former Rassemblement congolais pour la
democratie-Mouvement de liberation (RCD-ML)
elements. Beni is also reported to be the scene of
clashes between Mayi-Mayi militiamen and the FLC.
Zimbabwe Defence Force troops also appear to be
preparing to evacuate their position at Ikela, and the
Government of Namibia has announced its intention to
withdraw its troops by 31 August.

Assuming the continued commitment of the
parties to the Lusaka Agreement and to the plans they
themselves have drawn up, MONUC is about to enter a
particularly demanding phase of its activities. The
continued support of the Security Council, as
demonstrated by the Council's endorsement of the
report of the Secretary-General and its
recommendations, would send a convincing signal to
the parties that the United Nations was prepared to do
what it could to assist them in their efforts to restore
peace, security and the basis of prosperity in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes
region.

