Mr. Djinnit: I have the honour to introduce
the eleventh report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Office for West
Africa (UNOWA), covering the period from 1 January
to 30 June 2013 (S/2013/384). I will also seize this
opportunity to update the Council on the most recent
developments in the subregion.

Since my last briefing to the Security Council,
on 25 January 2013 (see S/PV.6911), the West African
subregion has continued to face multiple political and
security challenges, including election-related tensions
in a number of countries, transnational organized crime,
piracy and terrorist activities cutting across the entire
subregion. The humanitarian situation in the subregion
continued to be characterized by food insecurity and
malnutrition in the face of dwindling funding.

In addressing these challenges, the leaders of the
subregion have continued to display great commitment
in working collectively to enhance security and
promote peace and stability within the framework of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and other regional organizations, such
as the Mano River Union (MRU). In addition to the
commendable efforts made by ECOWAS and its leaders
to address the crises in Mali and Guinea-Bissau, the
regional organization has been promoting peaceful
solutions to disputes among its member States. As a
result, a number of border disputes between ECOWAS
member States have been resolved or are being
addressed through peaceful means.

On the situation in Mali, UNOWA has worked
closely with ECOWAS, the United Nations Office in
Mali and the defunct African-led International Support
Mission in Mali, and subsequently with the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), to promote political
dialogue in line with the relevant Security Council
resolutions and with the outcome of the support and
follow-up group meeting held in Bamako on 19 April.
It was the combination of all these efforts and the
collaborative work done under the leadership of
President Blaise Compaore' of Burkina Faso - with
the support of President Goodluck Jonathan of Nigeria,
the High Representative of the African Union, former
President Pierre Buyoya, and Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Koenders - that led to the
signing, in Ouagadougou on 18 June, of the preliminary
agreement on the presidential elections and inclusive
peace talks in Mali. The agreement provides for a
commitment on the part of the signatories to dialogue
and negotiation as a means of resolving the conflict in
the northern regions of Mali. It also provides for the
presidential election to take place in July, to be followed
by an inclusive political process for a comprehensive
and durable settlement of the conflict.

Looking forward, UNOWA shall continue to lend
its full support to MINUSMA and to the collective
efforts to mobilize regional support for the stabilization
of Mali. We will continue to extend similar support to
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau as it pursues its efforts to help
stabilize Guinea-Bissau under the leadership of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Jose Ramos-
Horta, in cooperation with ECOWAS, the African
Union and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries, building on the recent efforts towards
inclusive governance and the holding of the presidential
election.

In Guinea, an agreement was reached on 3 July
between the parties, providing for a consensual election
timetable for the holding of the legislative election in
September. The agreement has thus paved the way for
the holding of free, transparent and inclusive legislative
elections that would allow, at last, all the energies of
the Government and the people of that country to be
geared towards socioeconomic transformation and
development.

I seize this occasion to thank the Security Council
and the Guinea configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, as well as the African Union, ECOWAS,
the International Organization of la Francophonie, the
European Union and bilateral partners of Guinea, for the
support they have extended to me and my colleagues,
the national facilitators, in our efforts aimed at restoring
dialogue and promoting an agreement between the
parties.

However, funding is a major challenge to the
timely implementation of the agreement. I therefore
wish to take this opportunity to urge the bilateral
and multilateral partners of Guinea to make financial
contributions to assist the country in meeting the
additional costs caused by the successive delays in
the electoral timetable due to the lack of consensus on
the electoral process and especially the recent delay
generated by the agreement reached among the parties
on 3 July. The agreement brought an end to months of
differences between the presidential coalition and the
opposition, and political tensions on issues related to the
electoral process. In the context of the demonstrations
organized by the opposition, serious incidents of
violence erupted that led to a number of casualties, the
destruction of property and loss of life that threatened
social and national cohesion. We look forward to the
outcome of the investigations that have been ordered by
the Government as part of its commitment to the rule of
law and the fight against impunity.

The positive outcome of the dialogue process in
Guinea was welcomed with relief in the Mano River
region, which remains fragile, as illustrated by the
persistent tensions along the borders between Liberia
and C6te d'Ivoire and with other neighbouring countries.
These transborder threats continue to undermine the
stability and long-term development efforts of the
countries of the Mano River Union, in spite of their
great potential for economic development and growth.

In an effort to assist the region to address the
challenges posed to their common security, UNOWA,
in liaison with ECOWAS and the Mano River Union,
convened in Dakar, on 29 June, a high-level meeting
to launch the process of developing a security strategy
for the Mano River Union, as requested by the Security
Council. The meeting agreed that the strategy should
aim at addressing cross-border threats to peace and
stability in the Mano River region, and should be based
on a comprehensive approach that takes into account
the nexus between security and development, building
on the existing initiatives in the region. It was decided
to establish a steering committee composed of the three
organizations that will spearhead the development of
the strategy by the end of 2013. During the meeting,
the Ministers from the four countries and their regional
organizations, ECOWAS and the Mano River Union,
demonstrated a strong commitment to joining their
efforts to strengthen security and decided to own the
process leading to the adoption of the proposed strategy.

(spoke in French)

Piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of
Guinea are another regional threat to the security of
West African countries. This phenomenon is negatively
affecting international maritime trade in the area and
has the potential to take a long-term toll on the economic
development of coastal and landlocked countries.
In order to address this increasing threat, the United
Nations, through its Offices in West Africa and Central
Africa, assisted the concerned regional organizations
in convening a regional summit on piracy, as requested
by the Security Council in its resolutions 2018 (2011)
and 2039 (2012).

The resolve of the leaders of the region to establish
a framework to combat piracy and armed robbery at
sea was crystallized at the summit of Heads of State
and Government of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS), ECOWAS and the
Commission of the Gulf of Guinea, held on 24 and
25 June in Yaounde, Cameroon. The summit adopted
three key strategic documents: a code of conduct
for the prevention and punishment of acts of piracy,
armed robbery against ships and illicit maritime
activity in Central and West Africa; a memorandum
of understanding between ECCAS, ECOWAS and
the Commission of the Gulf of Guinea on maritime
security and safety in Central and West Africa; and,
lastly, a political declaration. It was further agreed that
ECCAS, ECOWAS, the Gulf Cooperation Council, the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and
the United Nations Office for West Africa, along with
the Government of Cameroon, would work together to
develop a programme of action on maritime security.

The third fragile zone in West Africa, besides
the Mano River Union and the Gulf of Guinea, is the
Sahel, as the crisis in Mali has shown. The region
has a significant number of vulnerability indicators,
including environmental degradation, desertification,
food insecurity, arms and drug trafficking and
terrorism. That fragility underscores the urgency of
the need for an integrated United Nations strategy for
the Sahel aimed at complementing the efforts of the
countries of the region and regional organizations to
address the root causes of instability along the Sahel-
Sahara belt and their consequences. That vision emerged
clearly in the discussions with the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Sahel, Mr. Prodi, whom
I accompanied on joint visits to various countries in
the subregion. The United Nations Regional Office for
West Africa, which very early on launched efforts to
promote a concerted United Nations approach to the
Sahel, and which has subsequently played an important
part, along with the other United Nations entities, in
preparing the Sahel strategy, will naturally assume a
share of the responsibility for implementing it.

Despite the commendable efforts of the ECOWAS
leadership to respond to the challenges posed by
transnational threats to peace and security, as manifested
in the crises in Mali and Guinea-Bissau, those threats
have nonetheless continued to spread through West
Africa. In that regard, the ECOWAS summit's recent
adoption of a counter-terrorism strategy and renewal
of its regional plan of action against drug trafficking
and organized crime are unquestionably encouraging
developments that must now be translated into concrete
action, with the support of the international community.
The attacks on several places in Niger on 23 May made
by the Movement for Unity and Jihad in West Africa,
along with the continued activity of terrorist groups
such as Boko Haram and Ansaru, emphasized yet again
the complexity of the trans-border challenges posed
by extremist groups and terrorist organizations in
the subregion. Such groups take advantage of porous
borders and the inadequate means and capacities of
States in the subregion.

The widely condemned terrorist attack of 6 July
on a school in Yobe state in Nigeria, which resulted in
the deaths of 42 innocent people, including students,
at a time when the state of emergency in that region
is still in force, clearly demonstrates the terrorist
groups' determination to spread terror and despair,
and at the same time underscores the complexity of
the problem. The avowed synergy between the terrorist
groups operating in the subregion calls for concerted,
region-wide action in order to deal with this threat.
Such action should also address the underlying causes
of instability, while, of course, taking into account the
human rights aspects.

During my visit to Abuja on 10 and 11 June, I
stressed how strongly the United Nations condemns the
terrorist acts that have been perpetrated in Nigeria and
our solidarity with its people and Government. I assured
the authorities of the firm commitment and support of
the United Nations for Nigeria's unity, stability and
sovereignty, and expressed our willingness to increase
our support for capacity-building in the areas of
counter-terrorism, human rights and the management
of disasters and humanitarian emergencies. I also
encouraged them to continue to promote regional
cooperation in addressing such transnational threats
within the framework of existing regional and
international counter-terrorism mechanisms.

The challenge posed by tensions related to
elections and the negative impact arising from the lack
of governance and regulation of security forces in some
countries remain a source of concern in West Africa.
Regarding electoral tensions, the United Nations Office
for West Africa, together with the relevant country
teams, continues to provide assistance through its
good offices, aimed at creating conditions conducive
to holding calm elections, as in the case of Guinea.
In that regard, I should commend the efforts led by
Bishop Barrigah in Togo, with the support of the Group
of Five, aimed at facilitating a dialogue between the
Togolese Government and the opposition in the run-up
to the forthcoming legislature elections at the end of
the month; in fact, I believe the date has been fixed for
25 July.

Moreover, the United Nations Office for West
Africa continues to work closely with ECOWAS and
the Mano River Union by supporting their efforts to
develop regional frameworks aimed at supporting
security sector reforms at the regional and national
levels. In that regard, I should note that the process
of security sector reform in Guinea has been making
significant progress, supported by the United Nations
and the personal involvement of President Alpha
Conde'. I should emphasize here that several other
countries in the subregion are also working on security
sector reform, particularly Cote d'Ivoire, Liberia, Mali
and Sierra Leone.

Before concluding, I would like to call the Security
Council's attention to the promising confidence-building
process that the United Nations has been leading on the
issue of demarcating the boundary between Cameroon
and Nigeria. Significant progress has been made in
the boundary demarcation between the two countries
and the follow-up process of the Greentree Agreement
on the Bakassi peninsula will soon come to an end. In
fact, in September the Greentree Agreement Follow-up
Committee should hold its final meeting on the margins
of the General Assembly right here in New York, where
the Secretary-General and the Presidents of Cameroon
and Nigeria launched the process in 2006.

West Africa, which more than ever stands at a
crossroads in its quest for peace and security, deserves
greater attention from the United Nations. In that
regard, I am encouraged by the commitment shown
by ECOWAS, under the leadership of its Chairman,
President Alassane Outtara of Cote d'Ivoire, and the
Chairman of the ECOWAS Commission, Ambassador
Kadre Desire Ouedraogo, to strengthening their
architecture for peace and security, drawing lessons
from the challenges that have been encountered in the
regional response to the crisis in Mali. My colleagues of
the United Nations Office for West Africa and I remain
committed to building on the valuable partnership we
have created with the other United Nations entities in
the subregion, ECOWAS and other continental and
regional organizations, including the African Union
and the Mano River Union, with the aim of promoting
and consolidating peace and stability in West Africa.

In that context, we will continue to encourage the
dialogue process as the best way to settle conflicts
and differences. We will also continue our efforts to
mobilize international partnerships to tackle, through
their support of regional and national stakeholders,
the underlying causes of instability in the region,
and to address the recent transnational threats in a
concerted way. West African leaders and their regional
institutions, particularly ECOWAS, know that they
can continue to rely on the continued attention and
support of the United Nations and its Security Council
for their efforts to promote lasting peace, stability and
development in the subregion.

