The President (spoke in Russian): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council this year, I should
like to extend my very warm wishes for a fruitful new
year to all members of the Council, the United Nations
and the staff of the Secretariat.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome the new
members: Belgium, Indonesia, Italy, Panama and South
Africa. We all look forward to their active participation
in the work of the Council. I should also like to take
this opportunity to express the Council's deep gratitude
to the outgoing members - Argentina, Denmark,
Greece, Japan and the United Republic of Tanzania
for their important contributions to the work of the
Council.

 

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to Mr. Nassir
Abdulaziz Al-Nasser, Permanent Representative of
Qatar, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of December 2006. I am sure
that I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Al-Nasser
for the great diplomatic skill with which he conducted
the Council's business last month.

Expression of welcome to the Secretary-General and
tribute to the outgoing Secretary-General


The President (spoke in Russian): On behalf of
the members of the Security Council, I should like to
welcome the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
who is taking part in a formal meeting of the Council
for the first time in his new capacity. Let me express
the hope that the Council will establish the closest and
most productive cooperation with the new Secretary-
General in carrying out its primary responsibility for
strengthening international peace, security and
stability.

We should support the Secretary-General's
already expressed intention to jointly find ways to
resolve current international problems through the
collective efforts of all States Members of this
universal Organization. We cannot fail to agree with
2

Mr. Ban that no single individual, including the
Secretary-General himself, nor any single State, even
with the most abundant resources and power, can
resolve those problems. Their resolution can be
achieved only by strengthening multilateral
cooperation and enhancing the role and the
effectiveness of United Nations activities, including the
activities of the Security Council.

I should like to take this opportunity to express
gratitude and pay tribute to Mr. Kofi Annan, who
carried out his duties as Secretary-General over the
course of many years in a dignified manner.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.


