Mr. Lancry (Israel): Mr. President, at the outset I
would like to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency for this month and to extend my
congratulations to Ambassador John Negroponte on the
outstanding manner in which he guided the
deliberations of the Council last month. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Kofi Annan, for his permanent contribution and
concerted efforts to bring an end to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict and to anchor peaceful coexistence
in the Middle East.

The Security Council is meeting just days after a
Palestinian suicide bomber turned an ordinary Tel Aviv
street into a scene of horrific carnage. As workers and
shoppers were going about their business, a Palestinian
terrorist boarded a public city bus and detonated a
powerful explosive charge that ripped through the
crowded downtown district. When the dust settled, five
Israeli civilians lay dead and more than sixty others
were wounded, several of them seriously.

The Tel Aviv bombing followed a day of hell in
which three Israelis were killed and three wounded in
three separate incidents. Early in the morning, security
forces discovered the charred body of David Buhbut.
Buhbut, who was reported missing on Tuesday night,
had gone shopping in an Arab village near his home.
He was abducted and tortured for several hours, and his
body was discarded in a dumpster where it was later
found.

In the afternoon, Palestinian terrorists shot and
killed Yosef Ajami, an Israeli civilian who was driving
his car to Baka al-Gharbiya. And in the evening, Israeli
policeman Moshe Hizkiyahu was killed as he
responded to a report of a suspicious individual near
the Umm el-Fahm Junction. As Officer Hizkiyahu
approached, the man blew himself up. Two others were
wounded in the attack, for which Islamic Jihad claimed
responsibility.

These attacks come after a six-week period of
relative quiet resulting from the extraordinary efforts of
Israeli security forces. In recent weeks, Israeli forces
have intercepted or thwarted scores of attempted
attacks, including one in which a truck filled with
hundreds of kilograms of explosives was seized, more
than enough to bring a skyscraper crashing to the
ground.

During this same period there have been some
encouraging signs of internal Palestinian dialogue,
including the voices of those who are beginning to
question the value of the Palestinian campaign of
terrorism and suicide bombings. Israel is following
these discussions with great interest, and we are
cautiously optimistic that they may signal a new
direction for the Palestinian people.

As a result of this period of quiet, and out of
genuine concern for the plight of the Palestinian
population, Israel had begun to scale back some of the
security precautions it had implemented. Various steps
were taken to ease the freedom of movement of
Palestinians, particularly the suspension of curfews.

It is no coincidence that terrorist attacks have
resumed at precisely the moment that Israel has relaxed
some of its security precautions. Steps that were taken
to improve the humanitarian conditions of the
Palestinian population have been cynically Viewed by
terrorists as opportunities. Any relaxation in Israeli
security policy is seized upon, and in the past few days
we have all witnessed the catastrophic result. This is
the clearest affirmation of what we have constantly
asserted: that the only thing which stands between
Palestinian terrorists and their Israeli victims is the
preventive actions of the Israeli military.

These attacks have also affirmed the terrorists'
violent rejection of any efforts at reconciliation
between the parties, as they come amidst resurgent
efforts of responsible parties to help stop the violence
and bring the parties back to the negotiating table.
Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres and Defence
Minister Benjamin Ben-Eliezer have met a number of
times with Palestinian officials and the meetings
appeared promising. The Quartet met in New York in
still another effort to revive the peace process. And yet,
with every hopeful step forward, terrorism forces us to
take an even greater step backward.

As Foreign Minister Peres observed in his recent
speech before the General Assembly, despite the
complexity of the conflicts in the Middle East, if it
were not for terror we could have already resolved
them. Terror, however, does not solve conflicts, it
entrenches them.

Time and again Palestinian terrorist groups have
shown their eagerness to scuttle any attempts to
energize the peace process and restore hope to the
people of the region. If the Palestinian leadership is
unwilling to confront these demonstrated enemies of
peace, then it undermines its claim to be a partner for
peace.
The responsibility of the Palestinian leadership is
clear. It must act decisively and resolutely to combat
Palestinian terrorism. It must end the financial,
logistical and moral support it has provided to terrorist
organizations. It must dismantle the infrastructure upon
which Palestinian terrorists depend. It must confiscate
their weapons, arrest their leaders, shut down their
offices and cut off their sources of funding. It must end
the relentless incitement to violence in the official
Palestinian Authority-controlled media. It must stop
the glorification of violence and martyrdom in
Palestinian schools. It must stop hanging portraits of
terrorists from buildings, naming streets after them and
holding them up as role models for other Palestinians
to follow. In short, it must completely de-legitimize
terrorism and suicide bombing in the eyes of its people.
Every one of these obligations stem from specific
Security Council resolutions, signed commitments and
the requirements of international law, which the
Palestinian leadership has repeatedly flouted.

Instead of respecting its legal obligations, the
Palestinian leadership, even to this day, continues to
harbour terrorists and refuses to arrest them and bring
them to justice. Inside the leadership compound in
Ramallah are 50 individuals who have planned, funded
and orchestrated scores of terrorist attacks and who are
responsible for countless deaths of innocent civilians.
Rather than take action against those it knows are
complicit in acts of terrorism, the Palestinian Authority
grants them immunity within its headquarters and
protects them.

The Palestinian leadership must establish itself as
the only party with the authority to exercise the use of
force. It can no longer tolerate the existence of
numerous armed groups, each with its own agenda,
methods and doctrine, acting independently of one
another. The monopoly of the use of force is one of the
most basic responsibilities of national leadership. A
leadership that fails to exercise that responsibility has
also lost its legitimate right to lead.

These steps, which are expected by the
international community, are more than within the
power of the Palestinian leadership to undertake. That
it has utterly refused to do so, even after more than two
years of hostilities, is a most telling indication of the
status of its commitment to ending violence and
returning to a political process.

The only enduring solution to the conflict in the
region is the one articulated by President Bush and
endorsed by the Council, one in which two States live
side by side in peace, security and coexistence. The
Foreign Minister of Israel, addressing the General
Assembly just a few days ago, again expressed Israel's
enduring commitment to that vision.

Additional Security Council resolutions,
particularly one-sided ones, are more than unhelpful;
they are counterproductive. Resolutions that fail to
address the context of terrorism, specifically demand
the dismantling of terrorist organizations such as
Islamic Jihad, Hamas and the Fatah Al-Aqsa Brigades
and condemn suicide bombing in the strongest possible
terms are simply a further incentive for the
continuation of the Palestinian terrorist campaign. If
international support can be garnered for one-sided
resolutions, why should compromise be sought at the
negotiating table?

As we know from history, achieving a vision of
two States living in peace and security depends not on
entertaining partisan initiatives, but on genuine and
meaningful dialogue. But if violence and terror
continue, it will be impossible to arrive at a political
settlement.

Ending the terror, incitement and hatred, and
engaging in genuine face-to-face negotiations, in a
spirit of good faith and partnership, is the only way we
can achieve the vision the Council has endorsed and
pave the way for a brighter future for all the peoples of
the region.

I would like to conclude by drawing the Council's
attention to a story that I believe should serve not only
as an inspiration, but also as a reminder that, even in
the face of the devastating reality Palestinians and
Israelis face each day, there remains among the peoples
of this troubled region the basic need for coexistence.

Jonathan Jesner was a teenage student who was
among those killed in Tel Aviv on Thursday. The
Jesner family donated his kidney to a 7-year-old
Palestinian girl, Yasmin Abu Ramila, who was
suffering from a debilitating disease. This act provided
her with a life-saving transplant.

In the past, the families of Palestinians who have
lost their lives in the conflict with Israel have made
similarly life-affirming and courageous gestures,
donating their organs to Israelis suffering from illness
and disease. These contributions are the very antithesis
of terror. They provide a glimmer of hope that, despite
the bitterness, death and mourning, we can still
recognize common humanity and common destiny.

