Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic): I have the
honour to make this statement on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC).

The OIC expresses its serious concern about the
grave situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, especially the continuing
inhumane Israeli blockade and dire humanitarian crisis
being imposed on the Palestinian civilian population in
the Gaza Strip and the ongoing illegal colonization
campaign being carried out by Israel, the occupying
Power, particularly in and around occupied East
Jerusalem.

We strongly condemn the recent attacks
perpetrated by Israeli occupying forces, including
extremist settlers, against Palestinian civilians and
worshippers at Al-Aqsa mosque and the Al-Haram
Al-Sharif compound in occupied East Jerusalem. Our
group reiterates its condemnation of Israel's persistent
aggression against Islamic and Christian holy places
and sites in Al-Quds Al-Sharif and against the
Palestinian inhabitants of the holy city of Al-Quds,
which continues to cause tensions to rise and
difficulties to mount for the Palestinian inhabitants of
the city in all spheres of life.

The new chapter of this Israeli aggression is the
ongoing saga of terror launched by the occupying
Power on 27 September 2009, when it began
excavation activity in a holy site, the purpose of which
was to undermine the site's symbolic and sacred
significance for Muslims throughout the world and for
the Islamic faith itself.
09-55901
Israel's current aggression against the Al-Aqsa
mosque is not the first of its kind. We still recall its
attempt to burn down the mosque in 1969, the
excavation of a tunnel near the mosque in 1996 and the
continuation of this excavation activity in 2007. In
another act of aggression, on 28 September 2000,
Ariel Sharon, leader of the right-wing opposition at
that time, visited the Al-Aqsa mosque compound,
which led to the outbreak of the second Palestinian
intifada and the hampering of the peace process.

The OIC expresses grave concern about and
condemns in particular Israel's illegal and intensifying
colonization measures, including its ongoing
settlement activities, the transfer of further Israeli
settlers and the construction of the wall in the occupied
Palestinian territory, especially in and around the Holy
City. It also condemns Israel's escalation of its practice
of demolishing Palestinian homes, the eviction of
Palestinian families from the city, the confiscation of
more Palestinian land, homes and properties, the illegal
excavation near and beneath Al-Aqsa mosque in the
Al-Haram Al-Sharif compound, the revocation of
Palestinian residency rights in the city, the continued
closure of Palestinian institutions in the city and the
imposition of severe restrictions of movement that
have isolated the city from the rest of the occupied
Palestinian territories. Each one of these crimes
constitutes a violation of the Geneva Conventions.

The OIC calls for the immediate cessation of all
such illegal Israeli activities, in accordance with the
occupying Power's obligations under international law,
including the Fourth Geneva Convention and relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and General
Assembly and in accordance with commitments and
obligations under the Quartet Road Map and in respect
of the firm international consensus in this regard.

The OIC calls on the international community,
and the Security Council in particular, to shoulder its
responsibilities, including, in particular, towards
occupied East Jerusalem, and to take urgent action to
bring a complete halt to all illegal Israeli measures and
actions aimed at changing the demographic
composition, character, geographical nature and legal
status of the Holy City and at depopulating it of its
Palestinian inhabitants, entrenching the occupying
Power's unlawful control of the city and thus illegally
and unilaterally determining the fate of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif, the capital of the future State of Palestine.
09-55901

The OIC recalls paragraph 4 of resolution
2/36-PAL, adopted at the thirty-sixth ministerial
meeting of the OIC in Damascus, in which the
members reaffirmed that all the Israeli colonial
settlement measures and practices in Al-Quds and the
rest of the occupied Palestinian territories are null and
void, in line with the resolutions of international
legitimacy, as well as international covenants and
conventions that consider all Israeli legislative,
administrative and colonial settlement procedures and
measures aimed at altering the legal, demographic,
architectural, cultural and heritage-related status of the
Holy City as null and void, and contrary to the
resolutions and decisions of international legitimacy
and international covenants and conventions and,
therefore, as diametrically opposed to agreements
signed between the Palestinian and Israeli sides. The
resolution requests the Security Council to revive the
International Supervision and Monitoring Committee
to Prevent and Prohibit Colonial Settlement in Al-Quds
and the Occupied Arab Territories.

Our group expresses its full support for the
request made by the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to
convene an urgent meeting of the Security Council to
consider the report of the United Nations Fact-Finding
Mission in Gaza (A/HRC/12/48), known as the
Goldstone report.

An important facet of the Goldstone report's
findings on the causal effects of the recent Israeli
aggression against Gaza, taking into account the
historical perspective, serves to highlight once again
that the root cause of this conflict is the Israeli
occupation, and nothing else. It also confirms the fears
and deep concerns of the international community
about Israeli violations that amounted to war crimes
and possible crimes against humanity, including wilful
killings, deliberate attacks on civilian objects, wanton
destruction of civilian property, indiscriminate attacks,
the use of human shields and collective punishment
against Gaza's civilian population in the form of a
continuing blockade.

Objective and apt recommendations made in this
report are not just addressed to the Human Rights
Council. The report also made an inevitable request,
set out in paragraph 1969, that the Security Council
shoulder its responsibilities. Therefore, the Security
Council must meet its responsibilities as mandated in
the Charter, take all necessary actions to bring the
5
Israeli perpetrators of these war crimes to justice and
put an end to the Israeli mindset of impunity.

The OIC once again expresses its regret at the
continued non-cooperation on the part of Israel, the
occupying Power, with all the independent and
international missions that have been mandated to
investigate human rights violations of the occupied
Palestinian people. Such an attitude reflects an above-
the-law mentality and constitutes a clear refusal to
acknowledge the international community's human
rights concerns.

The OIC remains deeply concerned by Israel's
ongoing violations, by both air and land, of Lebanon's
sovereignty, in breach of Security Council resolution
1701 (2006), and it calls on Israel to withdraw fully
from the Lebanese land it continues to occupy in the
Sheba'a farms, the Kfar Shouba Hills and the northern
part of al-Ghajar village.

The OIC also reaffirms that all measures and
actions taken, or to be taken, by Israel, the occupying
Power, to alter the legal, physical and demographic
status of the occupied Syrian Golan and its institutional
structure, as well as the Israeli measures to impose
jurisdiction and administration there, are null and void
and have no legal effect. The OIC demands that Israel
abide by Council resolution 497 (1981) - which, by
the way, was adopted by consensus - and withdraw
fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of
4 June 1967, in implementation also of Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

The OIC calls on the international community to
intensify its efforts to accelerate the achievement of a
just and comprehensive peace settlement on the basis
of relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
terms of reference, including the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Road Map. The
OIC reiterates its firm and unwavering support for the
just cause of Palestine. The OIC calls for the speedy
realization by the Palestinian people of their
inalienable rights, including their right to self-
determination, with the establishment of their
independent State of Palestine with East Jerusalem,
Al-Quds Al-Sharif, as its capital, and for a just solution
for the plight of the Palestine refugees on the basis of
General Assembly resolution 194 (III).

