Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to welcome the convening of
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. We also thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing on the
reality on the ground and for his good offices in the
region.

My country is following very closely the current
situation in the Gaza Strip. We have expressed our
concern about the escalating violence and our strong
condemnation of the ground incursion by the Israeli
army into the Gaza Strip, which further aggravates the
situation on the ground, and of the firing of rockets into
Israel. We therefore demand the immediate withdrawal
of Israeli troops from the Gaza Strip and the immediate
cessation of rocket fire against Israel.

Peru condemns the attacks on densely populated
urban areas and the disproportionate use of military
force. We therefore reiterate our call for the full respect
of human rights and international humanitarian law
and for immediate measures to protect the civilian
population, ensuring medical care for victims and the
opening of border crossings to facilitate the evacuation
of the civilian population.

Peru reiterates its call for the immediate cessation
of hostilities. To that end, we support the efforts of
the Secretary-General and the other initiatives, such
as those of Egypt, to achieve a ceasefire. We also
agree with the statements of those who spoke before
me that point out the need to address the root causes
of the conflict. That requires the resumption of direct
negotiations between the parties to achieve a viable and
lasting solution that puts an end to the status quo and
enables the Palestinians and Israelis to live in peace
within two States with secure and internationally
recognized borders.

For the third time in the past six years, we have
seen hostilities in the Gaza Strip. It is therefore
essential to put a permanent end to the recurring cycle
of that bloody conflict. My delegation believes that the
international community, including actors with greater
influence over the parties, should support the pursuit
of a lasting peace on the basis of full compliance with
the Madrid principles, the Quartet road map and the
other agreements and full respect for international law,
including the Security Council resolutions on the issue.

