Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): I thank the
Permanent Mission of C6te d'Ivoire for organizing
this open debate. It provides an opportunity for us to
reflect on the roles of the United Nations, regional
organizations and Member States in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts.

Let me start with the role of the United Nations,
whose peacekeepers are broadly seen as one of the most
effective tools available to help prevent and resolve
conflicts and promote international peace and security,
as reiterated in the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations in the
context ofthe alliance for peacekeeping. The Action for
Peacekeeping initiative has already received extensive
support from the United Nations membership and
partners. The Declaration also reiterates the principle
of the primacy of politics and emphasizes the need for
innovative partnerships with regional organizations.
In our view, those two recommendations reinforce
one another. Regional organizations often provide a
unique perspective of conflict dynamics, and taking
their views into account can help us to strengthen our
prevention and mediation capacities. To mention but a
few examples in our own region, Brazil highlights the
important role that the Organization of American States
and the Caribbean Community can play and has played
in ensuring peaceful relations in the region, including
in cooperation with the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti. We also commend the engagement
of regional and subregional actors in peace processes
in other regions, such as in South Sudan, Burundi and
the Central African Republic, among others, in Africa.
Those are sound examples of how regional arrangements
can contribute to the peaceful resolution of disputes,
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.

The notion that the United Nations should ensure
peace and prevent conflict is deeply rooted in the
identity of our Organization. It translates, for instance,
into the three basic principles of peacekeeping - the
consent of the parties, impartiality and the non-use of
force - which are deemed one of the reasons for the
success of United Nations peacekeeping operations. In
his most recent briefings, the Secretary-General clearly
made his point in arguing that regional organizations
might be a more suitable tool for addressing situations
that require peace enforcement and counter-terrorism
activities. Under exceptional circumstances, the
Security Council can and has authorized Member
States and regional organizations to use force in order
to achieve peace. Brazil has consistently argued that
any such actions must be judicious and proportionate
and adhere to international law. We emphasize the need
to remain vigilant so as to avoid causing unnecessary
harm to civilian populations, to monitor the situation
and to require periodic reporting. We therefore welcome
initiatives such as resolution 2391 (2017), which calls
for the Group of Five for the Sahel States (G-5 Sahel) to
uphold international law, including international human
rights law and international humanitarian law, as well
as to take into account a gender perspective in all G-5
Sahel Joint Force operations. We are following the
Secretary-General's reports on the operationalization
of that initiative and encourage the Council to continue
to pay attention to those aspects whenever it considers
authorizing third parties to use force.

In their role as troop/police-contributors, Member
States have a responsibility to provide peacekeeping
operations with disciplined, well-trained and motivated
personnel. On that front, Brazil has been engaged in the
predeployment training of African military engineers
through triangular partnership projects. The Brazilian
Peace Operations Joint Training Centre maintains
several cooperation projects with troop-contributing
countries, with a view to exchanging best practices
in peacekeeping operations and to improving the
predeployment training of peacekeepers.

Another task attributed to Member States is
ensuring that all peacekeeping operations pursuing
mandates that were established by the Security
Council are adequately funded. That is particularly
critical in the context of the expanding mandates and
responsibilities of peacekeeping missions, combined
with increasing security concerns with regard to the
troops on the ground. Permanent members of the
Council should therefore be expected to assume a larger
share of the responsibility in that regard, as reflected
in the current peacekeeping scale of assessment. It is
not reasonable to expect developing countries to have
additional financial responsibilities for the Security
Council's decisions without the corresponding reform
of its composition.

Allow me to reiterate Brazil's long-standing
support for non-military means to address security
challenges. As stated by the Secretary-General in one
of his previous reports: "It costs far more to pick up
the pieces after crisis than it does to prevent crisis."
(S/2018/525, p. I)

The challenge ahead of us is to shift from a
crisis-oriented approach to long-term engagement
aimed at promoting self-sustaining cycles of peace
and development. It is essential in that regard that we
remain committed to the continuous strengthening
of the peacebuilding architecture, in particular to the
need of achieving a quantum leap in the Peacebuilding
Fund. In our experience of chairing the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, we
can testify that creating lasting peace is necessarily
a collaborative endeavour. As such, it often
requires external partners, regional and subregional
organizations, Government authorities and local actors
to work together.

United Nations resolutions often state that Member
States bear the primary responsibility for preventing
conflict, protecting civilians and sustaining peace. But
when we evoke the principle of national ownership, we
should not be oblivious to the important roles of the
international community, international and regional
organizations and the United Nations in collaborating
with Member States in their efforts to realize lasting
peace and sustainable development.
