Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome you, Sir, as President of the
Security Council and thank you for organizing today's
meeting. Mediating and preventing the conflicts that
threaten international peace and security is indeed one
of the most pressing tasks of the United Nations and of
global politics as a whole. We are grateful to Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres and to the Chair and Deputy
Chair of The Elders, Ms. Mary Robinson and Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, for their statements.

There can be no doubt about the importance of
strengthening the capacity of the United Nations for
preventing conflicts. The Charter ofthe United Nations
and the resolutions of the States Members of the United
Nations provide all the necessary tools in that regard.
They reside first and foremost in Chapters I and VI of
the Charter and in the resolutions of Member States,
particularly resolution 2171 (2014), which enshrines the
fundamental principles of international assistance in
this area.

In the past few years the Secretariat, the
Security Council and some regional and subregional
organizations have made considerable efforts to
analyse the causes of crises and ways to prevent them.
Despite that, there is no universal or exhaustive list of
conflict indicators. That is not surprising, because the
Council's practical experience has shown that every
situation has its own unique set of factors influencing
its development, which means that there is no universal
formula for solving problems. Each situation requires a
delicate, balanced and impartial approach and a patient
search for a solution, and that is why one-size-fits-all
solutions are not useful in this area.

We firmly believe that international assistance can
be provided only with the consent of the parties to the
dispute. It must be impartial and free of preconditions.
Double standards and veiled political games designed to
overthrow legitimate authorities are also unacceptable.
Unfortunately, such situations are not uncommon today,
which understandably compels States to be suspicious
about mediation. We need only cite the examples of
Iraq, Libya and Syria. The international community is
still dealing with the consequences of the crises in those
countries, the result of shameless foreign invasions.

But some learn nothing from history. Today the
same approach is being applied to Venezuela, where
the acute phase of the crisis began as a result of
external pressure through sanctions and direct foreign
interference. Not surprisingly, the most successful
mediation efforts there are being conducted by States
that have been smart enough not to take sides in
Venezuela's internal confrontation.

Success in crisis prevention and resolution can be
achieved only through a painstaking collective quest
for political and diplomatic solutions, based on a direct,
inclusive dialogue between the parties involved. As the
most authoritative and representative organization in
the world, the United Nations is perfectly situated to
play a central role in international mediation efforts.
The good-offices missions of the Secretary-General
and his Special Envoys and Representatives continue
to prove that they are needed. However, we believe it is
important to ensure that United Nations mediators are
chosen based on objective criteria and with respect for
regional balance.

It is also important to take advantage of the
potential of regional and subregional organizations,
in line with Chapter VIII of the Charter. Regional
mediators' thorough knowledge of the nuances of local
conflicts enables a more accurate understanding of a
situation and therefore makes it possible to put forward
objective, realistic proposals for bringing the parties'
positions closer together. We are particularly pleased
about the fact that African countries are actively taking
the initiative to address the continent's problems. That
is something that the leadership of the African Union
(AU) should truly be proud of. In that context, I want
to single out the AU's efforts with regard to the Central
African Republic and South Sudan, although there is
still much work to be done, needless to say.

We value the work of the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia,
which is founded on the principles of neutrality,
objectivity and cooperation with the Governments of
the States of Central Asia and focused on cooperation
with regional integration organizations such as the
Eurasian Economic Community, the Collective Security
Treaty Organization and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization. We see excellent possibilities for
developing partnerships between the United Nations and
these organizations, which are expanding their political
authority and their contribution to strengthening
regional and international security.

While we too are ready to work together with
others to develop preventive diplomacy, we believe
that prevention should not be seen as a panacea for all
ills, and it cannot become a pretext for interfering in
the internal affairs of sovereign States. Their consent
to this kind of United Nations involvement is a key
criterion for us.

In conclusion, I would like to underscore that many
of the world's problems today could be avoided if some
of our colleagues on the Security Council genuinely
made the interests of the States they say they want to
help their top priority rather than lecturing them and
inflicting sanctions and coercive unilateral economic
measures on them. Such unilateral approaches, founded
on blind faith in one's own exceptional status and
righteousness and on an unwillingness to listen to the
views of others, not only prevent the Security Council
from reaching agreement on collective approaches but
also undermine the authority of the United Nations.
If we can deal with this kind of erroneous and short-
sighted behaviour, our Organization's potential with
regard to issues of conflict prevention and mediation
would increase significantly.

