Allow us first to express our appreciation for the convening of this open debate to address such an important issue, particularly at the current juncture. Similarly, we express our appreciation to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross and the Commissioner for Social Affairs of the African Union for their very valuable briefings. We regret, however, that this favourable opportunity was missed for hearing first-hand from the World Health Organization (WHO), whose role continues to be central in the global fight that we are all waging today against this deadly disease. In a world already shaken by armed conflicts, including those of a protracted nature, as well as by the threats posed by terrorism and climate change, among others, the human crisis resulting from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic represents an unprecedented challenge to the international system and, potentially, to the maintenance of international peace and security. That being said, from the very outset, we would like to stress our preference for this issue, which affects us all, equally and without distinction, to be addressed within the framework of the General Assembly, which is the most representative organ of the United Nations. Certainly, the current pandemic is one of the most pressing challenges that the world is now facing in the light of its many implications and devastating effects. It is the worst pandemic that has hit humankind in the past 100 years. Hence, addressing it undoubtedly requires collective, coordinated and decisive action by all members of the international community through an approach based on multilateral cooperation and international solidarity, that is, one that puts the human being at the centre of political action. This is why we are seriously concerned by how some States seek not only to politicize the virus but also to exploit this moment of global upheaval in order to advance their neocolonial and warmongering policies, all of which violate both international law and the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, so as to obtain geopolitical advantages, even if this means sacrificing entire populations, currently subjected to actions of extermination, through the illegal application of unilateral coercive measures, the development of disinformation and propaganda operations and acts of aggression that include the use or threat of use of force. From the very moment that WHO declared the evolution of the COVID-19 infection a pandemic, the Government of President Nicolas Maduro Moros put in place a series of measures to ensure the protection and well-being of the Venezuelan people, including their right to health and life, as well as to cooperate with global efforts aimed at containing the spread of this terrible disease. Today, despite being located in a region considered to be the current epicentre of the pandemic, and despite the campaign of aggression to which our country is inhumanely and deliberately subjected as part of a systematic policy of maximum calculated cruelty, seen particularly in the obstacles faced, which includes the looting of our assets and resources abroad, including the gold reserves deposited in the Bank of England, and seeks to use the pain and health of the Venezuelan people to promote a coup d'etat, Venezuela is the country with the lowest contagion rate and the least confirmed cases of COVID-19 per | million inhabitants in Latin America and the Caribbean, while being at the forefront in the number of tests carried out per million inhabitants in our region. The success of our national strategy, which is being concealed by propaganda and disinformation campaigns, has been possible thanks to our Government's prompt understanding of the magnitude of the health emergency, as well as the solidarity and technical assistance provided by various international partners, including the United Nations system, in order to ensure both its effectiveness and the fact that it adheres to the international protocols that have been established. In that regard, we take this opportunity to recognize the efforts made at all levels by the United Nations system, through both its main bodies and its specialized agencies, funds and programmes, to design and implement a comprehensive and coordinated response to COVID-19. Our special recognition goes to WHO and its Director-General, to whom we renew our full support, conscious of their efforts to lead the formulation and implementation of policies adapted to the various national contexts and realities. We believe that, at the current juncture, it is crucial to continue to provide all possible support to WHO, including financial, through predictable and sustained resources. We therefore categorically reject all inflammatory speeches aimed at disowning the important role that it continues to play in the fight against what is today our common enemy, as well as any arbitrary decision aimed at weakening its functioning. Adopting the necessary measures to prevent the spread of the virus not only demonstrates the responsible and capable character of a State towards its population, insofar as the guarantor of their safety and well-being, but also demonstrates its responsibility towards, and appreciation for, the international community and the ongoing global efforts to combat the pandemic - bearing in mind that, in the interconnected world in which we live, it is impossible to succeed in this battle in an isolated manner. The lack of responsibility of one State in the timely adoption of decisions therefore represents a threat to the security of entire regions, thus increasing the risk of the virus spreading indefinitely. In that regard, Venezuela takes this opportunity to denounce the criminal negligence of the Government of Brazil in addressing the COVID-19 pandemic, thus seriously endangering millions of lives both inside and outside that country, while undermining the actions that our national Government is taking to control the spread of the disease and its devastating consequences. This catastrophe is occurring at a time when there is a high level of human movement on our border with that country, as thousands of Venezuelan migrants - fleeing from the discrimination, xenophobia and other related forms of intolerance to which they have fallen victim in the neighbouring country - are voluntarily returning to Venezuela. That can only trigger the spread of the virus in our national territory, in spite of the protocols that are currently being implemented at our borders. Ignoring multilateralism at a time of crisis such as this one is an irresponsible attitude that cannot be tolerated or promoted, since it puts at risk the well-being of all peoples. This pandemic can be overcome only through the responsible conduct of all States and based on their capacity to coordinate policies for the prevention and eradication of COVID-19. We cannot conclude our statement without referring to two key issues. First, mindful of the need to foster an international environment that will enable us to jointly defeat the pandemic, we reiterate our support for the Secretary-General's call for an immediate ceasefire in all conflicts. Secondly, we renew our call to redouble efforts for the prompt development of a vaccine or other safe medical treatment against COVID-19. That can only be considered a global public good, and it is the only guarantee for effectively controlling the pandemic worldwide. In conclusion, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reaffirms its support for the work of the United Nations and considers that addressing this issue as a threat to international peace and security, despite its unprecedented reach, can be accepted only in conjunction with the premise that inequality is the main source of violence. Moreover, if the Security Council wishes to work constructively to prevent future conflicts, then it must condemn and combat the illegal application of unilateral coercive measures, which represent a criminal form of indiscriminate violence against entire populations and are today one of the main sources of inequality with regard to access to the resources, food and medicine needed to fight this pandemic. Only through our joint participation as equals, without political calculations, and with a real spirit of cooperation, can we together defeat COVID-19, a virus that knows no borders or distinctions of any kind.
