Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The candidate
countries Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey; the countries
of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
and Serbia and Montenegro; and the European Free
Trade Association country member of the European
Economic Area, Norway, align themselves with this
statement.

The European Union welcomes the initiative
shown by the presidency of Pakistan in tabling this
discussion and the very helpful non-paper circulated in
advance of the debate. Our debate is also very timely
from a European Union perspective in that it takes
place on the very day on which our Foreign and
Defence Ministers are meeting in Brussels to discuss
development of European Union peacekeeping and
crisis management capabilities, including in support of
the United Nations.

The European Union has actively supported and
participated in peacekeeping and crisis management
operations throughout the world, from the Balkans to
Africa and Asia, manifesting its commitment to the
United Nations and to maintaining peace around the
globe.

European Union Foreign and Defence Ministers,
at their meeting today in Brussels, adopted conclusions
which reflect the significant steps taken forward over
recent months in the European Union's security and
defence policy. I am pleased to report to the Security
Council that good progress is being made in relation to
both military and non-military aspects of European
Union peacekeeping and crisis management
capabilities.

Last September, the United Nations and the
European Union signed a joint declaration providing
for deeper cooperation in those areas and which placed
particular emphasis on the need for greater consultation
and cooperation in relation to planning, training,
communication and best practice.
In January of this year, Minster Brian Cowen of
Ireland, representing the European Union, met
Secretary-General Annan to discuss how the joint
declaration might be further implemented. Their
exchanges cemented our collective resolve to see
ongoing close collaboration between the two
organizations. Meetings between the two sides have
since taken place at the official level, and European
Union-United Nations relations were the subject of a
seminar held last week in Dublin, with the participation
of Under-Secretary-General Guehenno, on the theme of
synergy between United Nations and European Union
on military crisis management. Those contacts are
aimed at further concrete progress, most notably in the
area of European Union capacity to respond rapidly to
United Nations requests for assistance in short-term
crisis management situations. Discussions with the
United Nations on identifying modalities for
cooperation in crisis management operations will
continue.

The European Union is ready to share in the
responsibilities for global security and in building a
better world. The European Union's approach in this
area is informed in particular by the European Security
Strategy, adopted by the European Council last
December. The Strategy reflects the collective desire of
the Union and its member States that the European
Union should be better able to assist in responding to
challenges to peace and security arising at the
international level, while fully acknowledging that the
primary responsibility in this regard rests with the
Security Council. The European Union stands ready to
work more closely with the Chair of the Security
Council's working group, which could provide
important impetus and ideas to the C34 process.

The European Union welcomes the reform and
strengthening of United Nations peacekeeping in recent
years. We recognize, for instance, the significant
progress made by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) to enhance its operational capacity.
Certainly, it is clear that there are areas which require
further strengthening, not least because of the complex
nature of recent missions, coupled with the current
surge in operational activity.

In that regard, we welcome the integrated task
force concept and recommend that it be further
developed across all departments and involve all
stakeholders, producing a mission concept of
operations and component plans that are fully
understood, integrated, rehearsed and owned. We
encourage the DPKO to seek additional surge planning
capacity from external sources such as existing
regional headquarters, formations such as the Standby
Force High Readiness Brigade for United Nations
Operations (SHIRBRIG) or national staffs on a time-,
objective- or mission-oriented basis.

The European Union welcomes the creation of
new types of partnerships and cooperation
arrangements for peacekeeping between the United
Nations and regional organizations. Regional
organizations have unique and complementary
capacities to offer in support of United Nations
peacekeeping. Drawing from our positive experiences
to date of seeking to implement the joint European
Union-United Nations declaration of September 2003,
we recommend that DPKO expand and deepen its
contacts with regional organizations and their
subregional partners, especially at the working level, in
order to identify and implement practical means of
tapping that potential for cooperation. We recommend
that the Best Practices Unit, in consultation with
regional organizations, continue to develop its
catalogue of lessons learned from the European
Union's Operation Artemis in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the Economic Community of West
African States Mission in Liberia (ECOMIL), the
Economic Community of West African States Mission
in C6te d'Ivoire (ECOMICI) and the African Mission
in Burundi (AMIB). It remains our collective
responsibility to ensure that those lessons are fully
reflected in future partnerships between the United
Nations and regional organizations.

We welcome the United Nations own improved
rapid-response capability and encourage DPKO to
assess and evaluate the effectiveness of the United
Nations Standby Arrangements System (UNSAS) and
optimize the strategic deployment stocks system in the
light of recent lessons learned. However, when the
contingency arises to deploy a peacekeeping force at
much shorter notice, DPKO should further develop
partnerships with formations and regional
arrangements that have the capacity to meet that
specific need. The European Union welcomes DPKO's
recent pre-deployment headquarters training initiative
and stresses the need for the deployment of coherent,
well-trained, pre-existing headquarters at the initial
stages of a mission to afford optimum levels of
command and control.

There is a clear need to enhance African
peacekeeping capacity as well as the effectiveness of
United Nations peacekeeping in Africa. We welcome,
and we support, renewed efforts by African States to
strengthen conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
peace-building activities. We also welcome the recent
developments within the African Union to create
rapidly deployable capacities, and we encourage the
United Nations to further develop its partnership with
the African Union and African subregional
organizations.

The European Union is working with the African
Union in the establishment of a peace facility for
Africa. It is intended that the peace facility, which will
be operational shortly, will assist the African Union
and subregional organizations in their capacity for
conflict prevention and resolution. At their meeting
today in Brussels, European Union foreign and defence
ministers underlined the importance of developing the
potential of the European Security and Defence Policy,
in both its military and civil aspects, to assist in
effective conflict prevention and management in
Africa, while encouraging and ensuring African
ownership.

We believe that peace-building elements are vital
for the success of a peacekeeping operation in the short
term, as well as being essential for sustainable peace
and the long-term prevention of conflict. Accordingly,
we believe that a more comprehensive and integrated
approach to peace-building is required from all
relevant United Nations bodies, Member States, the
Bretton Woods institutions and non-governmental
organizations to prevent the recurrence of conflict, to
consolidate the gains wrought by peacekeeping and to
enable long-term development. Re-establishing the rule
of law and the provision of justice in post-conflict
situations should be a core part of such strategies.

We place the highest priority on strengthening the
safety and security of United Nations and associated
personnel deployed in the field, and we welcome the
steps taken by the Secretary-General towards a
thorough review of the safety and security system of
the United Nations. We recognize the need for an
enhanced capacity for security assessment and risk and
threat analysis. The European Union underlines the
need for the establishment of a full-time focal point for
safety and security in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and for the improvement of information
management and sharing, at both mission and New
York Headquarters levels. Such capacities are essential
for an efficient and integrated approach to planning
and managing United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Once again, we stress the need for the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to ensure that adequate,
customized medical facilities, supported by dedicated
medical evacuation plans, are in place from the
commencement stage of a mission.

We trust that the draft presidential statement to be
adopted at the end of this debate will help to highlight
the recommendations outlined in the 2004 report of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and
will inform and assist the deliberations of the General
Assembly's Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) this autumn.

