The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic.
My delegation, like all other members of the
Security Council, wishes to thank Under-Secretary-
General Jean-Marie Guehenno for his and detailed
briefing on the latest developments, in all of their
aspects, in Kosovo.

My delegation welcomes the recent positive
developments in Kosovo, particularly the establishment
of an administration that includes members of the
Kosovo Serb Return Coalition. We believe this is
significant progress and a good development after the
latest briefing by Mr. Steiner on 24 April.

We should like to pay tribute to the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). We believe that it is continuing to act in
cooperation with the provisional Government in order
to transfer authority according to the guidelines
prepared by Mr. Steiner. We believe that UNMIK is
working to ensure that any measures taken by the
provisional Government are in line with the guidelines,
benchmarks and provisions of resolution 1244 (1999)
and the Constitutional Framework. We appreciate the
ongoing efforts by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
in cooperating with UNMIK.

My delegation also pays tribute to the KFOR for
its work to combat transboundary trafficking and to
prevent the illegal activities of traffickers. We
encourage KFOR to continue cooperating with local
police forces according to the mechanisms set up by
Mr. Steiner to combat regional crime and promote the
rule of law. We believe that combating regional crime
requires cooperation with neighbouring States to
ensure a comprehensive approach.

We express our appreciation for improvement in
both the economic and financial areas. My delegation
encourages the continuing efforts to repatriate
displaced persons. We believe that would reinforce
stability in Kosovo, particularly following the return of
significant numbers of displaced persons to their homes
and their increasing participation in rebuilding their
country.

We look forward with confidence to the
municipal elections that will take place in October. We
hope that all communities and ethnic minorities in
Kosovo will be represented in these elections and that
participation by all parties will be assured.

We thank Mr. Steiner and all those working in
UNMIK for the efforts they have continued to make to
ensure quiet and stability in Kosovo and the Balkans in
general.
I now resume my function as Council President. I
now give the floor to the representative of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.

