I thank the Russian Federation for organizing today's debate, which has brought together the Security Council and some regional actors to discuss the situation in the Gulf. I highly appreciate the Secretary-General's briefing, as well as those made by Mr. Robert Malley and Mr. Vitaly Naumkin. The security of the Gulf region is instrumental to the security of the entire Middle East, from the Persian Gulf to the Red Sea and the Mediterranean. We cannot talk about security in the Gulf without mentioning the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which has been at the root of a multitude of tensions in the region. I am glad to say that some of those tensions were eased by the United Arab Emirates and the Kingdom of Bahrain normalizing relations with Israel. That is a positive step towards achieving peace and stability in the Gulf. We acknowledge the constructive role that the United States played in this regard. We encourage regional actors to embrace this spirit of compromise and continue to implement confidence-building measures that would contribute to the long-term stability of the region. However, one must not forget that the foundation for the settlement of conflicts is international law, including the Charter of the United Nations and Security Council resolutions, to which all parties must adhere. The current regional conflicts, such as the ones in Syria and Yemen, are not a consequence of cultural factors. Consolidation of regional relations around the idea of eliminating terrorism is fruitless. Estonia believes that religious extremism does not represent the Arab world or Muslim communities. Instead, regional conflicts and the instability they cause are a result of denying individual freedoms and carrying out expansionist foreign policies. Saddam Hussein's internal terror, crimes against the Kurds and attack on Kuwait in 1990 are examples par excellence. Unfortunately, such suppressive politics continue; only the aggressor has changed. The recently published Arab Opinion Index revealed that every second Iraqi and every third Saudi finds Teheran's actions to be the most threatening to their security. There is no surprise there; Iran has hijacked oil tankers, sent arms to radical groups and financed militants across the region. These acts have increased regional insecurity and made it difficult to justify the expiry of the Iran arms embargo. Still, the Security Council and the European Union put its faith in the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and Iran's commitment not to develop a nuclear weapon. Estonia believes that the fulfilment of all nuclear-related commitments under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, as well as the JCPOA, remain a fundamental precondition for regional and international peace and security. There is a need for a systematic approach to establishing a security system in the Gulf. This includes stopping the wars in Yemen and Syria, supporting Iraq in its recovery from violence by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, encouraging Israel and Palestine to start direct negotiations, and ending the blockade of Qatar with a political compromise. The initiatives to ensure security and stability of the entire Middle East must come from the region itself. We believe that only a broader regional security dialogue among the countries of the region can lead to a long-term solution. This will enable the full potential of the societies in the region, which are aspiring to touch the stars - and I mean that literally, as we recently witnessed the United Arab Emirates launching its first-ever space mission to Mars earlier this year.
