Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I wish to begin by
commending you and your team, Mr. President, for
the excellent organization and conduct of the Council's
work this month. Based on that alone, I must say
that the Egyptian presidency has been a resounding
success. I wish also to thank you for having organized
this formal note 507 briefing. This particular format
affords the Council an important opportunity for its
members, particularly the elected members, to place
on record their views on and assessment of the work
and workings of the Council, which other formats do
not. We continue to believe that Council members
should reach an understanding on striking a balance
between interactivity, which the informal briefing,
or Toledo format, allows, and the need for a formal
record, which the present format affords. In line with
the concept paper, I intend to focus on a few of the five
issues suggested.

I wish first to reflect on the Council's recent work
on Syria, specifically on the humanitarian front. We
wish to underscore that the Syrian Government has a
full obligation to secure the safety, security and welfare
of its citizens. The Government must also provide and
facilitate humanitarian access to besieged and hard-to-
reach areas, particularly to the areas under its control.
As such, we, alongside other Council members, remain
appalled that, despite our collective best efforts,
humanitarian access, especially to besieged and hard-
to-reach areas, remains pitifully limited. Bureaucratic
delays, facilitation failures or the wilful obstruction
of eight convoys by the Syrian Government and other
parties of the conflict are all deplorable and completely
unacceptable. It is frustrating, as every passing day can
mean life or death to the people in besieged areas. They
cannot be forsaken. While the 17 May communique
of the International Syria Support Group (ISSG)
provides for the activation of air bridges and drops by
tomorrow should the situation with regard to access
does not improve, we must underscore that it should
not substitute for land access. In that regard, we call on
all ISSG members, particularly those with influence on
the Syrian parties, to continue pushing for land access.
It is fitting that the tenth anniversary of informal
consultations between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council (PSC) was
commemorated with an open debate (see S/PV.7694)
on 24 May that focused on the way forward for United
Nations-African Union (AU) relations and the future
of the African Peace and Security Architecture. The
recent reviews of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, peace operations and resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security, have provided
impetus for a renewed and reinvigorated relationship
between the Security Council and the PSC. Malaysia
reaffirms its support for S/PRST/2016/8, which we
believe frames and paves the way for future engagement
between the Security Council and the AU PSC.

In line with our common interests to have more
substantive discussions that could lead to more concrete
outcomes, Malaysia believes that both the Council
and the AU PSC can further improve their working
methods when convening informal consultations.
Specifically, we believe that certain proposals floated
during the May consultations, including on the
agenda of the joint consultations, with emphasis on
an assessment of the implementation of the Security
Council-AU PSC communique would be useful for
continuity and coordination purposes. In addition,
following the example of the way in which informal
consultations between the Council and the European
Union Commission are undertaken, we are of the view
that the practice by which each side proposes a certain
number of topics it wishes to discuss would avoid
unproductive procedural wrangling and afford more
time for substantive exchanges.

Turning to more working methods-related issues,
my delegation wishes to reiterate its appreciation to
Ambassador Motohide Yoshikawa, who will be leaving
very soon, and to the delegation of Japan for their sterling
work in leading the Council's Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
We fully support the Informal Working Group's
proposed work plan for 2016 and are pleased with the
progress of consultations on the first item of the work
plan - on transitional arrangements for newly elected
or incoming Council members. Given that, in a few
weeks' time, the General Assembly is scheduled to
elect five non-permanent members of the Council for
the term 2017-2018, the proposal to involve the new
members in the Council's work as early as possible is
welcome. At the same time, we believe that the process
of identifying new Chairs of subsidiary bodies should
also begin early. In that regard, we support the proposal
for incoming members to be fully consulted and for the
Security Council presidency to take a much larger role
in that process. Ideally, the presidency should lead in
a way that could introduce greater transparency and
inclusiveness in the Council's work.

In conclusion, I again congratulate you,
Mr. President, and your excellent team on a job well
done. The Egyptian presidency was conducted very
efficiently and professionally, which we greatly
appreciate. To Ambassador Delattre and the delegation
of France, I wish to reaffirm the full cooperation and
support of my delegation during his presidency and
to wish them all the very best. We are confident that
France will successfully guide the Council through
what looks to be a very hectic June.

