Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome here the
Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Belgium, Mr. De Gucht, and we
should like to thank him for his briefing.

On the whole, we agree with the approach taken
by the Belgian chairmanship to structuring the work of
the organization for 2006. Russia welcomes the
decisions taken at the recent OSCE Ministerial
Council, held in Ljubljana. The positive results
obtained were due largely to the persistent efforts of
the Slovenian chairmanship. We are convinced that the
Belgian chairmanship will carry out its work in a
similar manner. Russia is prepared very constructively
to cooperate with the Belgian chairmanship, including
building on the agreements reached at Ljubljana.

We support the all-round development and
enhancement of cooperation between the United
Nations and its Security Council and regional and
subregional mechanisms on the basis of the Charter of
the United Nations, in particular its Chapter VIII, duly
taking into account the comparative advantages
involved.

We note with satisfaction that, as a regional
mechanism, the OSCE has established close and
fruitful cooperation with the United Nations in a
number of key areas, primarily with respect to security
and to the resolution of regional conflicts.

I should like in particular to note the contribution
made by the OSCE to the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) on Kosovo, Serbia and
Montenegro. The OSCE mission in the province, which
is part of the United Nations Mission in Kosovo, is
playing an important role in particular in monitoring,
encouraging and promoting observance of human
rights as well as monitoring the local media, and on the
whole in introducing the standards adopted by the
international community. This is particularly important
at this time, in the light of the process that is now
under way to determine the future status of Kosovo.

Important work in the area of political support
provided by the United Nations is being done by the
OSCE in the context of the Nagorny Karabakh
settlement, where recently we have noted some
positive progress. We hope that during the Belgian
chairmanship, the OSCE will continue to facilitate the
resolution of a number of other crises and conflicts in
its area of competence in the framework of the division
of labour that has developed with the United Nations.

Russia, for its part, will continue to support such
efforts on the part of the OSCE.

In conclusion, allow me once again to wish the
Belgian chairmanship every success in its work in this
very difficult year of 2006.

