Mr. Ntonga (Zimbabwe): I would like to thank
the Spanish presidency for convening this important
open debate and for giving this issue the significance
it deserves. I would also like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Eliasson, for his insightful
briefing, and the Ministers who participated in the
debate for their constructive proposals.

Zimbabwe aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

We are seriously concerned about the acts of
violence in and around the holy sites and by any
attempt to change the status quo in East Jerusalem.
Access to the Temple Mount and other holy sites must
be preserved under the status quo arrangements. The
recent tragic events are a stark reminder of the plight
of the Palestinian people, owing to a systematic denial
of their right to self-determination. We welcome the
insistence of the President and other Council members
that urgent steps must be taken to stop the violence.
Furthermore, as some other delegations have pointed
out, this is not a conflict between equal forces. The
Council must therefore take appropriate measures to
ensure the protection of Palestinian civilians.

The current violent actions are a direct result of
hopelessness and despair at the grim prospects for
a two-State solution, which nonetheless offers the
best prospects for peace. Israel's security cannot be
guaranteed by using excessive force to inflict collective
punishment on defenceless Palestinian civilians. The
spiral of violence feeds into extremism and terrorism.
The situation requires that the Security Council
act decisively to put a halt to all such violations of
international law, including humanitarian and human
rights law.

The Security Council shares the blame for the
longest continuous occupation in modern history.
No measures have been taken to stop the aggression
against the Palestinian people, and that has emboldened
the occupying Power to act with impunity in blatant
violation of Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions. The Council must protect the people
in the occupied territories. In that regard, we look
forward to the Secretary-General's report on ways to
respond to President Abbas's request for international
protection for the Palestinian people in accordance with
international law and the relevant resolutions.

The deteriorating situation in the occupied
territories makes it even more urgent to relaunch the
political process, end the impasse and restore hopes
for a two-State solution. We welcome the recent
initiatives taken by the expanded Quartet to revive
the peace process, and those by some members of the
Security Council. The Council should shoulder its
responsibilities and create conditions conducive to
negotiations by engaging both parties to the conflict,
and other international partners, in discussions on a
time frame for commencing negotiations. We would
like to underscore the importance of salvaging a two-
State solution, based on the pre-1967 borders and the
need for a just and comprehensive peace for Palestine.
Zimbabwe reaffirms its solidarity with the Palestinian
people and supports realization of their legitimate
national aspirations and inalienable rights, including
to self-determination and freedom in an independent
State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital,
living side by side in peace and harmony with the State
of Israel.

