Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): The
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina gave
a detailed account of the various challenges that Bosnia
and Herzegovina continues to face. I should like to
return to three of them.

First, more than a year after the general elections
of October 2018, the failure to form Governments and
operationalize institutions is of great concern in several
respects. First, it is indicative of an environment of
persistent mistrust among the various communities
that make up Bosnia and Herzegovina. Secondly, it
prevents the implementation of the reforms necessary
for the country, in particular in achieving European
rapprochement, whether in terms of the economy,
social aspects or strengthening the rule of law and
human rights.

France calls on all political parties and movements
to allow for the country to function, especially so that
it can form Governments at the state and the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Federation levels, as well as in several
cantons. We also stress the importance of the holding
of local elections in Mostar next year for the first time
in more than 10 years, as the High Representative
underscored. I recall that the European Court of Human
Rights recently ordered Bosnia and Herzegovina to
allow the holding of those elections.

My second point concerns the way in which Bosnia
and Herzegovina is addressing its past, with regard to
which I thank Ms. Korjenie for her very detailed briefing.
What was laid out for us was alarming. France strongly
condemns the glorification of crimes and war criminals,
regardless of their community of origin. National and
international justice has done an outstanding job in
prosecuting and convicting those responsible for the
atrocities committed during the conflict. Any attempt
to call into question or reinterpret the decisions of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia - I am
thinking in particular of those relating to the genocide
in Srebrenica - is unacceptable.

In that regard, I echo the questions asked earlier
by the Permanent Representative of Germany. What
can we do so that all political actors of Bosnia and
Herzegovina rise up to the duty that falls upon them in
that area, and how can we assure that the justice system
of Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to effectively
investigate the many cases left over from the war, in
particular war crimes? The stalling in transitional
justice and reconciliation processes is adding to the lack
of trust among the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina
in the judicial system and undermining the cohesion of
the country.
Thirdly, I return to the European perspective on
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Western Balkans,
which requires more than ever redoubling efforts
to adopt the reforms that the country needs. In that
regard, France aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union. The
prospect of integration into the European Union, when
the conditions are met, is an indication of the European
Union's massive and multifaceted engagement in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The European Union-led Operation
Althea, the one-year extension of the mandate of which
was authorized by the Security Council's adoption of
resolution 2496 (2019) today, attests to that support.
Beyond that support, it is the responsibility of the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to adopt far-
reaching reforms to make progress on European
rapprochement. Such reforms in the areas of the rule
of law and economic and social development will make
it possible to provide new opportunities to the younger
generations and encourage them to contribute to the
country's development.

At the summit held on 29 April in Berlin,
President Emmanuel Macron, together with Chancellor
Angela Merkel, reaffirmed France's willingness to
contribute to the stability of the Western Balkans.
That re-engagement focuses on economic and social
development, security, justice and defence - four
pillars of the French strategy, which was presented prior
to the summit. Bosnia and Herzegovina has its rightful
place in that strategy, which supports the actions of the
European Union. It is to this European future that the
political leaders must turn their attention.

