Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): It is with
great sadness and concern that I note the exercise today
of a double veto against a draft resolution on Syria that
had been supported by all other members of the
Council. This is a sad day for the Council; it is a sad
day for the Syrians; and it is sad day for all the friends
of democracy.

Above and beyond the thousands of dead,
wounded, tortured and imprisoned since the repression
began almost a year ago, history has compounded our
shame because today is the anniversary of the Hama
massacre and falls only one day after another massacre
in Horns. The father killed on a mass scale; the son has
followed in his footsteps. Horror would seem to be
hereditary in Damascus.

We have been discussing Syria for 10 months,
and all we have managed to adopt is a mere
presidential statement on 3 August 2011
(S/PRST/2011/l6) because of the exercise of the veto,
exercised in October by the same members, of a text
that was as moderate as today's.

What has happened over these past 10 months?
More than 6,000 Syrians have fallen victim to
repression, and the situation could well be worse than
we know. Ten days ago, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights Pillay told us that she
was no longer able to count the victims of repression.
The Secretary-General has called tirelessly on the
Council to act to stop the crimes against humanity
being committed in Syria. And the Council has
remained silent.

The Human Rights Council has thrice noted the
overwhelming responsibility of the Syrian regime, and
the Security Council has remained silent.

Some 133 members of the General Assembly
have solemnly condemned these criminal acts and
called for an immediate end to them. And the Council
has remained silent.

Only three days ago in this very Chamber (see S/PV.67lO), the League of Arab States called on the
Council to support its action in the face of the Syrian
regime's refusal to listen and the implications of that
refusal for the entire region. The Secretary-General of
the Arab League and the Prime Minister of Qatar called
here for a solution that is the only credible road to a
peaceful settlement of the Syrian crisis. A draft
resolution that was submitted by Morocco, broadly
co-sponsored within and outside the Council, and
deemed by most to be consensual, offered the
Council's support for regional efforts - nothing more,
nothing less - and yet the Council will remain silent.

We cannot and must not overlook the harrowing
conclusion that two permanent members of the Council
have systematically obstructed all its action. They do
so in the full knowledge of the tragic consequences of
their decisions for the Syrian people. And in so doing,
they are making themselves complicit in the policy of
repression being implemented by the Damascus
regime. Whatever they may claim, they have de facto
taken the side of the Al-Assad regime against the
Syrian people.

I know the arguments that will be made by those
who today opposed the Council's action. I have already
heard them say that only a few more days would have
sufficed for us to reach an agreement. How can one
speak of a few more days when hundreds of Syrians
are dying every day? We could wait no longer,
especially as the draft resolution represents the
broadest possible consensus of the international
community in support of the efforts of regional actors
to find a peaceful solution to the crisis.

For the past 10 months, we have been accused of
seeking regime change and preparing for military
intervention. That is patently false. We have fully
answered those concerns. In this Chamber three days
ago, our Ministers confirmed that there was no
question of imposing a political regime on Syria. On
that point and on the issue of armed intervention, the
draft resolution was crystal clear. How much time have
we squandered responding to these debating points?
The procrastination, scheming and hesitancy are not
commensurate with the tragedy being experienced by
the Syrian people.

History will judge harshly those countries that
have prevented the Council from offering its support to
the courageous efforts of the Arab League to
implement its plan. In so doing, they have without
scruple aligned themselves with a regime slaughters its
own people. In so doing, they have judged that their
presence in the Middle East now depends on the future
of the Al-Assad. That presence and that regime will
endure the same fate.

As I said, today is sad day. But we will not stop
here. We have no right to abandon the Syrian people to
its tragic fate. I tell the Syrians that France will
continue to work in all forums and with all partners
that share its values towards the objective that should
have united us here today - an end to the Syrian
nightmare. We will continue to work with the Arab
League, whose plan remains on the table even though it
has not been endorsed by the Council. We will continue
to support the peaceful Syrian opposition that is
rallying around the Syrian National Council. We will
continue to up the pressure by imposing further
sanctions of the European Union.

I save my final word for the Syrian people, who
with untold courage have kept their eyes on the prize
of future freedom for the past 10 months. From this
Chamber, I offer them France's full support and resolve
relentlessly to pursue our action. We weathered a first
double veto and returned to the Council; today, we
have weathered a second on the part of the same
countries. However, for the sake of the principles that
guide the Council and the work of the United Nations,
and for the sake of our responsibility as a permanent
members, that will not stop us.

