Mr. Doutriaux (France): Allow me, too, to
congratulate you, Madam President, regarding this
month of July. While I realize that it has not yet
ended - the weekend and Monday remain - we have
already had a very active and productive month, for
which the French delegation thanks you. I would also
like to thank Mr. Annabi for his very comprehensive
report to the Council on the situation in East Timor.

Allow me to begin my observations by expressing
the great sympathy of the French authorities for the
New Zealand Government and authorities and for the
people of New Zealand. I would like to ask
Ambassador Powles to convey all our sympathy and
condolences to the family of the late peacekeeper
Private Manning. This tragic event shows clearly that
there remain serious security problems in East Timor,
problems that we must fully address. In his briefing,
Mr. Annabi indicated that an investigation is under way
in order to fully determine who was responsible for this
tragic assassination. Of course the Security Council
would like to learn as soon as possible all that this
investigation uncovers and would like to be fully
informed about the steps that the Indonesian authorities
are taking in this regard.

Going beyond this tragic event, as the Secretary-
General's report clearly shows, there have been some
positive developments in East Timor. I would like to
comment on the current prospects for its transition to
independence. The success of the peacekeeping
operation in East Timor rests on the mainly exemplary
behaviour of the people and its leadership, who
immediately called for the calming of tensions. The
relative solidarity within the transitional National
Council and the remarkable understanding between
Xanana Gusmao and Sergio Vieira de Mello have
created a positive synergy with the United Nations,
which increasingly has to take administrative
decisions. Therefore, the recent establishment of a sort
of coalition government composed of Timorese and
United Nations representatives is a very positive
development. It seems logical that a people who spoke
massively 11 months ago in favour of independence
should have the will to take their fate into their own
hands quite soon.

As Mr. Vieira de Mello rightly said at the donors'
conference in Tokyo, the impact on the country's
economy of an international presence of such
significance, in terms both of resources and duration,
should also be taken into account.

We feel that the timetable for drawing up a
constitution and preparing for elections, which can
certainly be forecast to take place towards the end of
August 2001, could be shortened to some extent.
United Nations assistance could then take the form of
traditional development aid. It seems to us that it is in
the best interests of East Timor and the United Nations
to achieve an exemplary transition towards a normal
system of government and the exercise of sovereignty.

As previous speakers have done, I would like to
briefly mention the situation in West Timor. My
authorities, like those of previous speakers, are rather
tired of having to note that less progress than we would
like has been made in the situation in the refugee
camps in West Timor. We continue to appeal to the
Indonesian authorities. We support the efforts of the
United Nations, and of the UNHCR in particular, to
find a solution promptly to the problems of the refugee
camps in West Timor. If Mr. Annabi could suggest
possible action, we would be very grateful.

In conclusion, my delegation will closely
examine the draft presidential statement presented by
the United Kingdom delegation, with a View to its
adoption as soon as possible.

