Indonesia welcomes the adoption of the resolution 2559 (2020) on the withdrawal of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). We commend the penholders, Germany and the United Kingdom, for their efforts aimed at reaching consensus. We also commend the Council's unity in supporting the Sudan in this transition. Indonesia voted in favour of resolution 2559 (2020), as we are confident that the Sudan is ready to embark on a new chapter in which the country will move towards peace, stability and prosperity. In this regard, we welcome the fact that the Security Council, through resolution 2559 (2020), emphasizes the importance of the Sudan's national ownership of its transition while fully respecting the country's sovereignty and territorial integrity. Resolution 2559 (2020) leaves no room for misinterpretation on the logistics of the drawdown or on the Sudan's leading role in this transition. As one of the largest troop- and police-contributing countries in UNAMID and a current member of the Security Council, Indonesia is honoured to have served in UNAMID along with other United Nations members and the States members of the African Union. We welcome the responsible withdrawal of UNAMID on 31 December 2020, followed by a six-month cleaning-up period. This withdrawal should be conducted while ensuring the safety, security and well-being of all peacekeepers and staff serving in UNAMID. The challenges in the Sudan's transition call for all parties to ensure that all of the progress made in the country be sustained and further enhanced. We are confident that with support from the international community and countries of the region, the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan will be able to fulfil its role in advising, assisting and supporting the Government of the Sudan, including in the implementation of its national plan for civilian protection (see S/2020/429). Finally, allow me to close my statement by once again congratulating the Sudan as it embarks on a new chapter of its journey. Rest assured that Indonesia remains committed to supporting the Sudan on the road towards everlasting peace and prosperity.
