Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Our delegation would like to thank the Special
Representative and Head of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), Mr. Abou Moussa,
for his updated presentation of the latest events in the
subregion. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2013/671).

It is obvious that the Central African Republic
and the potential impact of the crisis on neighbouring
countries are at the centre of our concerns in this
region, as evident in the reports of numerous violations
of human rights and ethnic and religious violence
affecting the civilian population. We hope that, with the
adoption of resolution 2121 (2013), it will be possible to
start seeing some improvements on the ground.

Clearly, the consequences of the crisis are being
experienced at the subregional level. We therefore
decisively support UNOCA's efforts in support of the
Economic Community of Central African States and
the African Union in their efforts to plan for and deploy
the International Support Mission for the Central
African Republic. Moreover, we commend UNOCA's
support to initiatives aimed at grappling other regional
challenges, specifically piracy and maritime insecurity
in the Gulf of Guinea. We think that the cooperation
extended by UNOCA for the summit of Heads of State
and Government on maritime piracy and armed robbery
at sea in the Gulf of Guinea, held in Cameroon in July,
was key.

We encourage UNOCA to redouble its efforts to
support the different Central African States to address
the problem of the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, specifically the illegal hunting of elephants.
That phenomenon has two alarming consequences
that need to be stopped: the poaching of elephants and
the use of the proceeds from those illegal activities
by international criminal networks and armed groups
to finance their activities - profiting from natural
resources, such as ivory, whose loss is irreparable. We
commend the measures taken by various subregional
Governments to end the problem, but they are not
enough. We hope that immediate measures will be
taken to tackle the issue.

Our delegation believes that it is important for
UNOCA to continue to coordinate efforts to build peace
in the region, especially in the areas of strengthening
institutions, electoral processes, mediation and good
offices for conflict prevention. We hope that the next
meeting of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, to
be held in December, will be successful and that will
generate proposals to improve subregional security.

With regard to the ongoing threat of the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA), we condemn that criminal
group's ongoing criminal activities in remote areas
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central
African Republic and South Sudan. We welcome the
operationalization of the African Union Regional
Task Force to whom some credit should be attributed
for reducing the number of LRA attacks. Despite its
operational success and reports of weakening of the
LRA, efforts must be sustained to completely eliminate
this armed group, and especially to honour the arrest
warrants issued by the International Criminal Court
against Joseph Kony and the other commanders of the
LRA for war crimes and crimes against humanity.

We reiterate our support for the United Nations
regional strategy. Unfortunately, many of the projects
under the strategy do not have the requisite funding. We
hope that the international community will continue to
support those efforts. Indeed, the strategy includes a
tangible plan through which it is possible to address the
short and long-term needs of the people living LRA-
affected areas.

To conclude, we would like to express our concern
about the humanitarian situation in LRA-affected
areas, including displaced persons and refugees.
We commend the work of UNICEF and national and
international non-governmental organizations to care
for boys and girls who have been rescued and separated
from the LRA.

