Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Libya believes that weapons of mass
destruction, particularly nuclear weapons, cannot
constitute a source of security. They pose a threat both
to the States possessing them and to other States as
well. Therefore, we believe that the world will not
enjoy security until we manage to eliminate all
stockpiles of weapons of mass destruction in all States,
and that non-nuclear-weapon States should refrain from
trying to acquire them.

Proceeding from this position, Libya eliminated
its programmes of weapons of mass destruction under
international supervision. As the Council knows well,
Libya is a party to a treaty making Africa a nuclear-
weapon-free zone. It also looks forward to the
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
Middle East region.

We believe that the international community
wasted a precious opportunity that would encourage
other States to abandon weapons of mass destruction
when Libya was not properly rewarded for doing so,
and when it did not receive the assistance necessary for
the acquisition of peaceful nuclear technology,
particularly with regard to water desalination,
treatment of diseases and the production of energy. The
international community similarly failed to grant the
necessary incentives at the proper time to the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, just as it did
not make appropriate use of the situation of Libya.

Libya emphasizes the right of all States to the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, in accordance with the
provisions of the Non-Proliferation Treaty. At the same
time, it emphasizes that the nuclear installations of all
States - and I say all States without exception - must
be subject to the supervision of the International
Atomic Energy Agency as well as be under its
safeguards regime. In this connection, we would like to
state that measures taken by the international
community must be global and non-selective, and they
must extend to Israeli nuclear activities, which still
threaten the Middle East region as well as the world in
its entirety, without any clear-cut position having been
taken by the Security Council.

Libya has always been in the forefront of those
States that do not encourage the imposition of
sanctions, because they do not achieve the desired
result. Rather, they directly harm peoples by increasing
of poverty and hunger and through the deterioration of
health and education services. Libya has always called
for the pursuit of good offices and dialogue to settle
disputes. With regard to the matter before us, we have
always supported the Six-Party Talks and have
encouraged the parties to pursue them as the optimal
way to address the Korean nuclear question.

We still believe that negotiations constitute the
reasonable approach that should be pursued. We hope
that the current measures adopted by the Security
Council will not lead to further worsening of the

situation in the region. We also hope that dialogue will
be resumed and that all forms of sanctions will be
cancelled once an agreement is reached among the
concerned parties. Still, we believe that this resolution
has been formulated in a manner that seeks to avoid
making the consequences of sanctions harm the Korean
people directly. Therefore, we join the general
consensus prevailing in the Council.

