Mr. Baja (Philippines): Mr. President, we thank
you for having provided the Council and other
Members of the United Nations this opportunity to
address the important issue of small arms and light
weapons, and the Under-Secretary-General for
Disarmament Affairs for having presented the
Secretary-General's report on the progress so far made
on the issue.

Why are solutions in combating the illicit trade in
small arms still not in sight? Two reasons stand out:
first, the magnitude of the problem, and secondly, the
fact that it has been only a little more than two years
since the adoption in July 2001 of the Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects.

The scope of the problem encompasses both the
proliferation of millions of loose firearms, which claim
millions of lives each year, and the entrenched
clandestine system of illegal arms trafficking. Indeed,
the problem can be likened to a malignant disease
requiring bold and decisive surgery.

This menace to international security - a factor
that protracts and complicates armed conflicts and
fuels the rise of terrorism and international organized
crime - has been identified and internationally
recognized as such. The identification and appreciation
by the international community of the gravity and
complexity of the problem represents a significant
accomplishment that will facilitate the adoption and
enforcement of appropriate measures. The importance
of this first step - the completion of the diagnostic
phase - cannot be overemphasized.

The next step concerns the prescriptive stage.
Here I would like to focus on two points.

The first area of consideration to which I would
like to invite the Council's attention is the value of
complementarity between the two vital organs of the
United Nations - the Security Council and the
General Assembly - which are both seized with the
issue of small arms and light weapons.

If we were to examine closely the 12
recommendations of the Secretary-General, some of
them fall - appropriately - within the competence of
the General Assembly: for instance, recommendations
1, 2, 3, 9 and 12. Recommendations 5, 7, 10 and 11 fall
within the Council's competence, while
recommendations 6 and 8 concern both the Council and
the General Assembly.

The Assembly is seized with establishing
universal norms and making rules to control the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. On the
other hand, the Council is focused on practical
measures such as arms embargoes and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration in conflict situations.
We realize, however, that their respective concerns on
the issue of small arms are not mutually exclusive, but
overlap and complement each other. The nuances of
organic competencies should thus be carefully weighed
so as not to slow down the progress of work by
overburdening the Council with the same issues
already under consideration by the Assembly. My
delegation therefore supports the holding of
consultations between the presidencies of the Council
and of the Assembly on this important issue of small
arms and light weapons in all its aspects to identify
complementarities and to avoid duplication in their
work so that the many complexities of the issue can be
addressed in the process.

We also recognize that many Member States have
undertaken initiatives to address the issue of small
arms and light weapons, as reported during the United
Nations First Biennial Meeting of States to Consider
the Implementation of the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, held
last year. The Assembly, however, still faces the task of
coming up with an international instrument for possible
completion before the first review conference on the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its
aspects, to be held in 2006.

We welcome General Assembly resolution
58/241, adopted last year, which established an open-
ended working group to negotiate an international
instrument to enable States to identify and trace illicit
small arms and light weapons. In the same vein, the
Council must adopt effective and practical enforcement
strategies for arms embargoes, for targeted sanctions
and for restricting the supply of ammunition to areas of
instability. The sanctions committees must be provided
by Member States with information on alleged
violations of arms embargoes.

The second point I wish to bring to the Council's
attention relates to regional and subregional
cooperative arrangements to combat the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons. The process leading to
regional cooperation should be pursued just as
vigorously as the wider multilateral cooperative
processes and the national processes of formulating and
enforcing legislative and regulatory measures. There
should be parallel efforts to develop regional
arrangements as a vital segment of the policy
continuum. In fact, global experience has shown that
the illegal trade in small arms and light weapons has
passed mainly through porous border routes in conflict
areas.
Promoting regional awareness of the issue and
encouraging cooperation among regional partners in
the fields of information exchange and training in law
enforcement, customs and airport controls, among
others, are effective tools to control the traffic in small
arms and light weapons. My country in particular
benefited from such an exercise in the Regional
Seminar on Implementing the United Nations
Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light
Weapons, held in Manila in July 2002, co-sponsored by
the Government of Canada and supported by the
United Nations Secretariat. We are aware that similar
exercises have been undertaken in other parts of Asia,
South-Eastern Europe and Central Africa. We
encourage more cooperation in that regard in order to
prevent the diversion of small arms and light weapons
to terrorist groups.

My country fully recognizes the tragic loss of
innocent lives and the insecurity and fear that the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons creates
among the civilian population of the entire world. My
delegation is therefore determined to contribute -
together with relevant international organizations, civil
society and other actors - to the search for solutions
to this global problem.

