Ms. Blum de Barberi (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Ten years after the earthquake that affected millions of people and changed their history, Colombia reaffirms its solidarity with the people of Haiti. We also express our sorrow for the victims of the violent events in the Niger. Minister for Foreign Affairs I thank the presidency of Viet Nam for convening this meeting and all Council members for their ongoing and unanimous support of Colombia. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2019/988) and his Special Representative, Carlos Ruiz Massieu, for the significant work of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia under his leadership. My Government appreciates the Mission's participation in the national talks led by the President of the Republic on the policy of "Peace with legality", as well as its independent assessments of the progress and challenges in that area. The policy of "Peace with legality" that the Government of President Ivan Duque Marquez has been implementing is aimed at the realization of the constitutional right of Colombians to peace within the framework of the protection of the rule of law and istherefore a benchmark for the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, signed in 2016 between the Government and the former Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia - Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) guerrillas. Among its many components, the policy includes decisive instruments for making progress on the two fronts examined by the Verification Mission, in accordance with its mandate - the reintegration of former FARC-EP members and security guarantees for communities in the areas most affected by the violence. With regard to the first mandate, concerning reintegration programmes, the Secretary-General has acknowledged the significant progress made by Colombia. The first-ever participation of the FARC party in the regional elections held last October and the election of some former combatants or candidates endorsed by them are evidence of the guarantee of the full integration of its members into political life. In addition, the State lifted the bans that could restrict the exercise of the vote or the candidature of former combatants and special protection measures for their candidates were put in place. That election day was more peaceful than in the past and reaffirmed the vitality and pluralism of Colombian democracy. In terms of economic and social reintegration, the 898 individual productive projects and 47 collective projects under way and access to employment have allowed more former combatants to generate their own income and not depend on State programmes. Ninety- nine per cent of former FARC members are affiliated with the health insurance scheme and 9,000 of them have had access to formal education and technical training. I am also pleased to announce that on 27 December, the Government approved the road map for social and economic reintegration agreed with FARC, which establishes a comprehensive, sustainable and transitional process that, based on institutional services, will guarantee the realization of the right of people in transit and their families to reintegration. We have taken note of the information provided by the Secretary-General on the accreditation of former combatants and a workplan has already been defined to analyse individual cases. The workplan enabled the accreditation of a further 99 individuals in December 2019, in addition to those included in the report, thus bringing the total number of accredited persons to 13,185. Similarly, as mentioned in the report, the activities of the Gender Technical Working Group of the National Reintegration Council are noteworthy, as are the participation of young people. The Secretary-General also refers to the Government's expectation that former FARC-EP members hand over their assets to provide reparations to victims and that they cooperate in locating anti-personnel mines and in establishing the truth. Those remains issues on which Colombian society expects answers. It is worth noting that the Verification Mission is paying greater attention to those issues, which are also part of the reintegration process. Regarding the Mission's second mandate, the report mentions various measures adopted by the State for the protection and security of the communities affected by violence but warns of the serious challenges that remain, several of which concern the need to consolidate the stabilization of the areas most affected by poverty and violence. That is where the projects under the "Peace with legality" policy become important. Pursuant to that policy, the Government has launched 16 development plans with a territorial focus, which cover the 170 municipalities most affected by violence and poverty. In the 17 months since the Government took office, 309 new projects have been approved for implementation by local authorities, at an investment cost of $500 million. At the national level, the Government has completed 641 additional projects under the plans. It is also essential to highlight the role of the private sector, which recognizes the economic benefits of stabilizing the territories concerned and is progressively investing in the areas most affected by violence and poverty. Other undeniable security challenges relate to illegal economies and associated crime, which we have not yet been able to eradicate from our country. We continue to suffer the consequences of criminal economies, in particular drug trafficking and illegal mining, which have historically fuelled violence. The Government is prioritizing the issue and working resolutely to address those threats, which affect former combatants, social leaders, ethnic populations, human rights defenders and vulnerable communities in general. Colombia ended 2019 with the lowest rate of kidnapping in its recent history, while homicides of social leaders decreased by 25 per cent comparedto 2018. Such crimes nonetheless remain deplorable reminders that we cannot be complacent and must continue to work. For that reason, the State is taking systematic steps to speed up judicial investigations and develop comprehensive public policies to confront criminal organizations and strengthen prevention, early warning and protection. The special unit of the Public Prosecutor's Office assigned to investigate attacks on former combatants has already issued 51 arrest warrants against suspects and 23 sentences have been handed down, including in the cases of Alexander Parra Uribe and Dimar Torres mentioned in the Secretary-General's report. A new meeting of the National Commission on Security Guarantees, led by President Duque Marquez, was held on 8 January, at which the Commission verified that the considerations of civil society were reflected in public policies on the dismantling of illegal armed groups and the protection of social leaders, former combatants and human rights defenders. The recent thwarting of a plan to assassinate the president of the FARC party is the result of the robust measures being taken by the Government. By the end of 2017, coca plantations had reached an unprecedented 200,000 hectares, but thanks to the State's action since 2018, their growth has been halted. Some 100,000 hectares were destroyed in 2019, mainly through forced manual eradication programmes. The Government recognizes the challenges that the country faces and will continue to work with unwavering commitment to confront the criminal structures responsible for attacks on communities and individuals. The Secretary-General's report mentions the importance of achieving comprehensive progress in other chapters of the 2016 agreement. Although the issue is not part of the Mission's mandate, our Government has a comprehensive vision for that field. There are more than 500 action indicators that impact the construction of "peace with legality", for example in terms of our comprehensive rural transformation. In the 17 months that our Government has been in power, 697,000 hectares have been incorporated into our land fund and 375,000 hectares have been regularized. With the enactment of an economic growth law, between 2020 and 2022 approximately $900 million will be invested in building tertiary roads that will improve the connectivity of remote rural areas of the country with more developed centres. At the same time, the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition continues to be consolidated, with the increasingly active participation of victims. The necessary resources have been approved in our national budget for 2020 so that the three principal mechanisms of that system will be able to fulfil their mission independently. Finally, I wish to refer to the demonstrations that have taken place in the capital and other cities since 21 November, which are referred to in the report of the Secretary-General. Social and non-governmental organizations have addressed various petitions to the State in the course of these demonstrations. Colombia guarantees the right to social protest as an expression of participatory democracy, which must be protected. In response to the demonstrations, President Duque launched a grand national conversation as a channel for communication between citizens and their institutions.By 31 December, 12 meetings had been held between representatives of the Government and more than 1,000 members of social organizations, leaders and experts in many fields in order to analyse proposals with a view to building a more just and equitable society. I note with satisfaction that the report recognizes President Duque's openness in the national conversation and I trust that it will contribute to consolidating the progress achieved in our ever-challenging political and social context. I wish to reiterate before the Council today that the process of building "peace with legality" in Colombia is ongoing. The process is an irreversible one, but it requires the commitment and support of the Council and of the international community as attestations to the exceptional achievements and advances that have been made thus far. The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.
