The Secretary-General: I would like to thank
the Security Council for focusing its attention, even at
this critical moment when all our minds are on Iraq, on
a subject which is of great importance to the welfare
and well-being of millions of people in another region
of the world, namely West Africa.

The uncontrolled proliferation of small arms and
light weapons and the use of mercenaries sustain
conflict, exacerbate violence, fuel crime and terrorism,
promote cultures of Violence, Violate international
humanitarian law and impede political, economic and
social development.

The easy availability of small arms and light
weapons is strongly linked with the dramatic rise in the
Victimization of women and children and with the
phenomenon of child soldiers. Light automatic
weapons can be carried and fired by children as young
as nine or ten. This link is particularly evident in West
Africa, where the conflicts in Liberia, Sierra Leone and
now Cote d'Ivoire have been fuelled in no small part
by an unregulated trade in small arms - often paid for
with the proceeds from the illicit exploitation of natural
resources.

The flood of arms in the region has been
accompanied by - and, indeed, has facilitated - a
rise in the activities of mercenaries. Armed men from
within the subregion and beyond have moved across
borders: a large force of fighters, unemployed but
armed and willing to fight for whomever will pay them
most. This supply side of the mercenary problem is
closely linked, in turn, to the failure to adequately fund
and implement disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes and to the failure to provide
enough assistance to countries such as Liberia and
Guinea-Bissau in restructuring their armed forces as
part of post-conflict peace-building arrangements. The
result in Liberia, for example, is that tens of thousands
of former combatants face little or no prospect of
gainful employment, leaving them more susceptible to
recruitment as combatants once again.

The actions of unscrupulous and predatory arms
merchants also bear special mention. Their lack of
restraint in the sale and transfer of their products to
zones of tension in West Africa and beyond directly
translates into more unnecessary suffering and
instability.

The problem is easy to diagnose. The more
complex challenge is to mount an effective response.
Fortunately, the international community and the
countries concerned are not without tools with which to
fight back.

Legal instruments and other international
agreements offer one such avenue.

The Programme of Action on Small Arms,
adopted by the international community in 2001, offers
a blueprint for action at all levels, including such steps
as increased cooperation with Interpol and the World
Customs Organization.

The International Convention against the
Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of
Mercenaries came into force in October 2001; I urge all
West African countries to join Mauritania, Mali,
Senegal and Togo in ratifying this vital instrument.

This Council has demanded that countries in the
Mano River Union cease military support for armed
groups in neighbouring countries and refrain from any
actions that might contribute to destabilization of the
situation on their borders. The Council has also
imposed arms embargoes, another essential step.

The heads of State of the Economic Community
of West African States, for their part, have agreed to
work more intensively towards making the region a
child-soldier-free zone and have put in place a
moratorium on the import, export and manufacture of
small arms in the region. To support the moratorium,
the United Nations Development Programme has been
helping the countries involved to strengthen controls at
border posts, to establish arms registers, to build up the
capacity of national monitoring commissions and to
carry out collections and destructions of illicit arms.

This is just one example of the many steps that
are being taken by the United Nations system at the
operational level and on the ground. The United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone and the United
Nations peace-building office in Liberia are helping
those countries address not only questions of small
arms but the full range of post-conflict reconstruction
and development tasks. The United Nations is also
leading peace-building efforts in Guinea-Bissau. And
of course, the economic and social development efforts
being carried out by the entire United Nations
system - to improve education and health, to create
jobs, to promote good governance and respect for
human rights - will necessarily have a supportive
impact on efforts to demilitarize the societies involved.

Unless adequately addressed, the proliferation of
small arms and mercenaries will continue to pose a
severe threat to the region's hopes of attaining durable
peace and security. Spillover effects from one country
to the next have been all too common, underscoring the
need for regional cooperation and a comprehensive
approach. The Council's own panels of experts on
Sierra Leone and Liberia have reported as much and
offered a range of valuable recommendations.

I urge you all to do your utmost to bring the
countries of the region to build up the capacity to
address this issue. I urge the countries involved, and in
particular the leaders, to focus more intently on this
very real and very present threat to peace.

