Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank the
Permanent Representatives of Egypt, Kazakhstan and
Bolivia for their briefings and their leadership as Chairs
of their respective Committees.

Acts of terrorism continue to pose a threat
to international peace and security and affect all
regions of the world. We View such acts as attacks
on democracy and on our open and tolerant societies.
Terrorism in all its forms must be opposed, and those
responsible, obviously, held accountable. At the same
time, all counter-terrorism measures must be carried
out in accordance with international law, including
international human rights law, humanitarian law and
refugee law - a fundamental principle reiterated in
numerous Security Council resolutions.

We welcome and encourage the continued good
cooperation and sharing of information between the
three Committees, notably through close cooperation
between their respective groups of experts. It is
important to continue to find synergies while respecting
their distinctive mandates and tasks. I would like to
make three points in response to today's briefings.

First, with regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, as Da'esh's power and
attractiveness wane, its attacks have become even more
bloody and indiscriminate. It is turning to increasingly
desperate and malicious means to secure funds,
including kidnapping for ransom. Da'esh is a threat to
us all. The perpetrator of the attack in Stockholm last
month is suspected of being a sympathiser or member
of Da'esh. It is important that the Committee, with
the assistance of the its Monitoring Team, continue to
monitor and adapt its measures accordingly.

The growing security challenges involving
returning and relocating foreign terrorist fighters
calls for enhanced information sharing. The advice of
the Monitoring Team, as well as that of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, in
understanding those flows is extremely useful for
Member States, including Sweden, to better combat
the phenomenon. Every case must be assessed on its
own merits and may require the involvement of many
stakeholders at the local and national levels. Sweden has
introduced new penal code provisions related to travel
and financing so as to fully meet the requirements set
out in resolution 2178 (2014). It is also important that we
make use of existing international information systems,
for example within INTERPOL.

The Council has recognized sexual violence
as a tactic of terror, and we welcome the adoption
of resolution 2331 (2016) and the report of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence
(S/2017/249), submitted to the 1267 Committee by his
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
We look forward to reporting by the Monitoring Team
on those issues, and, with regard to the protection of
cultural heritage, we look forward to the Secretary-
General's report at end of the year.
We welcome the Chair's call for cooperation by
Member States in the annual review of the 1267 list.
For the sanctions regime to be credible and effective,
the listings must be factual and correct. We recognize
the important work carried out by the Ombudsperson
in that regard, as well as the impartial and professional
way in which she is carrying out her mandate. The
sharing of information with the Ombudsperson by
Member States helps to safeguard the credibility of the
listings, thereby strengthening the sanctions regime.

Secondly, with regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-
terrorism, Sweden welcomes the many opportunities
for dialogue in the Committee on the current challenges
in countering terrorism. The goal of all counter-
terrorism activities must be to prevent terrorist attacks
from being carried out in the first place. At the same
time, fundamental principles, such as the freedom of
information and of expression, online as well as off-
line, and the freedom of association and assembly
must be upheld. Those freedoms represent the basis
of an open society that promotes critical thinking and,
consequently, resilience against terrorist propaganda.
Women play multiple roles in relation to terrorism,
including those ofperpetrators, supporters, facilitators,
victims and preventers. We encourage the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate to apply
an integrated gender perspective in all its reports, as
mandated in resolution 2242 (2015).

Thirdly, and finally, regarding weapons of
mass destruction, resolution 1540 (2004) remains a
central pillar of the multilateral disarmament and
non-proliferation regimes. The goal of resolution 1540

(2004) i to stop non-State actors from acquiring
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery - is closely linked to global anti-terrorism

efforts. The threat from non-State actors is real, and
its urgency has become even more evident with the
increased confirmed use of chemical weapons.

We welcome the role of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) in facilitating
technical assistance, in particular by engaging actively
in matching offers and requests of assistance, including
through a regional approach. Sweden is engaged in such
cooperation with Ukraine in the area of export controls.
We welcome the decision to hold a special meeting of
the 1540 Committee devoted to intangible transfers of
technology, since more attention should be placed on
knowledge and information as central factors in the
acquisition of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery.

