Mr. Ba (Mauritania) (spoke in French): On behalf
of Mauritania, allow me in turn to offer our deep
condolences to the families of the Blue Helmets killed
in the Democratic Republic of Congo and to all those
who defend the values of peacekeeping. This is also
an opportune moment for my country to extend our
thanks to the highest authorities of the United Nations
for their compassion and solidarity following the death
of a Mauritanian soldier deployed to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic. We also thank France for
its expression of solidarity and compassion.

It is with great pleasure that I address the Council
today. On behalf of my country, and particularly on
behalf of the President of the Republic, I thank members
for the very special interest that the United Nations
has shown in the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), comprised of Burkina Faso, Mali, Mauritania,
the Niger and Chad. There is no proof more eloquent
of that interest - in addition to resolution 2359
(2017) - than the October visit conducted by Security
Council members to the G-5 Sahel region, including
Mali, Mauritania and Burkina Faso, to assess first hand
the nature of the terrorist threat and the feasibility of
the Priority Investment Programme in order to support
both the operationalization of the Joint Force of the
G-5 Sahel and development issues in that region, where
the terrorist threat persists. We salute the efforts of
the co-leaders of the mission, namely, France, Italy
and Ethiopia.

I reaffirm the deep gratitude of my country to the
United Nations for its commitment to peace, security
and development in the Sahel region. My country also
seizes this opportunity to recognize the efforts of our
bilateral and multilateral partners in support of the
G-5 Sahel, including France, a friendly country whose
long-standing, significant and exceptional efforts in
favour of peace and stability in the region we have
always appreciated. Nor can we forget the efforts of the
European Union, the African Union, the United States
of America and the alliance of Saudi Arabia, Denmark
and Germany, which are also committed to actively
supporting the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.

Allow me to reiterate that, today more than ever
before, my country is wholeheartedly committed to the
spirit and founding principle of the G-5 Sahel. Since
February 2014, we have been committed to meeting the
peace, security and development challenges in the Sahel
region and elsewhere, as evidenced by our participation
in the peacekeeping operations of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic.

As Council members are aware, from the very
outset Mauritania has both understand and appreciated
the magnitude of the challenges posed by the terrorist
threat in the region. That is why since 2008, we have
made the fight against violent extremism, terrorism
and the cross-border trafficking of drugs and persons
a priority through a multidimensional national strategy
to effectively combat such crimes. To that end, and in
the light of the commitment of the highest authorities
of my country, including the President of the Republic,
His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz,
Mauritania is firmly committed to the principles of the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force and recalls the importance and
critical nature, today more than ever, of the following
three points for a more effective, efficient and effective
operationalization of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.

The first is the international legality of the Force
based on the express authorization of the Security
Council and the mandate it has provided under Chapter
VII. Second is the need to secure the adequate and
sustainable funding identified by our Heads of State to
the tune of €423 million at the start and €115 million
per year thereafter. The third is the need to launch
offensives throughout the Sahelo-Saharan band.

In conclusion, on behalf of my country I once
again thank Council members for their interest, as
demonstrated by their consensus in making the G-5
Sahel Joint Force a reality.

The meeting rose at 4.05 pm.
