Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): A minor point, but I said accurately in
Russian what my British colleague said, namely, that he
does not care who did the shooting. But we do care. We
continue to believe that those who kill civilians should
not be left unpunished. So we care very much who did
the shooting. But that is not such a substantive detail.

I am more surprised at what our Ukrainian
colleague said about the events that took place on 2 May
2014 in Odessa. The more so as he said that Odessa is
his native town. An event took place in his native town
that shook the whole world. There were many awful
events during the crisis - murders and different forms
of violence - but that event was a milestone. Forty-
eight people were burned to death, as could be seen
on television when those who tried to save themselves
jumped out of the windows and were shot. Many
witnesses, including the television coverage itself, said
that the attack was planned, inter alia, by the current
speaker of the Verkhovna Rada.

With regard to what happened in Odessa, the
Deputy Foreign Minister of Ukraine, who was born in
Odessa, says that that attack does not require special
attention, but, as I have already said, it is possible that
an awful tragedy is in the offing and may take place in
Odessa on 2 May. He is also indifferent. He wants to
see the event in the general context. But our Western
colleagues have also only wished to address the general
context. Their position is quite characteristic. It is
however rather strange for France to do so, as it took
part in the elaboration of the package of measures.
Throughout this chain of events the only useful thing
that we have done, and that we must continue to do in
order to settle the conflict, is to implement the package
of measures. But some say that we cannot confirm the
package ofmeasures. Our Ukrainian colleague said that
he can agree on the first paragraph, but our American
and British colleagues cannot. They say that they want
to play a constructive role, but if we do not refer to the
"aggression", they will not support the document. There
is nothing about aggression in the package of measures.

We note that the United States likes to use that
term - it has one aggression after another with
destructive consequences throughout the world. But no
aggression is mentioned in the package of measures.
They are again just trying to draw attention away from
the serious political and diplomatic work. And the
United States says that it wants to be constructive and
help us. How can we understand that claim? It is not
possible to understand that position. It was repeated
againjust now. The United States is not even prepared to
agree with the first paragraph, which mentions the need
to ensure the realization of the package of measures
as soon as possible. Why? Because no reference to
Crimea is made in that paragraph? Well, that is because
the package of measures makes no reference to Crimea
either.

It is very clear, as you said, Mr. President, that
there is no consensus here. We see exposed the position
of some members of the Security Council, in particular
our British and the American colleagues. They
ought not to claim that they want to participate in a
constructive manner. France and Germany will perhaps
take part in a constructive way in the implementation
of the package of measures, but the others will still be
engaged in their demagoguery and hide their roles in
all those matters. Here we have come up against one of
the main problems, as a result of which the settlement
of the crisis has been delayed in the Ukraine.

