Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I am pleased to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month. I thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her
important briefing.

Allow me to take this opportunity to stress once
again Libya's pursuit of complementarity between
national courts and the ICC to ensure justice and fight
impunity. Although Libya has not acceded to the Rome
Statute, it continues to closely cooperate with the ICC
and with the Prosecutor to achieve those goals.

We are well aware of the delay in the prosecution of
suspects. That was due, unfortunately, to the security
situation in our country. Despite the conditions under

which the Libyan courts and the Attorney-General
have been working, we stress their ability to fulfil their
commitments and guarantee fair and just prosecutions.

The Council is undoubtedly well aware that the
process of achievingjustice cannot be limited to certain
cases or specific suspects but should include everyone,
regardless of the identity of the perpetrator or of the
victim. That cannot be achieved in the absence of
security, and security cannot be achieved in the absence
of an army and a police force in a situation where there
are numerous militias and weapons are plentiful.

To ensure justice for all, we stress the need for the
international community to support the Government of
National Accord and law-enforcement institutions, that
is, the army and the police, and extend State authority
throughout the territory. That is the sole guarantee
for fighting impunity, achieving justice for all and
protecting the independence of the judiciary, so as to
enable it to shoulder its responsibilities in a transparent
and equitable manner.

We also stress that the proceedings under way in
our national courts have given rise to a sense ofjustice,
which is the cornerstone of our national reconciliation
process and has had a positive impact on our stability
and security. However, exercising our national
jurisdiction does not necessarily mean that we will not
cooperate with the ICC. That is something that previous
Libyan Governments and the current Government
of National Accord have done through cooperation
between the Attorney-General and the Prosecutor of
the ICC in implementation of the 2013 memorandum
of understanding on the sharing of responsibilities with
the Libyan authorities.

It is well-known that human trafficking in itself
is a crime. Combating and ending it require close
cooperation between countries. It is also known that
this type of crime is perpetrated through transnational
criminal networks. We noticed in the report of the
Prosecutor and in reports of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya and of other international
organizations that light is being shed on alleged crimes
that are a direct result of human trafficking, including
rape, arbitrary detention, torture and other crimes
against humanity. Indeed, we know full well that the
humanitarian situation ofillegal immigrants in Libya is
tragic. As we have said before, this is a direct result of
the insecurity and the spread of militias and weapons.

However, we would have liked to see in the report a
mention of genuine preventive procedural efforts to fight
these criminal networks, whether in countries of origin
or destination. It is known that my country is a transit
country suffering from insecurity and chaos, which
affects our citizens and results in their displacement.
Had it not been for the presence of criminal networks
in countries of origin and destination, transit countries
would not have to experience such crimes and violations.

According to some media outlets, the Prosecutor-
General of Catania in Sicily, Italy, accused some
European non-governmental organizations that
were saving migrants of being complicit with human
traffickers. That was stressed by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
last Sunday. We hope to see mention by the Prosecutor
in future reports of Court efforts to fight human
trafficking networks in both the north and the south of
the Mediterranean equally.

Moreover, given the sensitivity of the subject
in Libya, we hope to see further cooperation and
collaboration between the ICC and Libyan authorities
on illegal immigrants. In that regard, we have noticed
that the latest reports of the Prosecutor fail to mention
certain topics that used to be a priority in previous
reports, such as internally displaced persons and
migrants. We believe it would be useful to brief Council
members on the latest updates in that regard.

In conclusion, we reiterate our hope for further
support from the Council to address the security and
administrative situation and to provide a conducive
environment for the restoration of the rule of law as
soon as possible. We look forward to further positive
collaboration and cooperation with the ICC to ensure
criminal justice, in line with Libyan sovereignty and in
full respect of our local legislation, including laws on
transitional justice and national reconciliation.

The meeting rose at 4.45pm.
