The President (spoke I thank Ms. Mayaki for her briefing. in French): I shall now like to make a statement in my capacity as the representative of the Niger on behalf of the three African members of the Security Council - the Niger, South Africa and Tunisia - as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1). I would like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Gamba de Potgieter, and the Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Fore, for their complementary presentations, which provide us with good material for today's discussion. I note that this meeting takes place within the framework of the commemoration of the first International Day to Protect Education from Attack. What could be more normal, on this occasion, than to listen to the voices of the victims of this phenomenon that we denounce, who, from the depths of their distress, tell us that it is time for us to act. Hadiza and Rimana, two young girls from the Niger, whose poignant testimonies we have just followed, remind us how urgent it is to listen to the Secretary- General's call for a ceasefire and the African Union's call to silence the guns in Africa for peace to prevail, create the conditions to protect schools from attacks and to promote quality education for all children, particularly children affected by conflict and violence. I tell Hadiza and Rimana that they can rest assured that we have listened to them and that their messages give us additional reasons to act. The information that Ms. Marika Tsolakis, from the Global Coalition to Protect Education from Attacks, just shared with us allows us to assess the impact of attacks on schools, this savagery of our time, on children's education, especially for young girls. When access to education is taken away from a child in a conflict situation, it is a tragedy that also takes away what most children want and are entitled to - an opportunity to learn and develop their imagination in a safe and healthy environment. All too often, in situations of armed conflict, schools and associated people, who are entitled to protection, are subject to attacks and threats of attack. That is why it is essential that we assess the progress made since the adoption of resolution 1998 (2011) and subsequent related resolutions, and renew our commitment to provide an adequate learning environment for all children. The A3+l recognizes the important new developments in protecting schools worldwide from attacks and threats of attacks. In that connection, the signing of an action plan to deter attacks on schools between an armed group in the Central African Republic and the Office of the Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict is worth noting. Such actions should be replicated in other conflict situations to promote the main objective of protecting schools and people operating in those environments. We commend efforts made in Mali, for example, where the Government has effectively implemented the commitments made in the Safe Schools Declaration, as well as in Burkina Faso, with the provision of distance education - because of the coronavirus disease pandemic - to children affected by the conflict, in collaboration with UNICEF, UNESCO and regional bodies. As the world strives to adapt education to the difficult context of the global pandemic, greater emphasis must be placed on the need to provide quality education to children, including those in vulnerable situations, such as internally displaced persons, refugees, childrenwith disabilities and children removed from conflict in reintegration programmes. We are equally concerned about the particular vulnerabilities of girls in conflict contexts, compounded by social burdens, all of which have a serious impact on their education. In many parts of the world, girls are much less likely to return to school after school closures or the destruction of school infrastructure. In countries affected by conflict, girls are half as likely to be enrolled in school as those living in countries at peace. They are also more likely to experience sexual and gender-based violence on their way to school. Particular attention should be paid to the issue of violence and trauma suffered by girls in conflict situations, with a view to better defining the means and other strategies to be put in place to help them. In the absence of rapid and comprehensive action, the reduction in access to education due to conflict, insecurity and the coronavirus disease will have disastrous consequences. The presidential statement adopted today (S/PRST/2020/8), at the initiative of the Niger and the Kingdom of Belgium, specifically focuses on the targeting of schools within the broader framework of the protection of children in armed conflict and calls for bold efforts to address the harmful effects of such attacks, including child labour, the forced recruitment of children by armed groups and early marriage. Girls like Rimana, from whom we heard today, tell us that there are other ways to do things, for example, in the Sahel region or the Lake Chad basin, where armed terrorist groups specifically target schools. We all remember the tragedy of the girls of Chibok, Nigeria, ripped away from their schooling and from the affection of their families by fanatics from the terrorist group Boko Haram. Between April 2017 and December 2019, Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger saw a six-fold increase in the number of schools closed due to violence. In the first seven months of this year alone, more than 90 incidents of attacks on education occurred in the central Sahel. In some parts of the region, the insecurity situation has led to a disturbing pattern of school closures; in December 2019, more than 3,300 schools were reported closed due to insecurity, disrupting the education of more than 650,000 children in the three countries. In 35 conflict- affected countries around the world, the education of 75 million children and adolescents is being disrupted by this situation. Schools have become the target of armed terrorist groups, particularly in the Sahel, because, as centres of knowledge, they are a crucible of knowledge. Schools shed light, whereas the ideology of violence carried by terrorist groups is nourished by ignorance and obscurantism. Educated children are the spearhead of a responsible society; they are the pillars on which a strong nation is built. States must therefore commit themselves to adopting legislation and policies focused on the protection of children and which are gender-sensitive and in conformity with international humanitarian law, the Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol on the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict. They must also commit to greater respect for the civilian character of schools. To be effective, such protection mechanisms should involve, in addition to States themselves, all other partners in education, should be based on monitoring and communication, and raise awareness about the unacceptability of attacks on schools. If such a system is to work efficiently, there is also an urgent need to increase resources that can create the conditions for teachers and students to engage in appropriate online and blended-learning modalities so that no child is left behind. The maintenance of reliable statistics on schools that have been destroyed will enable a better understanding of the extent of the phenomenon and allow for rehabilitation and reconstruction operations, with the support of UNICEF and other relevant United Nations entities. These rehabilitation and reconstruction operations are, in our view, the best way to strengthen the role of schools as a vector for promoting and consolidating peace, because, as we said earlier, it is through education that we combat not only obscurantism and fanaticism, but also terrorism. Before I conclude, I am pleased to announce that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines has just endorsed the Declaration on Safe Schools, joining the 104 countries that have already signed it. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. I shall now give the floor to those Council members who wish to make statements.
