Ms. Lajous (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I
should first like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Marie Guehenno for his briefing on the situation
in Kosovo and on the progress achieved by the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK).

My delegation has taken note with satisfaction of
the completion of the Cabinet of the provisional
institutions of self-government in Kosovo. Its members
took office on 12 June. With the formation of this
multi-ethnic Government, reflecting the results of last
November's elections, a very important step has been
taken towards reconciliation in Kosovo. It is significant
that upon assuming their functions, the Prime Minister,
other ministers and the Inter-Ministerial Coordinator
on the return of refugees and displaced persons have
committed themselves to work in the interests of all
inhabitants of Kosovo, without discrimination.

We also welcome the measures adopted by
UNMIK to encourage the return of refugees and
displaced persons to their communities of origin in
conditions that will genuinely enable those people to be
reintegrated. I am referring specifically to the Mission
document in which the principle of the right to
sustainable return for those people is outlined. I would
also refer to the creation in the Kosovo Government of
the post of Inter-Ministerial Coordinator on the return
of refugees and displaced persons, with ministerial
rank. Similarly, we see as a positive sign the
appointment of a new Senior Adviser on Returnees in
the Office of Returns and Communities of UNMIK,
who is to apply the principle of the right of sustainable
return. The fact that both of those posts are now
occupied by representatives of the Serb minority is a
positive fact - a confirmation to that population that it
is part of Kosovo.

Whoever holds public office in the future must
not forget that the majority ethnic group and the major
minority are not the only inhabitants of Kosovo, and
that they have not been the only victims of the recent
conflict and ethnic reprisals to which the conflict led.
There are other minorities. Some of them traditionally
have been marginalized, and their rights must be
respected irrespective of their degree of presence in the
Kosovo Assembly and the provisional institutions of
self-government.

Regarding the security situation in Kosovo, my
delegation read with interest the monthly United
Nations report on the Kosovo Force (KFOR)
operations, on the period from 1 to 30 April. We
learned from this document that the security situation
for that period remained tranquil and stable, with the
exception of isolated cases and disturbances that took
place in Mitrovica on 7 April. The prevailing situation
in Mitrovica is an obstacle to reconciliation and an
example of division and daily ethnic tension for the
rest of the province, which must be resolved with the
political will to put an end to this situation by peaceful
means. We call upon UNMIK and the Government to
find a solution.

Finally, my delegation places enormous
importance on the municipal elections to be held in
October this year. It is essential that those elections
have the greatest possible number of voters
participating, in particular minorities. We have the
recent precedent of the November 2001 elections, in
which the Serb minority decided to participate, thus
showing their confidence in the possibility of a multi-
ethnic society. We therefore appeal for this pattern of
behaviour to continue. Broad electoral participation
will generate confidence among all groups in a State
based on the rule of law in Kosovo, which is a
prerequisite for democratic multi-ethnic coexistence.

