Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): This
is my first time addressing the Security Council in
a formal meeting in my capacity as the Permanent
Representative of China, and it is a privilege to be here.
I would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
and my colleagues for their welcome. I look forward to
working closely with everyone with the aim of jointly
safeguarding world peace and stability and delivering
on our responsibilities as mandated by the Charter of
the United Nations.

I would like to congratulate Kuwait on its assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month and to
assure it of China's support and cooperation. I would
also like to thank Kazakhstan for presiding over the
Council last month and to commend Ambassador
Umarov and his team for their outstanding diplomatic
prowess and competence. China welcomes Kuwait's
initiative in convening today's meeting, and we thank
Mr. Ian Martin, Executive Director of Security Council
Report, for his briefing.

The Charter of the United Nations confers upon the
Security Council the important mandate of maintaining
international peace and security. Currently, the
global security situation remains complex, with local
conflicts breaking out and terrorism and other security
threats interweaving.

The Security Council, as the core of the United
Nations collective security mechanism, shoulders
the enormous responsibility of tackling international
security threats and challenges, which is a Herculean
task. In recent years, the Council has convened on
many occasions to hold open debates on its working
methods for in-depth discussions on this issue. This
is a demonstration of its steadfast commitment to
improving the Council's working method and enhancing
its effectiveness. China has been working with other
Council members to push for further the progress in
that regard.

There has been a palpable increase in the number
of open debates of the Council. Coordination among
the Council, the General Assembly, the Economic and
Security Council and other United Nations entities
has been strengthened. Regular exchanges with the
Peacebuilding Commission and its country-specific
configurations have continued. Engagement with
relevant regional organizations has expanded. The
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions has consistently noted valid
practices of the Council, put forward recommendations
in that regard and achieved great results.
China supports continued improvement of the
Council's working methods to better position it to
deliver on its mandate more efficiently and to respond
effectively to threats to international peace and security.
In this vein, I wish to make the following observations.

First of all, we should stay focused on key issues and
ensure effective execution of mandates. It is essential to
adhere to the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, which is the fundamental guide to
the work of the Council and its subsidiary organs. The
Charter contains clear provisions on the responsibilities
of the Council and other United Nations organs.
The Council must focus its resources and energy
on addressing major and urgent issues concerning
international peace and security and improve the
impact of its action. In deliberating thematic issues, the
Council needs to coordinate with the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and other United
Nations bodies so that can all play their respective roles
and avoid duplication.

Secondly, we should stay committed to democratic
consultations and collective decision-making. In the
process of decision-making, full consultations should
be conducted with a view to achieving consensus.
Efforts should be made to ensure that all members
have adequate time to examine draft resolutions
and presidential statements. We should refrain from
steamrolling divisive draft resolutions, seek the
broadest possible consensus and safeguard the Council's
authority and unity.

Thirdly, we should enhance information exchanges
and value the views of all parties. The Council needs
to heed the views of its broad membership, the
countries concerned in particular. China supports the
Council in its effort to strengthen coordination with
regional organizations, pursuant to Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations, in order to leverage
their expertise in addressing local issues and their
unique strength with regard to geography, history
and culture. The Council should more actively engage
troop-contributing countries and enhance information
sharing through mechanisms, such as the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations and meetings with
troop-contributing countries. It should also weigh the
views and concerns of troop-contributing countries
during mission deployment and mandate adjustments.

The General Assembly intergovernmental negotiations
provide an important forum for Member States to discuss
Council reform. As such, its role as the main avenue of
deliberations on this issue needs to be safeguarded.
China attaches great importance to Council reform
and supports necessary regional reform initiatives to
increase representation and the voice of developing
countries, in particular African countries as a matter
of priority, and to enhance the Council's authority and
efficiency. China is ready to continue working with
all Members States and to be guided by the Member
State-led principle.

With regard to the five reform clusters, we strive
for patient and democratic consultations in a quest for a
package resolution with the broadest possible consensus.
I would like to reiterate that setting artificial deadlines,
steamrollering half-baked proposals or initiating textual
negotiations in the absence of requisite conditions will
only undermine the credibility of such negotiations and
is anything but helpful for membership unity and the
sound development of intergovernmental negotiations.

China supports Kuwait in its capacity as Chair of
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions. We are ready to work with
all parties to engage in assessing innovations; support
the improvement of the Council's working methods with
concrete action; and encourage the Council to conduct
its work in a more effective, transparent, democratic
and impartial manner and to play an important and
constructive role in maintaining international peace
and security.

