Mr. Cevik (Turkey): At the outset, I should like to
express our appreciation to the French presidency for
having convened this meeting. I should like also to thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2015/151); his Special Representative, Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, for his briefing; and Ambassador Zahir Tanin
for his statement.

Afghanistan stands at a crucial juncture in its
political, security and economic transformation. We
welcome the continuation of the transition processes in
the country. However, the significant gains of the past
years, including in the fields of security, democracy,
governance, capacity- and institution-building,
economic development and human rights, have not
yet passed the point of no return. The launch of the
transformation decade calls for enhanced efforts to
consolidate the achievements in these fields.

The international community's continuing support
remains vital for a peaceful, secure and stable
Afghanistan that can effectively meet the needs of its
people. The steps and messages we take now will have
an immense impact on the way in which the next decade
will unfold. We therefore attach particular importance
to the need for all parties to refrain from mentioning
any misguiding dates, which would imply the drawing
down of the international community's commitment
to Afghanistan at an early stage incompatible with the
situation and requirements on the ground.

Resolution 2210 (2015), renewing the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), is timely, when change and transformation
dominate the agenda of Afghanistan. We believe
that the comprehensive role assumed by UNAMA in
assisting the Afghan people to achieve a bright future is
of utmost importance. Turkey will continue to support
UNAMA's activities and efforts in this regard.

The national unity Government's resolve in carrying
Afghanistan forward should be commended. We
welcome and support the robust reform agenda the
Afghan leadership has embarked upon, including in
the fields of governance, the rule of law and the fight
against corruption, as well as its efforts for an Afghan-
1ed and -owned reconciliation process. The international
community's support to the efforts of the Government
of Afghanistan, with full respect for the principles of
Afghan leadership, ownership and sovereignty, will be
particularly important.

The issue of civilian casualties continues to be a
source of grave concern in Afghanistan. Regrettably,
2014 saw a 22 per cent increase in the number of civilian
casualties compared with the previous year. We believe
that addressing this issue should remain among the top
priorities of our common agenda.

Furthermore, we condemn the terrorist attacks
perpetrated in the country since the Security Council's
last debate on Afghanistan in December 2014 (see S/PV.7347), including an attack carried out against a
Turkish Embassy vehicle in Kabul last month, which
claimed the life of one member of the Turkish Armed
Forces personnel and wounded another. We reiterate
our conviction that those who perpetrate such attacks
will not achieve their goals of dragging Afghanistan
into instability and confirm that we will always stand
by Afghanistan in its struggle against terrorism.

The Secretary-General's report underscores in its
paragraph 54 that "peace remains the fundamental
precondition to durable and sustained political and
economic progress in Afghanistan". In fact, a successful,
Afghan-led and inclusive reconciliation process would
serve to eliminate the obstacles impeding social,
political and economic development.

Furthermore, at a time of transformation, the
importance of regional cooperation and commitment
becomes all the more relevant. We welcome all bilateral
and multilateral dialogue and cooperation efforts to
this end. With this understanding, we also welcome the
increased momentum that has been achieved through
the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process. Concrete projects
emerging from increased cooperation will facilitate
economic development, stability and self-sustainability
in the region.

Turkey remains committed to standing by the people
of Afghanistan in this transition process, including in
the fields of security and development. In addition to
Turkey's financial commitments for the funding of the
Afghan National Security Forces, Turkey has assumed
the framework nation role for Kabul in the new Resolute
Support Mission.

The international community's solidarity and
continued commitment will strengthen the hopes of the
Afghan people for a bright future. Turkey will continue
to contribute to a secure, stable and prosperous
Afghanistan.

