Mr. Pita (Tuvalu): Tuvalu fully aligns itself with
the statement made by the Permanent Representative of
Papua New Guinea on behalf of the Pacific island
countries and Pacific small island developing States.

Tuvalu is greatly honoured to have been given
this golden opportunity to speak in the Security
Council. First, I must thank you, Mr. President, and
your Government, for your wisdom in calling for this
special open debate of the Council on the theme of
energy, security and climate.

At the sixtieth anniversary General Assembly in
2005, as on many other occasions here at the United
Nations, the Government of Tuvalu highlighted the
7

issue of environmental security, particularly in relation
to climate change. We are extremely grateful to see that
this concern is now on the agenda of the Security
Council. We strongly believe that the Security Council
should permanently place the issue of climate change
and environmental security on its agenda, just as it
wisely decided to do in 2000 with regard to the issue of
the security threat posed by HIV/AIDS.

As is well known, this is a topic of extreme
importance to a small, atoll nation like Tuvalu. The
recent report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change further highlighted the extreme
vulnerability of island countries like Tuvalu to the
impact of climate change and the urgent necessity for
global actions to address their vulnerability.

We face many threats associated with climate
change. Ocean warming is changing the very nature of
our island nation. Our coral reefs are slowly dying
through coral bleaching, we are witnessing changes to
fish stocks and we face the increasing threat of more
severe cyclones. Given that our highest point is four
metres above sea level, the threat of severe cyclones is
extremely disturbing to us, and severe water shortages
will further threaten the livelihood of people in many
islands.

Our livelihood is already threatened by sea-level
rise, and the implications for our long-term security are
very disturbing. Many have spoken about the
possibility of migrating from our homeland. If that
becomes a reality, then we will be faced with an
unprecedented threat to our nationhood; it would be an
infringement of our fundamental rights to nationality and
statehood as constituted under the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and other international conventions.

But Tuvalu is not alone in facing the threat of
climate change. Many millions of people will suffer the
effects. The world has moved from a global threat
called the cold war to what should now be considered
the "warming war". Our conflict is not being fought
with guns and missiles but with weapons from
everyday life - chimney stacks and exhaust pipes.

We are confronted with a chemical war of
immense proportions. As the Secretary of State for
Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United
Kingdom correctly underscored during the most recent
general debate in the General Assembly, "if we all try
to freeride, we will all end up in free fall" (A/6l/PV.16, p. 20) as a result of the impact of climate change.

With regard to energy, it is clear from the
ongoing world crisis that the security dimensions of
access to and use of sources of energy must be
addressed. The world needs a mix of energy sources
that is easily accessible for all countries and
communities. Tuvalu's own security is also threatened
by the high cost of its energy supply. Importing fossil
fuels into Tuvalu to provide fuel for electricity
generation and inter-island transport is one of the
greatest drains on our economy, using funds which
could otherwise have been saved for climate change
adaptation. Our economic sustainability is contingent
on our acquiring self-sustaining and reliable renewable
energy and energy efficiency technologies. We humbly
call upon the Security Council to understand and
respond to these new concepts of security and conflict.

Tuvalu joined the United Nations on 5 September
2000, firmly believing in its noble pillars of
development, security and human rights as the source
of security against the very threat of climate change.
By virtue of this membership, our security concerns
relating to climate change cannot be simply ignored.
The Security Council must consider the threat to our
national security and, ultimately, to global security,
from a new perspective. We are a peace-loving nation
and have no army. We will pose no security threat even
if we face the full consequences of climate change; but
we must not disappear from the Security Council radar
screen. As the great Martin Luther King said, "Injustice
anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere".

Through you, Mr. President, we therefore beseech
the Security Council to act urgently to address the
threats to our national security. We would respectfully
like to make four concrete suggestions. First, we
believe that the real and serious threat posed by climate
change demands that solutions and decisions be taken
at the highest level of Government. As in General
Assembly debates, we strongly encourage the Security
Council to adopt a resolution to urge the Secretary-
General to convene a world leaders' summit on climate
change as soon as possible.

Secondly, such a summit should create the
impetus to establish a new economic forum to
dramatically boost access to environmentally friendly
energy security options for all the nations of the world.
In this context, however, nuclear and clean fossil fuel
cannot be part of the solution for Tuvalu and many
small island developing States, considering the security
risks to our fragile environments. It is our humble View
that the rapid development and deployment of
renewable energy and energy efficiency technologies
must be the primary focus of an energy security
agenda. These have the benefits of creating energy
self-sufficiency, reducing poverty and making a major
contribution to mitigating climate change.

Thirdly, there is an urgent need to build strong
institutional arrangements to protect and restore
vulnerable countries like Tuvalu from the impact of
climate change. We need a global strategy on adaptation
and disaster-risk reduction, which should include new
insurance facilities. Those could be key themes for
consideration at the proposed summit on climate change.

Finally, we strongly encourage the Security
Council to review its Charter obligations and to fully
embrace the concept of environmental security within
its mandate. This is not simply a matter of identifying
trouble spots where armed conflict may be linked to
environmental decline. We believe that the Security
Council should address environmental decline as a
security issue in itself.

As former Secretary-General Mr. Kofi Annan
stated at the twelfth session of the Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change in Nairobi, "The question is not
whether climate change is happening or not, but
whether [...] we ourselves can change fast enough".

The Security Council must provide the much-
needed impetus for that timely change to address
climate change. Tuvalu looks forward to the ongoing
considerations of this agenda item and sincerely hopes
that the Security Council can find a meaningful way to
address the security concerns of extremely vulnerable
countries like Tuvalu. My delegation fully supports the
United Kingdom's proposal on climate change before
the Security Council.

