Mr. Nsengimana (Rwanda): The Rwanda
delegation commends you, Mr. President, for
convening this important open debate of the Security
Council to discuss the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We would like to join other
delegations in expressing our thanks to
Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for his briefing.

The Rwanda Government condemns in the
strongest terms the deliberate targeting of civilians in
conflict. Rwanda fully supports Security Council
resolutions on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. The most serious crimes in situations of
conflict are committed against poor, defenceless and
voiceless people, often living in remote locations far
from the sight of the international community and the
media.

It is for such people that the implementation of
resolutions 1674 (2006) and 1738 (2006) is most
urgent. Despite these resolutions, and despite the
endorsement by all States at the 2005 World Summit of
the principles of the "responsibility to protect", which
my Government strongly supports, too many people
continue to suffer unspeakable horrors in situations of
armed conflict. It is clear that much more needs to be
done, particularly by this Security Council, which is
the Charter-mandated body responsible for
international peace and security.

We believe that our common humanity should
unite us in the resolve to put an end to the suffering of
millions of people who live in, and are threatened by,
situations of conflict. This resolve entails national
Governments taking full responsibility to protect
civilians, and, where they are unable or unwilling to do
so, the international community acting through the
Security Council to take appropriate steps to provide
such protection. It is essential that, in taking such
actions, the Security Council be seen as consistent and
just, acting in the best interests of the international
community, and that it show special concern for those
who are most defenceless and vulnerable and most in
need of protection from the international community. It
was, after all, to protect such defenceless people that,
in the aftermath of the Holocaust, the United Nations
and its Security Council were established.

Let the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, and other

similar situations, serve as a lesson that when the

United Nations, and specifically the Security Council,

fails to take appropriate, timely and decisive action to

provide protection for people under threat, the
consequences are catastrophic.

Finally, we would once again point out that the
Interahamwe militia, which was responsible for the
1994 genocide in Rwanda, remains active in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
where they continue to terrorize, murder and rape
innocent civilians with impunity. It is inexplicable that,
13 years after the Rwanda genocide, and despite the
numerous commitments of the international community
to prevent and combat genocide and to protect civilians
in armed conflict, this force continues to kill innocent
civilians. The presence in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo of the largest
peacekeeping force in history has equally failed to
address this problem. We call upon this Council to
address the issue urgently.

