Ithank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic, Mr. Miguel Vargas Maldonado, for being with us today. It is of course always a great pleasure to see my friend Mr. David Beasley. I am glad that he is doing well and that he is healthy. It is absolutely great to see him. I particularly thank Director-General Qu Dongyu for his briefing and so much more. Indeed, we owe him such a tremendous debt of gratitude for his advocacy for those on the margins of society. Ensuring that every single person on the planet has enough to eat is one of the fundamental ways we meet that obligation. I also wish to commend our other briefers today for all their contributions and their particular efforts aimed at ensuring that every single person in the world does have access to food. The United States would also like to thank the Dominican Republic for encouraging the Security Council to return to the topic of food insecurity and hunger. Today's conversation is especially important as we approach the two-year anniversary of the adoption of resolution 2417 (2018), which acknowledged the clear connection between conflict and hunger. In a perfect world, our discussion today would focus on the positive trajectories we are beginning to see in some countries, where there has been progress in the decoupling of violence and hunger. However, we cannot ignore the downward trends we are seeing in places like north-eastern Nigeria, South Sudan and Cameroon. In these areas, insecurity and a lack of humanitarian assistance access are causing enormous disruption to the lives and livelihoods of millions of women, children and men. Furthermore, we cannot turn a blind eye to the horrific and continuing impact of armed conflict on millions of Syrians and Yemenis. Innocent people are suffering because they are unable to acquire or produce food. What this means, practically speaking, is that because of constant insecurity - or, as in the case of Syria, inter alia, the use of humanitarian aid as a weapon by a despotic regime - families and individuals cannot sustain themselves. It is deeply troubling that in some cases States use hunger as a tactic of war; they deploy siege tactics to prevent civilians from gaining access to food and even impede and harass humanitarian actors trying to help. These types of behaviour are cruel and inexcusable under any circumstance, but they are especially so in the midst of a global health crisis. States simply cannot ignore applicable obligations under international humanitarian law and international human rights law. As we speak, humanitarian needs are at unprecedented levels. With this in mind, it is of paramount importance that the Security Council call out those States that are failing to uphold their most basic responsibility to protect the people within their borders. We all know that international humanitarian assistance is vital, but it is only a temporary solution for meeting human needs - needs that are created, in many cases, by conflict. The only long-term solution is for States to act responsibly in the interests of all people living within their borders. The Secretary-General has outlined a reform agenda to make immediate and long-term efforts more effective and efficient, and I want to close by taking note of two important and concrete elements of that agenda. First, we must improve coordination among humanitarian, development and peace actors. Secondly, we must prioritize the timely and reliable financing of relief aid. These two areas are ones where the Council can, should and must make greater strides towards reducing hunger and conflict-related suffering - strides that are in keeping with our responsibility to care for those on the margins.
