Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I, too, wish to express my
deep appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Valerie
Amos for her briefing, which gives us a broad picture
of the challenges we face in the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. I also wish to thank Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Alain
Le Roy, and the Assistant Secretary-General for
Human Rights, Mr. Simonovie, for their important
contributions to this timely debate.

Italy fully endorses the statement to be delivered
by the representative of the delegation of the European
Union and wishes to add a few remarks in its national
capacity.

The violence perpetrated against populations,
even women and children in some cases, in Cote
d'Ivoire, Libya, Yemen and, more recently, Syria is a
tragic reminder of the importance of protecting
civilians. Italy calls on all States and non-State actors
to abide by international humanitarian and human
rights law and has always been ready to help all parties
to a conflict to exercise their responsibility to protect
civilians.

Italy also wishes to recall that safe humanitarian
access is an indispensable part of international
humanitarian law. We are therefore concerned by the
severity and prevalence of existing constraints on
humanitarian access, as well as by the continuous risk
of attacks on humanitarian personnel.

Over the years, the United Nations has set up a
comprehensive system to prevent and monitor serious
violations of human rights and humanitarian law, as
well as to combat impunity and to take action when
violations occur. The international community is
accountable for making that system work. In that
regard, the Security Council has a crucial role to play
and must be ready to take prompt action against those
who undermine the commitment made by the heads of
State and Government in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome document (General Assembly resolution 60/1) and reaffirmed in resolution 1894 (2009).

United Nations peacekeeping operations have a
significant impact on enhancing the protection of the
civilian population and must therefore focus every
effort on accomplishing that task, using all available
capacities. We believe that more systematic
mechanisms - such as indicators and benchmarks
relating to the implementation of Security Council
decisions on the protection of civilians - should be
put in place. We therefore welcome the fact that some
United Nations peacekeeping operations have already
adopted comprehensive strategies for the protection of
civilians and have developed benchmarks to measure
progress in achieving that goal. In addition, we
welcome the important progress made in this field
during this year's session of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and in the Strategic
Framework for Drafting Comprehensive Protection of
Civilian Strategies in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, now finalized by the Secretariat.

There is no avoiding mention of the Libyan crisis,
also in the light of the important results obtained at the
second meeting of the Contact Group on Libya, held in
Rome on 5 May. With repeated attacks on civilians,
including women and children, the situation in the
country had deteriorated so drastically that
international action to protect the population was the
only viable option. That is why Italy supported the
Security Council's intervention from the beginning of
the crisis and, in complete coherence with resolutions
1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011), contributed to the
collective action under way, which has prevented even
greater violence being committed against the Libyan
people.

The meeting in Rome confirmed the need to
increase pressure on Al-Qadhafi's regime through all
necessary and legitimate means. While we stress the
importance of the NATO-led Operation Unified
Protector - which is crucial to the achievement of the
goals of the Security Council resolutions and to the
effective protection of the Libyan population - the
political and economic component must also be firmly
supported to secure a complete cessation of all
violence and attacks on and abuse of civilians.

Part of the work of the Contact Group meeting
was dedicated to humanitarian assistance to Libya, to
which the international community is greatly
contributing. Italy has always been at the forefront of
aid provision. Less than two weeks after the beginning
of the insurgence, our first aid packages were delivered
to Benghazi. We then strengthened the assistance
capacity of Camp Choucha in Tunisia, provided
humanitarian assistance in Misrata, repatriated third-
country nationals, transported some of the wounded
from Benghazi to Italy, and responded to the regional
flash appeal for the Libyan crisis.

We reiterate our firm support for the United
Nations role in leading and coordinating international
efforts. It is thus our great hope that the United Nations
can urgently restore a presence in Tripoli in order to
coordinate the delivery of humanitarian assistance and
to establish, with the Government authorities, the ways
and means to allow humanitarian organizations full
access to the affected populations, in fulfilment of the
agreement of 17 April 2011 between the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the
Tripoli authorities. Should that not happen, I would
also like to reaffirm that Italy is ready to participate in
any future European Union action to assist and to
secure the delivery of aid, if requested by OCHA.

We are also deeply concerned by the troubling
developments in Syria. The lack of access to the areas
where the violence has been most intense and the
consequent inability to obtain reliable information
about the needs of the civilian population are cause for
even greater concern. We strongly urge the Syrian
Government to honour its responsibility to protect its
population, and we invite it to immediately stop the
repression under way and to begin a dialogue with
those who want reform, as President Al-Assad has
promised. We support the Secretary-General's appeal
to allow a United Nations humanitarian team into the
towns worst hit by the protests and the violence.

In conclusion, I would like to express Italy's deep
appreciation for the increased attention that the
Security Council has given to the issue of the
protection of civilians, which is more relevant now
than ever. The adoption and implementation of the
resolutions on Libya and Cote d'Ivoire are a clear
testament to the Council's commitment to operating
effectively and with determination to guarantee the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts. The
international community has shown that it is ready to
act collectively and resolutely, through the United
Nations and its organs and in accordance with the
Charter, against perpetrators of violent and inhumane
attacks against civilians.

