Mr. Gertze (Namibia): Namibia thanks you,
Sir, for organizing this open debate on the important
topic of the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. I would also like to thank the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
for his briefing on the situation in the region.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the representative of Azerbaijan on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Since my previous statement to the Security
Council (see S/PV.8583) on this most fundamental issue
of international peace and security, the situation on the
ground has not changed. Furthermore, as the Special
Coordinator outlined in his eleventh briefing to the
Security Council on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016), no concrete steps have been taken to
implement the resolution, and no steps were taken
to immediately and completely cease all settlement
activity in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem. On the contrary, Israeli authorities
advanced approximately 3,000 housing units in the
occupied West Bank, including some 400 in East
Jerusalem. I want to take this opportunity to reiterate
that settlements are illegal under international law and
represent an obstacle to peace and the achievement of
a two-State solution. We are also extremely concerned
about statements made concerning Israel's annexation
of the Jordan Valley. Annexation is strictly prohibited
under international law. The demolitions and seizures of
Palestinian-owned structures by the Israeli authorities
also represent an obstacle to peace. Those actions
have continued unabated, displacing men, women
and children.

The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) plays a
fundamental role in the region. The Agency provides
services to the more than 5 million Palestinian refugees
in Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, the West Bank and Gaza.
Its provision of vital services represents a stabilizing
element in a region that continues to be a victim
of violence. Namibia remains concerned about the
ongoing financial shortfall that UNRWA continues to
suffer from. We also want to take this opportunity to
reaffirm Namibia's support for the Agency, and we look
forward to the renewal of its mandate.

We have taken note of the fact that the overall
levels of violence in Gaza have decreased and also
take this opportunity to condemn all forms of violence
committed against civilians. Namibia welcomes the
increase in the energy supply to households in Gaza,
which has more than doubled, according to the Special
Coordinator's report. Israel's easing of the import and
export restrictions and extension of the permitted
fishing zone to 15 nautical miles from the coast are
also welcome developments. But despite those positive
steps, the humanitarian situation remains extremely
concerning. Namibia is particularly worried about the
state of the health system, which remains on the brink
of collapse. In July, 44 per cent of essential medicines
in Gaza were completely depleted, and there was
less than a month's supply remaining of 26 per cent
of essential medical disposables. Those staggering
numbers underline the fundamental necessity of the
ongoing presence of UNRWA health centres, which see
an average of 100 patients a day.

Finding a solution to the ongoing fiscal crisis
facing the Palestinian Authority is a matter of urgency.
The continuation of the crisis is affecting the already
fragile Palestinian economy and threatens to destabilize
an already volatile situation. We urge the parties to
implement and respect their bilateral agreements.

It has been almost three years since the adoption
of resolution 2334 (2016), a historic document that
gave Palestinians hope and expectations for a solution
to be found to this protracted conflict. However, the
humanitarian, social and political situation has only
worsened since its adoption, and tensions have risen
drastically. Actions have been taken that have severely
undermined the process of reaching a mutually
acceptable, just and lasting solution. The people of
Palestine have a fundamental right to self-determination
and independence. We must achieve a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace between the Israelis and
the Palestinians with the establishment of two States
coexisting in an atmosphere of peace and security.
No amount of humanitarian and economic support
can substitute for a negotiated two-State solution, the
only one that can meet the legitimate aspirations and
security needs of both Israelis and Palestinians.

I will now deliver a statement in my capacity under
rule 39 as Vice-Chair of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

At the outset, on behalf of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
people, I would like to commend the leadership of
the delegation of South Africa in its presidency of the
Security Council this month.

As we gather quarterly in the Council to collectively
consider the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, I can only lament the ongoing
illegal occupation of the Palestinian territory and
the worsening situation on the ground, which have a
negative impact not only on the rights of Palestinians,
including children, but also on the security of Israelis
and the prospects for a peaceful and just solution to the
question of Palestine, which has already been too long
delayed. The violence and loss of life have continued,
illegal Israeli settlements have expanded, demolitions
of Palestinian homes and evictions of their inhabitants
have accelerated, and the humanitarian and economic
situation in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem
and the Gaza Strip, has continued to deteriorate under
the oppressive weight and as a result of the illegal
practices of Israel's 52-year military occupation.

I want to reiterate in the strongest terms that the
Israeli settlements in occupied areas are illegal under
international law, and that as has been reaffirmed in
resolution 2334 (2016), among other things, Israel must
halt its expansion immediately and completely. The
Committee joins the calls for the Secretary-General's
reports on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016)
to be provided in writing and to include Member States'
reports on how they comply with operative paragraph
5, which requires Member States to distinguish in their
dealings between Israel and the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. Such measures of
distinction are crucial to upholding international law,
including the relevant United Nations resolutions, and
to ensuring that this illegal situation does not receive
support or recognition. In that regard, the Committee
looks forward to the publication by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
of the relevant database, as mandated by Human Rights
Council resolution 31/36.

The Committee would like to express its profound
concern about the escalating rhetoric and threats
by Israeli officials concerning intentions to annex
settlements and the Jordan Valley. The Jordan Valley
makes up 30 per cent of the occupied West Bank and is
home to more than 65,000 Palestinians. Annexation is
strictly prohibited under international law and cannot
go unchallenged by the international community,
obliging the Council to act should any such aggression
be committed. As was recently stated by Human Rights
Council Special Rapporteur Michael Lynk,

"By annexing these areas, Israel will further
confine Palestinians to live in small, fragmented
and disconnected cantons while others will continue
to live under Israeli military rule. The annexation,
if realized, will effectively entrench a one-State
reality of separate and vastly unequal legal systems,
political rights and social opportunities."

The international community must consider what
that would mean with regard to the viability of the
long-standing international consensus on a two-State
solution, based on the pre-l967 borders, which such an
action would effectively terminate.

The Committee is also gravely concerned about the
recurrent and rising tensions in Jerusalem at the holy
sites, including continuing provocations, incitement
and violations at the Al-Aqsa Mosque. The Committee
urges Israeli authorities to abide by international law
and avoid actions that undermine an already fragile
situation there, and calls for respect for the historic and
legal status quo and the sanctity of the holy sites.

In Gaza, the situation also remains volatile, as
weekly Great March of Return demonstrations and
the ensuing casualties among Palestinian civilians
have continued, alongside the indiscriminate firing
of rockets into Israel. The dire economic situation,
especially the insufficient energy supply, combined
with the scarcity of essential medicines, is causing a
health crisis, with the health system reported to be near
collapse. We reiterate our call on Israel, the occupying
Power, to abide by international standards with regard
to the use of force. We also call on Palestinian militants
in Gaza to stop the indiscriminate firing of rockets into
southern Israel.

The Committee welcomes the steps taken by the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians as presented in
its September report to bring relief to the population
through a package of urgent humanitarian and economic
interventions for Gaza. These measures should go hand
in hand with efforts to address the continuing fiscal
crisis faced by the Palestinian Government, which
hampers its ability to deliver services to the population.

In September, UNRWA was able to reopen
709 schools, allowing 530,000 refugee children to
continue their education. However, the Agency's
financial situation remains challenging albeit improved
following the ministerial pledging conference held on
26 September in New York. The Committee reiterates
its call on all Member States to provide UNRWA
with the reliable and sustainable funding necessary to
deliver critical humanitarian services to Palestinian
refugees in all five fields of operation, contributing
to their development and protection and to stability in
the region. We also urge Member States to continue
strongly supporting its General Assembly mandate,
which is to be renewed in November.

We commend Egypt and others for their ongoing
efforts to advance the reconciliation process and call
on the Palestinian parties to actively engage towards
that end. Achieving reconciliation and holding general
elections, which will be organized soon, as announced
by President Mahmoud Abbas during the general
debate of the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth
session (see A/74/PV.7), would constitute positive steps
towards reuniting the Palestinian people under a single,
legitimate Palestinian national Government.
Finally, the only just and viable solution to
ensure peace and prosperity in the region remains the
international consensus on how to resolve the conflict:
two States living side by side in peace and security
along the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as the
capital of the Palestinian State.

We are at a critical juncture, and it is time for the
parties and the rest of the international community
alike to break the inertia and walk the talk. We must
implement all the resolutions adopted in this Chamber
and face our collective responsibility vis-a-vis past and
future generations of Palestinians and Israelis.

We all know that making the two-State solution a
reality is the only way forward for peace and stability in
the region. It is time to act to bring an end to the Israeli
occupation; to realize the long-denied Palestinian
rights, including to self-determination and freedom;
and to make peace a reality. Failure to act will only
hasten the demise of the two-State solution and bring
more conflict and suffering.

