Mr. Kasanda (Zambia): My delegation joins with
previous speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening this important meeting. Fortunately, what started
as an experiment under the Dutch presidency is now
developing into what could become a tangible practice,
which we hope will be part of the Council's culture of
business.

My delegation listened with great interest to the
contributions on the subject before us by many delegations
this morning and this afternoon. We welcome the frank
admissions that the Council has been hesitant and
sometimes unwilling to take effective and timely action
relative to conflict situations in Africa. We welcome the
apparent new commitment on the part of Council members
to afford Africa and its problems the priority attention they
deserve. The Council must banish the shadow of Somalia,
which led to such a negative reaction to the Rwandan
tragedy and which has continued to haunt new efforts at
conflict reduction and prevention in Africa. We hope that
the time has come when the Security Council will not
hesitate to summon the political will necessary to address
conflict situations in Africa now and in the future.

With regard to cooperation between the Security
Council and the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
my delegation is in agreement with several suggestions
already made by many delegations, such as encouraging
more visits by the OAU Secretary-General and his
officials to consult with the Council on matters of
common interest. The OAU, however, is essentially a
political organization, and its military and logistical
capacity for conflict prevention and resolution are limited.
It is in that area, therefore, that support is critically
needed.

We believe also that the Council should widen its
sources in the consultative process. I refer to the need to
involve parties closely affected by a conflict that the
Council is considering. Here, Irecall the Security Council
meeting held on 21 September 1999, at which the
President of Zambia, who served as mediator on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, had a very useful
exchange with the Council. As the representative of India
said, one hopes that these meetings are not essentially
symbolic, but that the Council will actually look at what
its visitors - those it is consulting - say and will
consider it and see what it can do with it.

As to the means of African peacekeeping, we should
look at the peace missions themselves. Here, planning
should be comprehensive, and missions should be
mandated for periods longer than the traditional three to
six months, a period that is too short properly to assess
the chances of a mission's success or failure.

Also, the strength of a mission should be
commensurate with the job to be performed. For example,
we are told that in Sierra Leone combatants number about
45,000; the United Nations force that has been put in
place numbers about 6,000. It is not difficult to see that
it is very hard for a force of that strength to carry out
normal peacekeeping duties and then carry out the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme
as well.

With respect to additional instruments, I agree with
Ambassador Fowler of Canada that it is not a question of

 

additional instruments; it is more a question of improving
the quality of the measures already in place. Ambassador
Fowler's new and improved sanctions regime against
UNITA is a case in point, and my delegation looks forward
to the publication of the sanctions Committee's report in
February 2000.

As mentioned by several delegations in one form or
another, where our action is necessary is in providing a
mechanism to investigate arms trafficking and to stop arms
from being exported to areas of conflict in Africa.
Voluntary moratoriums on arms exports do not work. It is
therefore absolutely necessary publicly to expose private
companies and national Governments that put profit before
human lives. Public censure, we believe, cannot fail to be
a positive instrument for conflict reduction.

