Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank most warmly Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno
for his clear and precise briefing. The position of the
European Union, which France entirely endorses, will
be put forward by the representative of Sweden. I
would just like to make a few comments to complete
and supplement what Ambassador Schori will be
saying.

It is essential that violence be curbed in Kosovo.
Since June 1999, impressive progress has been made.
The international community has played a decisive role
in this evolution. The Kosovo Force (KFOR) has met
the challenge before it in a frequently difficult
environment. It has taken courageous action to
preserve the security of the peoples. This was the case
just recently in Mitrovica, where some 20 soldiers from
KFOR were wounded.

However, reducing tensions is first the
responsibility of the Kosovars themselves. To promote
the involvement of citizens in this struggle against
violence, the Kosovo political leaders bear particular
responsibility. Their active support is required. In this
connection, following the Mitrovica events, the
statement published on 1 February by Albanian leaders
in Kosovo to condemn the violence was a positive sign.

In the Mitrovica area as well as elsewhere,
de'tente must be sought. We give our full support to the
efforts of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and KFOR to bring the
violence among the ethnic groups to an end and to
guarantee to all the inhabitants the security that all
ethnic groups have the right to claim, and also to
overcome as quickly as possible the division amongst
the communities.

Relating to the holding of general elections, I
would like to emphasize that it is necessary at the start
to have a precise definition of the nature and functions
of the provisional institutions that will be elected.
Preparation in impeccable conditions is also a
prerequisite. Everything must be implemented in order
to ensure the participation of all communities,
particularly the Serbian community, in the elections.

At this time, continuing discussions amongst the
Kosovars of all ethnic origins concerning the
temporary structures of the autonomy, under the
authority of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, is a necessary step. It would be
desirable for the other parties to be informed of those
discussions and then to be associated to them. From
this angle, setting up an UNMIK office in Belgrade is a
positive measure.

With regard to the situation concerning the
administrative border between Kosovo and the
southern part of Serbia, the presidential statement of
the Security Council on 19 December 2000, as well as
the statement to the press on 30 January 2001, made
possible a strong condemnation of the activities of
terrorist groups.

Political steps taken recently by the Belgrade
authorities, under the aegis of President Kostunica, are
part of the attempt to find a peaceful solution. We
should support this willingness by Belgrade to
undertake, despite any difficulties encountered,
negotiations with local representatives of the Albanian
community. Support by the international community
for economic, political and social measures to help the
peoples of the area, particularly those of Albanian
origin, will also be necessary. The European Union, for
its part, has already earmarked close to €l million for
humanitarian work in the Presevo region and intends to
do more in the future.

KFOR, for its part, has strengthened its staff on
the administrative border. These measures will make
possible closer monitoring of illegal activities in that
area. Any solution in the Presevo valley would also
require that there be cooperation between KFOR and
Belgrade, including in the field.

