Mr. Kasanda (Zambia): Let me start by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of May
and, of course, for the most skilful manner in which you
have conducted the work of the Security Council this
month.

We thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros
Boutros-Ghali, for his lucid report to the Council,
contained in document S/1996/362 of 21 May 1996, on
the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia
(UNOMIL). From this report it is clear that the eruption
of brutal hostilities on 6 April 1996 in Monrovia only
served to exacerbate the disintegration of Government
authority and the breakdown of political and civil order in
Liberia. The escalation of hostilities, the killings, the
taking of hostages, and the ransacking and looting of
United Nations and other properties were a clear
indication that there is in Liberia a state of anarchy and
lawlessness on an unprecedented scale.

As if such anarchy and lawlessness were not enough,
there has also been a stalemate in the factional fighting in
Liberia. This situation has in turn led to intolerable
polarization in that war-torn country, further traumatizing
the innocent people of Liberia. Tens of thousands of

 

innocent civilians have been needlessly killed since the
onset of the civil war in Liberia. More people continue to
die as anarchy and confusion take hold in the country. This
situation cannot be allowed to continue. The killings must
stop. Liberians, like any other people in the world, are
entitled to peace and security. All those concerned -
faction leaders, regional leaders and the international
community - must pool their efforts to ensure that Liberia
returns to peace and stability.

The civil strife in Liberia has not only affected the
people of that country; the conflict has had grave
ramifications for the peace and tranquillity of the subregion.
The spillover effect of the conflict has manifested itself in
the flight of refugees and displaced persons into
neighbouring States. This means that Liberia's neighbours
have been just as harshly affected by the Liberian crisis as
the Liberians themselves. The economies of Liberia's
neighbours continue to suffer a major strain. As long as
there is no end to the crisis in sight, neighbouring countries
will also continue to suffer. Peace and security in Liberia
are therefore integral to peace and security in the entire
subregion.

All these factors make it imperative that Liberia return
to normalcy after years of factional fighting. The onus is
first on the Liberian factions to liberate themselves from
their self-imprisonment in factional fighting and embrace
the Abuja peace process. The time has come for all
factional leaders to break with the tortured past. The
situation now calls for a commitment on the part of all
factions concerned to rise above selfish interests and ensure
that they resolve their disputes by peaceful means. This,
after all, is provided for under the Abuja Agreement, which
defines the transitional arrangements and processes. The
Abuja Agreement is the cornerstone of Liberia's national
survival plan. The key to the peaceful resolution of the
problems of Liberia lies in a return to the Abuja accords.

In this connection, my delegation fully supports the
outcome of the meeting of Foreign Ministers of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
which adopted the Mechanism for Returning Liberia to the
Abuja Agreement. The Ministers reaffirmed the Agreement
as the only basis for peace in Liberia and agreed on a
number of conditions to be fulfilled by the Liberian
factions.

The time has come for all Liberian factions to
challenge themselves by fulfilling the conditions set forth
by ECOWAS and abiding by the provisions of the Abuja
Agreement. Both the ECOWAS Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) and the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia (UNOMIL), are likely to disengage themselves from
Liberia if no progress is made towards the fulfilment of the

 

provisions of the Abuja Agreement. Such a
disengagement would plunge Liberia into a state of
unmitigated anarchy and confusion. It should therefore be
avoided at any cost. It is in the interest of all military
factions and all Liberians to ensure the continuing
presence of ECOMOG and UNOMIL to assist the process
of Liberia's transition from a state of internal conflict to
a state of internal peace and security.

In this respect, it is fitting to demand that faction
leaders create the conditions that would enable the
Liberian people to choose their own leaders through free
and fair elections.

My delegation welcomes the initiative of the
Government of the United States of America in
establishing the International Contact Group on Liberia,
which held its first meeting last month in Geneva and its
second meeting just last Friday. By bringing together key
donor Governments, the United Nations, ECOWAS, the
Organization of African Unity and international agencies
concerned with Liberia, the initiative shows that there is
no lack of good will on the part of the international
community to bring peace and stability to Liberia.
However, such initiatives, well-meaning as they may be,
will not bring peace to Liberia until the Liberians
themselves join forces to return their country to peace and
tranquillity, and until they resolve to address themselves
seriously to the three issues critical to peace in Liberia.
These relate to restoring security in Monrovia, reinforcing
ECOMOG, and returning to the Abuja peace process.

For now, my delegation supports the extension of the
mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia for another three months, until 31 August 1996.

