Mr. Wolff (United States of America): I wish to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco
for his briefing.

The United States is deeply disturbed by the
recent violence and regrets the tragic loss of life and
injury suffered among those involved in the incident
last night aboard the Gaza-bound ships. We are
working to ascertain the facts. We expect a credible
and transparent investigation and strongly urge the
Israeli Government to investigate the incident fully.

As I stated in the Council Chamber in December
2008 when we were confronted with a similar situation
(see S/PV.6030), mechanisms exist for the transfer of
humanitarian assistance to Gaza by Member States and
groups that want to do so. These non-provocative and
non-confrontational mechanisms should be the ones
used for the benefit of all those in Gaza. Direct
delivery by sea is neither appropriate nor responsible
and is certainly not effective under the circumstances.

The United States remains deeply concerned by
the suffering of civilians in Gaza and the deterioration
of the situation there, including the humanitarian and
human rights situation. We continue to believe the
situation is unsustainable and is not in the interests of
any of those concerned. We will continue to engage the
Israelis on a daily basis to expand the scope and type
of goods allowed into Gaza to address the full range of
the population's humanitarian and recovery needs.
Hamas' interference with international assistance
shipments and the work of non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) complicates efforts in Gaza. Its
continued arms smuggling and commitment to
terrorism undermine security and prosperity for
Palestinians and Israelis alike.

We will continue to work closely with the
Government of Israel and the Palestinian Authority,
along with international NGOs and the United Nations,
to provide adequate access for humanitarian goods,
including reconstruction materials, through the border
crossings, while bearing in mind the legitimate security
concerns of the Government of Israel.

Ultimately, this incident underscores the need to
move ahead quickly with negotiations that can lead to a
comprehensive peace in the region. The only Viable
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is an
agreement negotiated between the parties that ends the
occupation that began in 1967 and fulfils the
aspirations of both parties for independent homelands
through two States for two peoples - Israel and an
independent, contiguous and viable State of Palestine,
living side by side in peace and security. We call again
on our international partners, both inside and outside
this Council, to promote an atmosphere of cooperation
between the parties and throughout the entire region.

