Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy): Allow me first
of all to congratulate Foreign Minister Stubb on his
presentation and on his outstanding chairmanship of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) over the past year. Many have been the
results he has achieved thus far, and we wish him
continued success in his mandate.

Italy is strongly committed to the OSCE and
supports the priorities of the Finnish chairmanship and
Mr. Stubb's efforts to revitalize the organization, which
remains an important and much-needed actor in
promoting regional stability, security and cooperation.

My Government upholds the cooperation between
the United Nations, and the Security Council in
particular, and regional and subregional organizations
in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter. Regional organizations
must reinforce and complement United Nations efforts
through an active role in maintaining international
peace and security in areas such as crisis management,
peacekeeping operations and counter-terrorism. We
believe that the OSCE has established, in that respect,
a successful record over the years.

The OSCE, together with the European Union,
has played a crucial role since the outbreak of the crisis
in Georgia and will continue to be instrumental in the
implementation of the 12 August and 8 September
agreements, as well as with regard to the Geneva
conference to be held in mid-October.

Italy welcomes the continued presence of the
OSCE in Kosovo, where it contributes, in close
cooperation with all international actors, to the
protection of human rights, particularly minority rights,
and plays an important role in ensuring regional
stability and security.

We also expect the OSCE to follow up on the
ministerial decision concerning its engagement in
Afghanistan with concrete projects and activities, as its
contribution to the ongoing international efforts.

In conclusion, my country believes that the
meeting of the Ministerial Council in December will be
an opportunity as timely as ever to continue to pursue a
constructive and open dialogue on all of the
outstanding issues and to highlight the work of the
OSCE and strengthen the confidence of Member States
in its role in the European security architecture.

