Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me begin by thanking Special Representative of the Secretary- General Leila Zerrougui for her briefing today. I would like to commend the continuation of the vital operations of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), despite the complex and difficult operating environment and the continued challenges posed by the unprecedented coronavirus disease pandemic. In particular, we welcome the Mission's success in Pinga. Its effective intervention in a volatile situation following the split of the Nduma defense du Congo-Renove armed group protected those displaced by violence and ensured that they could receive humanitarian assistance. But I want to reiterate the need for vigilance in the Mission's delivery of its mandate. The Beni prison break stands out. MONUSCO should consider if and how it could have been prevented with a more proactive approach and learn any lessons from it. In that vein, we call for the prompt implementation of mandated reforms within MONUSCO and its Force Intervention Brigade. Civilian loss of life remains unacceptably high in the east, in particular around Beni, owing to attacks by the Allied Democratic Forces. The lack of progress on mandated reforms to the Force Intervention Brigade, such as the incorporation of additional quick-reaction forces, is hindering the Mission's efforts to tackle that threat. Those reforms are key to enhancing the performance of the Mission. We welcome the joint transition strategy developed by MONUSCO in collaboration with the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We would like to see that go further, however, in detailing how the transition will be taken forward, how it will be measured against clear benchmarks and how the Mission will work with the United Nations country team and other development actors on the handover of tasks with humanitarian actors and with the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. At the same time, we call on the Government to participate actively in planning for MONUSCO's eventual exit. National ownership is crucial in ensuring that the exit allows for sustainable stability and development. As the Democratic Republic of the Congo's second- largest bilateral aid donor, the United Kingdom remains committed to ensuring long-term stability and security in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Tackling armed groups remains a major challenge in this respect. We are therefore pleased to see progress on a new approach to community-focused disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and we call on the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to support that momentum by developing a comprehensive national strategy. We remain deeply troubled by the human rights situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and we condemn the fact that the security forces continue to commit almost half of all reported human rights violations in the country. This remains a major impediment to significant progress on security-sector reform. I must call on the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to ensure accountability. Finally, we would like to outline our concern over the ongoing political tensions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. it is vitally important that progress on stability and prosperity be protected and maintained and that all political actors enable the delivery of crucial democratic and governance reforms for the benefit of the Congolese people.
