Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Over the past few
weeks, the media worldwide was reporting negative
stories about the United Nations having sent an
inadequate peacekeeping mission to Sierra Leone. One
positive story about the situation in Africa was on the
fact-finding visit by the Security Council to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and neighbouring
countries in search of a solution that may help bring
peace to the Great Lakes region. My delegation would
like to commend the Security Council for having made
this important visit, and we hope that this visit will
bring about an understanding in the Council that will
eventually lead to an early deployment of phase II of
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) in the
country.

Perhaps the most welcome news was the signing
of the status-of-forces agreement between the United
Nations and the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We hope this agreement opens
the way for the United Nations to deploy peacekeepers
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo without any
hindrance.
South Africa remains committed to conflict
resolution in our region. Together with partners in the
Southern Africa Development Community (SADC),
our country was engaged in the behind-the-scenes
negotiations to bring about peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which resulted in the Lusaka
Peace Agreement. As the United Nations begins to
prepare to send peacekeeping troops to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, South Africa has offered to join
in supporting MONUC. We are pleased that the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations is now
engaged with our Government in finding ways in
which my country can make a useful contribution to
MONUC.

We must be realistic about what phase II of
MONUC can accomplish. The primary tasks for
MONUC will be to inject much-needed confidence into
the peace process by monitoring the ceasefire and
devising plans for a phase III deployment of United
Nations peacekeepers. This planning must include a
realistic framework and timetable for disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement. The
search for long-term peace in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo cannot succeed as long as there are armed
groups everywhere.

However, sending troops to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo can only be the first step
towards achieving peace in that troubled land. The
bitter reality is that, in the end, the United Nations may
not be able to mobilize the ideal size of peacekeeping
force that a country as large as the Democratic
Republic of the Congo may actually need. Therefore,
my delegation believes that the contribution to peace
coming out of the real political settlement to be
reached through the inter-Congolese dialogue will be
critical for creating stability in that country. South
Africa has given assistance to Sir Ketumile Masire, the
former President of Botswana, who is coordinating the
inter-Congolese dialogue. We urge other countries to

do the same, and we thank those that have already done
so.

It is now left to our collective will to muster the
political and material resources for a speedy
deployment of MONUC phase II, as mandated by
Security Council resolution 1291 (2000). The parties to
the conflict themselves frequently expressed to the
visiting Security Council mission that the deployment
of MONUC phase II is crucial to sustaining the
ceasefire. In our View, a speedy deployment will also
give hope to the people of the Congo who have been
left at the mercy of their tormentors.

South Africa agrees with the observation in the
report that recent negative experiences encountered by
the United Nations in Sierra Leone must not be allowed
to derail our efforts in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. While we cannot wish away the reality of the
setbacks suffered in Sierra Leone, we can arm
ourselves with valuable lessons learned. Sierra Leone
has confirmed the lessons from Bosnia and elsewhere
that it is important to send our troops with an
appropriate mandate that takes account of the actual
conditions in the area of deployment. It is equally
critical to equip United Nations troops with the
appropriate resources to carry out their mandate. If all
of these things are put in place, we will have a realistic
chance of ensuring the long-term success of MONUC.

The international community cannot afford to fail
the Congolese people in their search for a lasting
peace. Simultaneously, the international community
cannot fail to recognize the responsibility of the
Congolese people themselves to lay the foundations for
their own much-needed peace.

