Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): I wish to take this
opportunity to congratulate Judge Agius on assuming
the presidency of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals. We are convinced that the
Mechanism will make further substantial headway in
its work under his leadership. At the same time, I wish
to express gratitude to Judge Meron for his dedicated
and significant leadership of the Mechanism, which
achieved much under his guidance.

I also with to thank the Prosecutor ofthe Mechanism,
Mr. Serge Brammertz, for his comprehensive briefing
on the work undertaken by his Office.

We welcome the efforts of the Mechanism in terms
of its administration, functioning and activities during
the reporting period, which are indeed commendable.
We wish in particular to emphasize the President's focus
on addressing gender issues within the Mechanism, as
well as enhancing its efficiency. In relation to gender
parity, we are particularly pleased to see that 50 per
cent ofthe professional staff members at the Mechanism
are women. We would, of course, like to see the same
percentage reflected in the overall staff numbers. The
increased emphasis on the efficiency of the Mechanism
is indeed positive. We are therefore encouraged by
the innovative strategies presented in the report of the
President (S/2019/4l7, annex I) to enhance efficiency,
such as increased inter-branch coordination and

harmonized practices and policies.

Turning to the briefing by the Prosecutor, we wish
to thank him for his report (S/2019/4l7, annex II). We
are particularly impressed with the work carried out
by the Prosecutor and his Office during the reporting
period and their tireless efforts in fulfilling the mandate
of the Mechanism. We note the concerns raised by the
Prosecutor in relation to the challenges experienced,
particularly with regard to cooperation with States.
We believe that States have an international obligation
to cooperate with the Mechanism and the Prosecutor.
South Africa, like other States, takes its international
obligations seriously. We do not support impunity.
Therefore, with regard to the request for assistance that
was made of South Africa, our competent domestic
authorities are actively seized of the matter and have
been in contact with the Office of the Prosecutor with a
view to finding solutions.
South Africa wishes to commend the Prosecutor
and his Office for their efforts beyond prosecutorial
obligations. In particular, we wish to emphasize the
activities undertaken in relation to capacity-building
through the provision of appropriate practical training
on investigative and prosecutorial techniques. Such
capacity-building is instrumental to ensuring that
efforts undertaken now to dispense justice are
sustainable in the future.

In conclusion, we are grateful for the work carried
out by the Mechanism, under circumstances that are
often not ideal, and wish to commend it for its efforts.
We are convinced that the Mechanism will continue to
strive towards the fulfilment of its mandate under its
current effective leadership.

