Mr. Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I
thank you, Sir, for convening this important meeting
and for the work you have done throughout your
presidency of the Council.

(spoke in English)

We welcome most warmly the presidency's
decision to choose for this year's ministerial debate the
topic: "Justice and the Rule of Law: the United Nations
role".

I will, with your indulgence, first make some
comments the on rule of law as it relates to United
Nations transitional administrations and then deal with
justice, in terms of actions undertaken by the United
Nations to address those individuals who commit the
gravest of crimes.

This debate comes 11 years after the United
Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC)
relaunched the United Nations back into complex
peacekeeping, following a 28-year hiatus separating
UNTAC from what is arguably the most complex
operation ever undertaken by the Organization - the
United Nations Operation in the Congo, which ran
from 1960 to 1964. And, as we survey the last 11 years
of United Nations experience with complex
peacekeeping, it is noticeable how we, the international
community, failed early on in the 1990s to draw on the
lessons of those pioneering early days decades ago in
the Congo and how, in many instances, we chose to
operate notjust from a clean slate, but also on the basis
of trial and error - with the rule of law being the
prime example of this.

Only after the United Nations had already
established its complex operations in the Balkans and
East Timor, for example, were we forced to confront,
by force of circumstance, the penalty of not having
positioned the rule of law high enough on the ladder of
immediate priorities. This ensured that each
transitional administration undertaken by the United
Nations during that period ran close to having both
itself and the purposes for which it was there
undermined by well-organized criminal activity of the
sort which would exploit, with blistering efficiency, the
absence of the rule of law through the well-recognized
industries of war profiteering, black marketeering,
money-laundering, as well as arms- and drug-
trafficking.

It was the report submitted by the Panel on
United Nations Peace Operations, led by Lakhdar
Brahimi, in August 2000 that first alerted us to this
problem, relating to the absence of applicable law
whenever a transitional administration is set up.
Unfortunately, the proposal offered - of examining
the possibilities for having an interim or model
criminal code - ran into difficulties in the General
Assembly, not because there was insufficient
appreciation by Member States over the need for it, but
because there were doubts as to whether an unreformed
Security Council should be enabled, through the
availability of a model criminal code, to impose a penal
law when only the permanent members of the Council
are in a position to chaperone this process over the
longer term. In other words, the difficulties then
encountered were essentially doctrinal and, while there
was little doubt that the Security Council has an
essential role to play on the rule of law, the question
remains of whether it should have the only or exclusive
right to it.

The discussions held within the General
Assembly over the last two and a half years on the rule
of law led to the creation by the Secretariat of the
Criminal Law and Judiciary Advisory Unit, a small
unit within the Civilian Police Division in the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. However, as
was mentioned by the Secretary-General in his
intervention in this Chamber a week ago, the
Secretariat also established, in April 2002, a Task
Force for the Development of Comprehensive Rule of
Law Strategies for Peace Operations under the aegis of
the Executive Committee on Peace and Security, which
produced an excellent and comprehensive report on the
rule of law, circulated to all Member States on 25
November 2002. This report offered numerous
recommendations and highlighted those areas where
Member States could be of some assistance to the
Secretariat.

In his introduction of that report to the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the Secretary-
General noted specifically that:

"the Task Force emphasized the need for the
United Nations to consult much more closely
with local actors in the country concerned and
engage them in a meaningful way in devising and
undertaking rule of law initiatives in peace
operations, so as not to impose a rule of law
strategy on them." (A/57/7I], para. 28)

It was language and a perspective that eased markedly
the concerns of several delegations, and the Task
Force's comprehensive report was subsequently both
welcomed by the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations and then discussed at length in a special
session called for by the General Assembly, arranged
by the Secretariat and then held only a few months ago.

Our debate in the Security Council last week and
today is therefore all the more timely and, naturally, we
are in your debt, Mr. President, for that. What is now
required, we believe, is for the Security Council to take
stock of the current dialogue between the Secretariat
and the General Assembly, and then work closely with
the General Assembly so that whatever future decisions
the Council may seek to take on the matter, should they
require commensurate resources at United Nations
Headquarters, those resources will be there.

Ultimately, we feel that not only should the
Criminal Law and Judiciary Advisory Unit, which
presently comprises only two very able staff members,
be expanded, but that, eventually, the United Nations
police function at Headquarters should itself be a part
of a justice and rule of law division, and not vice versa,
as happens to be the case now. Discussions, I am sure,
will continue on these and other points within the
relevant committees of the General Assembly in the
near future.

Finally, turning to the prosecution of those
accused of having committed the gravest of crimes, my
delegation believes firmly that, with the establishment
of the International Criminal Court, the Security
Council is well positioned to make use of Article 13 (b)
of the Rome Statute and refer relevant situations to the
Court. Not only are there strong legal arguments to be
made in favour of such action by the Security
Council - tied to the unique legitimacy brought on by
the Court's international and permanent character,
together with the Court's early deference to national
jurisdictions - but also there are very practical
considerations which must be brought into the
Council's calculations. Simply put, there is a limit to
the number of legal specialists worldwide who are
qualified, able and willing to staff and then render
operational alternatives to the International Criminal
Court, such ad hoc, special or hybrid courts. And, as
the President of the Council noted last week, funding
these ad hoc arrangements can also be a serious
problem.

We stand convinced that the International
Criminal Court will, over time, play a central role in
how the Security Council chooses to confront those
who commit the gravest of crimes in societies afflicted
by war, and are pleased to note that most Council
members appear to share that opinion.

