Mr. Chambas: It gives me great pleasure to
address the Security Council on this special occasion of
a briefing on the peace process in Liberia.

Since the visit of a Security Council delegation to
West Africa in June 2003, significant progress has been
achieved in bringing an end to the civil war in Liberia
and establishing the basis for returning that country to
lasting peace. Indeed, the Council's visit to our
subregion not only gave impetus and structure to our
collaboration and continuing dialogue, but more
important, served as a catalyst for the Accra peace talks
which were then ongoing. The Council delegation's
presence in Accra was timely, and strongly underscored
the support of the United Nations in particular, and of
the international community as a whole, for the
initiatives of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) to return Liberia to peace
and security. It encouraged the Liberian stakeholders to
utilize dialogue and negotiation to settle their
differences, rather than violence and war, which have
over the years ruined their country. The Council
buttressed the position of the African Union and
ECOWAS that no group which sought to attain political
power by force of arms would obtain the recognition of
the international community, least of all, that of the
Security Council.

The Council delegation warned that those who
would take lightly the lives of others with impunity and
disregard for international humanitarian law would not
go unpunished. But it also offered the firm support of
the Council to the peace process, with assurances that
if Liberians would demonstrate a resolve to end the war
and agree on a comprehensive accord that would return
the country to normalcy, the Council would in turn
authorize a peacekeeping operation and would
galvanize international humanitarian reconstruction
and redevelopment assistance for Liberia.

The excellent working relationship between the
Security Council and ECOWAS in the resolution of the
Liberian crisis is a shining example of the partnership
that should exist between this body and regional
organizations in tackling regional issues of peace and
security.

There is no gainsaying that we have much to gain
from deepening collaboration to better deal with
conflicts and political instability in our subregion,
through addressing issues such as conflict prevention,
conflict resolution, peacekeeping, peace-building,
humanitarian concerns, human rights, et cetera. We
truly look forward to strengthening the relations that
are developing systematically between ECOWAS and
the Security Council. In that regard we call for the
establishment of a consultative mechanism under
which there would be regular meetings between the
United Nations and ECOWAS, alternately in New York
and in Abuja, to discuss developments in Liberia,
structured similarly to what we had in the case of
Sierra Leone. We hope that the resolution which we
hope the Council will adopt soon to authorize a
peacekeeping operation will establish such a
mechanism.

The appointment of Mr. Jacques Klein as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Liberia is also very welcome. Mr. Klein was in Accra
during the final phase of the peace talks. He had the
opportunity to meet most of the key Liberian
personalities with whom he will be working to ensure
the thorough implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement. ECOWAS looks forward very much
to a close working relationship with Mr. Klein
principally through the Special Representative of the
Executive Secretary in Liberia, Mr. Francis Blain.

We also wish to commend the efforts of Mr. Abou
Moussa, with whom we have worked very closely over
the past year. We hope he will continue to play a useful
role in Liberia, given his tremendous experience and
knowledge of the political and humanitarian situation
in the subregion.

I shall now focus my remarks on three issues that
require special attention in the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement signed by the
Liberian parties. First is the issue of armed groups that
have moved about freely from one country to the other
in the Mano River Union area and also in western Cote
d'Ivoire. The armed groups in Liberia have among
them several thousand nationals of other West African
countries but, especially, significant numbers of Sierra
Leoneans. This matter deserves special attention, as
these armed elements could pose a threat to the peace
that now happily prevails in Sierra Leone. Conscious
and deliberate efforts should be directed at their
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration into the
West African community. They should certainly not be
allowed to infiltrate back into their various countries,
for instance Sierra Leone, with their weapons.

The return of peace to Liberia should help
consolidate peace in neighbouring countries, as Liberia
should no longer be a source of arms and armed groups
fuelling conflicts in the subregion. To ensure this, the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
Liberian combatants should be an integral part of the
peacekeeping operation. The authorized budget of the
peacekeeping operation should include the effective
disarmament, demobilization and, I emphasize,
reintegration of the thousands of youths into Liberia
society in constructive and productive employment.
These youths should be provided skills and
opportunities for employment more worthy than the
banditry and killing they have been accustomed to over
the past decade or so.

Secondly, now that we seem to be bringing the
conflict in Liberia under control we should pay
attention to the urgent need to curb the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons in West Africa. Nowhere
have the damaging consequences of these types of
weapons been felt more than in Liberia and the Mano
River Union countries, where they have done so much
harm to innocent people. ECOWAS would like to
cooperate with the international community to identify
ways in which we can prevent, combat and eradicate
illicit brokering in small arms and weapons. Illicit arms
brokering plays a key role in facilitating illegal
transfers of arms to groups that are prevented from
buying them legally - such as embargoed States and
groups, insurgents, organized criminals and terrorists.
Arms-producing States should establish a formal
register of arms brokers. We see a register as a useful
way of keeping arms brokers informed of their
responsibilities. Also, the ability to strike people or
companies from the register would be a very strong
signal to them that, wherever they are operating,
Governments are able to effectively monitor and
control their activities to ensure that they are in the
best interests of Africa's people.

The other issue I wish to call attention to is the
need to review the current regime of sanctions against
Liberia. The sanctions were imposed on Liberia for its
role in support of the Revolutionary United Front
(RUF) in Sierra Leone and for the failure of the
Government of former President Taylor to respect the
resolutions of the Council.

Today, the interim Government of President Blah
not only denounces any support for rebel groups that
might seek to overthrow the Governments of
neighbouring countries but also seeks to build good-
neighbourly relations based on friendship and
cooperation. Furthermore, on 14 October 2003, a
Transitional Government will be inaugurated pursuant
to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement of Accra. It
will be an all-inclusive Government of national unity to
lead Liberia through the two-year transition period.

As the Foreign Minister of Ghana has observed,
the Transitional Government faces monumental
challenges. Keeping the current regime of sanctions in
place will doubtless make it impossible for it to
function effectively. Therefore, I would strongly
entreat the Council to consider lifting all the sanctions
currently imposed on Liberia, except the arms
embargo, to further signal support for the Liberian
peace process.

Finally, I wish to register the deep appreciation of
ECOWAS towards the United Nations; towards
Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his personal
commitment to seeing Liberia climb out of the abyss in
which it has found itself for more than a decade;
towards the Departments of Peacekeeping Operations
and Political Affairs for working closely with us and
providing invaluable technical and material support;
and, of course, once again, towards this crucially
important organ of the United Nations, the Security
Council, for giving high priority to meeting its
responsibility for the maintenance of peace and
security in our West African subregion.

