Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Polish presidency
for the month of May for having proposed this very
important topic for open debate in the Security Council.
I should also like to thank the briefers for their highly
significant presentations.

In the wake of humankind's painful experiences
in the Second World War, the world understood that
certain purposes, principles and legal norms were
necessary to maintain international peace and security,
ensure development and protect human rights. Those
principles were enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and attained the highest level of international
jus cogens. They became the modus operandi of
international multilateral actions and international
relations But while the purposes, principles and legal
norms enshrined in the Charter are ideals, it is up
to us to implement and abide by them, and we must
demonstrate political will in order to do so.

We continue to witness conflicts and occupation
around the world, in some case continuing for decades,
as well as terrorism, the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, and flows of refugees and
undocumented migrants. This situation results from the
fact that some do not abide by the rules of international
law but instead exhibit double standards, undermining
the purposes, principles and norms enshrined in the
Charter. They propose erroneous interpretations of the
Charter, voiding its meaning or transmogrifying it to
serve their own interests.

Against that regrettable international backdrop,
the United Nations, as the principal entity overseeing
international affairs and entrusted with ensuring the
implementation of international law and the Charter,
must shoulder its responsibility and engage in reform to
improve its performance so as to ensure that the United
Nations continues to fully play its due role. If that does
not happen, its role in the international arena will be
eclipsed. The United Nations will no long command
trust, being seen instead as an organization without
credibility and incapable of action. We must first and
foremost show the political will to respect international
law as enshrined in the purposes and principles of the
Charter, particularly those relating to the peaceful
settlement of disputes. If we are truly serious, we must
take the following crucial steps.

The Security Council must be objective in its
deliberations in assessing the scope of threats to
international peace and security. The Council must
adopt the most logical approach in dealing with an issue
before it, in accordance with what the Charter says about
promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes with
respect for sovereignty. The Council must take all the
necessary measures to do so, including recourse to the
concept of preventive diplomacy, which encompasses,
among other things. the provision for the Secretary-
General to use his good offices. We must promote the
use of mediation, establish fact-finding commissions
and request advisory opinions from the International
Court of Justice. In addition, we should make use of
Article 36, paragraph 3, of the Charter, which recalls
that the Council should urge parties to a dispute to refer
it to the International Court of Justice.

For the Security Council to successfully discharge
is responsibilities, it must be apprised of the most
up-to-date information on conflicts or situations
risking deteriorating into conflict. The early-warning
mechanisms of the United Nations and various regions
must be functional for that to be the case. The Council
should cooperate with regional mechanisms with a
view to preventing conflict.

There is a crucial need to swiftly resolve protracted
ongoing conflicts, such as that in Palestine. How can
that not be included in the framework of international
law? We must make use of all mechanisms available in
order to ensure that we do not undermine the credibility
of the United Nations internationally, and to avoid a
situation where countries resort to alternative methods
outside the United Nations in order to prevail.

We also need to avoid situations that may lead to the
collapse of States located in conflict regions. We must
not address such situations in a conventional manner or
move slowly, as that would result in the deterioration of
the situation and make such countries fertile ground for
terrorists, who threaten peace and security throughout
the world and make maintaining peace and stability
globally an even more difficult task.

Let us reconsider the veto right. The use of the veto
undermines the implementation of the provisions of the
Charter and of international law. The provisional rules
of the Security Council must be followed.

There is a need to address capacity-building in the
legal and judicial sectors to guarantee accountability
and prevent impunity, especially in the case of
grave crimes.

The United Nations must improve its practices
in peacekeeping and peacebuilding to guarantee the
prevention of outbreaks and renewal of conflicts
between countries, and to establish peace and stability
in them. When that is successfully achieved, those
countries will see the tangible added value of the
United Nations.
There is a need to promote the economic and social
aspects ofUnited Nations efforts, which are the essential
pillars of its work, particularly following the adoption
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in
2015. Socioeconomic aspects are of key importance
and could compensate for the failure of the United
Nations to respond to numerous challenges and resolve
conflicts and disputes that threaten international peace
and security. The real problem that we face is that of
adequate international funding for relevant activities
and projects.

Finally, with regard to the fight against terrorism,
we must prove that the United Nations is capable of
undertaking tangible and specific actions, apart from
the resolutions adopted in the Chamber. We must
demonstrate that terrorist organizations and groups are
not the only ones that can plan and act. That is why
we need to do our utmost to achieve tangible progress
on the ground in order to ensure that terrorists do not
propagate their ideology, indoctrinate people, use
social networks to spread their ideology or have access
to funding or weapons coming from various sources.
In that regard, we need the highest possible level of
coordination among the counter-terrorism entities of
the United Nations to carry out such efforts both within
the United Nations and outside the Organization.

In conclusion, I would once again like to thank
Poland for having convened this very important debate.

