Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I convey
my delegation's appreciation to the French presidency
for convening this open debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine.

I align myself with the statement made on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

The Israeli occupation of Palestinian lands is
central to every conflict in the Middle East. That
injustice has continued for more than seven decades
and has been exacerbated by Israeli expansionism
and aggressive policies towards Palestinians and the
whole region. Attempts by the United States to exclude
the issue from the Security Council's agenda serves
no other purpose than to ignore the suffering of the
Palestinian people resulting from Israeli suppression
and occupation - the most prolonged tragic situation,
supported by the United States in the Middle East.

The entirety oflsraeli history begins with the illegal
occupation ofPalestinian land and unchecked aggression
against its neighbours and other countries in the Middle
East - on at least 14 occasions since 1948. That regime
arrogantly and flagrantly continues to violate at least
86 Council resolutions, from resolution 54 (1948) to
2334 (2016). Those violations have taken place with
the total impunity that the regime continues to enjoy.
Israel also continues to flout all international regimes
governing weapons of mass destruction by refusing to
adhere to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the Biological Weapons Convention and the
Chemical Weapons Convention. The nuclear weapons
in the hands of the regime represent the most serious
threat to the security of every State in the Middle East.

Although the Israeli occupation of Palestinian
lands certainly is the main source of instability in the
Middle Ease, there are other contributors. Foreign
intervention, occupation and its consequent instability
and attempts to engineer societies in the Middle East
have created breeding grounds for terrorism, terrorists
and extremist groups. Those groups, which initially
received support from the United States and its allies,
have been transformed into the monsters that now
threaten those who once supported and created them.
The United States tries to give the wrong attribution
when it comes to the root causes of insecurity in the
Middle East. As our Supreme Leader emphasized only
today, we will not waste our time replying to rants of a
brute nature.

We have not neglected the serious crises affecting
the region, and, on numerous occasions, have proposed
plans to end armed conflicts. Unfortunately, almost
every one of our proposals, including initiating a forum
for regional dialogue, has fallen on deaf ears. However,
those crises are perpetuated by those willing to spend
their dollars on beautiful American military equipment.
Military equipment and weapons targeting women and
children in Yemen are not beautiful. Beauty, rather, lies
in the eyes ofthe innocent children who are being killed.

I am most confident to say that no country has done
more than Iran in combating Da'esh in the region. If
we had hegemonic ambitions, the nuclear deal would
never have been reached. The new United States
Administration's approach and the recent dangerous
strategy adopted with regard to the deal and Iran run
counter to the will of the international community.
We are witnessing today a United States that is more
isolated globally than ever before, while the good-
faith nature of Iran's policies and positions has become
apparent to the international community.

In conclusion, with regard to the Middle East, I
should say that the right approach is not difficult to
find. It requires a willingness to engage and search
for peace and justice with regard to the long-standing
problem of the Palestinian issue in the Middle East.

