Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I thank China,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate. I would
first like to offer our condolences to Malawi and
Tanzania. It is a cruel reminder of what it costs to have
peacekeepers all around the world.

Although not explicitly provided for in the Charter
of the United Nations, peacekeeping has evolved over
the past seven decades to become the most visible part of
the United Nations actions and activities. Let us remind
ourselves that peacekeeping has been brought about
from the thirtieth floor by bold diplomats, not as part of
the Charter. It was an innovation. Yet that situation can
be likened to a double-edged sword in that any failure
to deliver properly in that area could have a detrimental
impact on the credibility of the United Nations. There
are many examples to testify to that reality.

The focus on Africa in today's debate is also very
pertinent for two reasons. First, Africa remains the
main theatre of United Nations peacekeeping efforts,
with 7 out of the 14 peacekeeping operations, and no
doubt the most complicated and robust ones, currently
operating in Africa. Secondly, it is on African soil that
United Nations peacekeepers face the most serious and
complex challenges, ranging from the fact that they are
deployed in dangerous environments where there is
no peace to keep to the increasing threat of terrorism
and violent extremism, which poses fundamental
questions about the doctrine and practice of United
Nations peacekeeping.

In other words, while the peacekeeping context in
Africa has changed dramatically over the past decade,
the same cannot be said of the concept and practice
of United Nations peacekeeping, which, despite some
notable exceptions, continues to be underpinned by
the formal principles of impartiality, neutrality and the
limited use of force. Therefore, while acknowledging
the steps taken so far to adjust peacekeeping to that
new environment, including the recent adoption of the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations, which my country has of
course fully endorsed, that should not be the end of the
process. Collectively, we should continue to analyse
recent trends and explore ways and means to make
sure that peacekeeping is fit for purpose given the new
realities on the ground.

On that note, allow me to underline the following
key points, which we believe to be important. First,
peacekeeping cannot succeed without a viable political
process. It is therefore important and urgent to redouble
efforts to accelerate the pursuit of political solutions.
Undertaking offensive military operations, although
necessary in some cases, should not translate into a
preference for military solutions. Even in counter-
terrorism contexts, beyond reducing the violence,
our objective should remain to encourage as many
stakeholders as possible to join the political process.

Secondly, while the mandates of peacekeeping
operations continue to expand - and I would
like to quote the Secretary-General, who has said
that current mandates "look like Christmas trees"
(S/PV8218, p. 3) - we should be mindful of the fact
that peacekeeping on its own is only one element in
the effort to restore peace and security to countries in
conflict. In other words, while peacekeeping should
be empowered to create the conditions for lasting
stability, it cannot address all the underlying causes
of the situations that motivated its deployment. It is
therefore crucial for the international community to
step up its commitment towards post-conflict situations
well beyond the duration of the mandates of peace
operations. The need to strengthen the nexus between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding in order to achieve
sustainable peace cannot be overemphasized.

Thirdly, I would like to draw the attention of the
Council to a real risk that we have already seen in a
number of situations. Owing to their ever-growing
responsibilities, in certain cases peacekeeping
operations have substituted for failed States in providing
the population's basic needs, including security. They
have increasingly become an alternative that, instead
of promoting the rebuilding of national capacities, has
had the opposite effect on that process. In dealing with
that situation, we should bear in mind that the only
way to achieve sustainable peace is by building strong,
responsive and accountable State institutions at the
local and the national levels that will be responsible for
delivering essential services.

Fourthly, and lastly, it is necessary to strengthen
partnerships for peacekeeping operations. As the
nature of international peace and security threats has
evolved, no single organization has the legitimacy
and the capabilities required to act alone. Since
its establishment in 2002, the African Union has
demonstrated a clear comparative advantage in two
particular kinds of situations: first, in missions where
offensive operations are needed and the United Nations
is unable to deploy; and, secondly, where the Security
Council is unable to mobilize the requisite political
consensus to initiate action. It is therefore important
to build a strategic partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union based on mutual
respect, solidarity and, most important, adherence to
the principle of comparative advantage.

That brings me to the issue of financing, which
remains one of the most important challenges facing
such a partnership in the area of peace and security.
Funding is indeed a central concern when it comes to
launching and sustaining African Union peace support
operations. The ongoing African Union Mission in
Somalia testifies to that reality. That is why the African
Union has consistently called for predictable and
sustainable financing through United Nations assessed
contributions for African Union-led peace operations.

Let me draw attention to the decision that was
taken only two days ago at a summit with regard to
the reinstatement of the Peace Fund of the African
Union. When Africa calls on the Security Council
to do more regarding the issue of funding, the call
should be understood in the context of the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations, which entrusts
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security to the Security
Council. Therefore, by providing responses to threats
to peace and security, the African Union is doing so on
behalf of the United Nations.

