Mr. Loncar (Serbia and Montenegro) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation provided by the delegation):
First of all, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of August. I would also like to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Hedi Annabi for his
in-depth presentation of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2004/6l3).

I would also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to state the positions of Serbia and
Montenegro at today's meeting of the Security Council
regarding the report before it on the activities of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and the situation in Kosovo and
Metohija, Serbia and Montenegro, from 1 April to 15
July 2004.

Serbia and Montenegro appreciates the view
stated in the report that much of the political effort in
Kosovo and Metohija over the reporting period was
aimed at alleviating the consequences of the attempted
ethnic cleansing in the province in mid-March this
year. Without seeking to diminish the efforts of the
international community and UNMIK to rebuild
destroyed houses, schools and other structures, it is our
view that the consequences of the pogrom by Kosovo
Albanian extremists and terrorists committed against
the Serbs on 17 and 18 March 2004 are far from being
addressed. In addition, reconstruction has not yet even
begun of 35 destroyed and torched churches and
monasteries of the Serb Orthodox Church, a centuries-
old testimony of the Serb presence in the area. I cannot
but mention that these include the cathedral and the
Metropolitan's residence in the mediaeval city of
Prizren and the Church of Our Lady - the Bogorodica
Ljeviska - dating from the beginning of the fourteenth
century.

Moreover, Serbia and Montenegro does not
consider sufficient the efforts made so far to overcome
the political and moral consequences of the March
pogrom against Serbs. The basic human right to life in
safety, peace and dignity worthy of human beings
continues to be denied to Serbs in Kosovo and
Metohija. Adequate measures have not been
undertaken against extremists and terrorists, whose
influence was very much in evidence among Kosovo
Albanians in the March events. The fundamental
human right of a safe and peaceful life for Serbs cannot
be realized without decisive police and judicial
investigation and without putting a total end to the
contrary policy by the Kosovo Albanians themselves.

We note with regret that the past activities of
UNMIK and other representatives of the international
community in this respect have been insufficient. This
indirectly sends the message to Albanian extremist and
terrorist structures that their crimes may remain
unpunished and that they are tacitly tolerated and
hence may be repeated.

Serbia and Montenegro expresses its concern
over the fact that the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government in Kosovo and Metohija failed to
condemn the March ethnic violence and ethnic
cleansing promptly and willingly. How is it possible
that the bodies and institutions that should, according
to the Constitutional Framework, represent all
inhabitants of the province condemned the violence
only when compelled to do so by international factors?
How can it be that the majority Albanian community is
using this horrendous violence against the Serbs as an
excuse to demand new responsibilities since it
allegedly lacks the authority to prevent such brutality?
The collapse of the Kosovo Police Service in March
best disproves the validity of any such demand. Some
activities undertaken by the Kosovo parliament offer
similar examples. We therefore welcome the position
of the Secretary-General concerning the illegal
amending of the Constitutional Framework by the
Kosovo parliament, particularly the assessment in the
conclusions of his report that this was clearly outside
its competencies. This is an absolutely unacceptable
act.

Serbia and Montenegro wishes to reiterate the
position stated in the plan of the Republic of Serbia for
the political solution to the current situation in Kosovo
and Metohija, adopted by a resolution of the National
Assembly of the Republic of Serbia on 29 April 2004:
Serbia does not want to diminish any effort by the
international military and civilian missions in Kosovo
and Metohija to curb inter-ethnic conflicts. However,
Serbia and Montenegro still considers that UNMIK has
not yet fulfilled its mandate under Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). That mandate includes, inter
alia, "establishing and overseeing the development of
provisional democratic self-governing institutions to
ensure conditions for a peaceful and normal life for all
inhabitants of Kosovo" (para. 10), "assuring the safe
and unimpeded return of all refugees and displaced
persons to their homes in Kosovo" (para. 1] (k)), and
"protecting and promoting human rights" (para. 1] (j)).

We would like to point out once again that
UNMIK's failure to fulfil those goals was not due to a
lack of good will or conscientiousness by a significant
part of the international mission. It is virtually
impossible for the international troops and civilian
presence to effectively protect the basic human rights
of Serbs when they have been exposed to expulsion by
well-organized Kosovo Albanian extremist and
terrorist structures. That is why the Government of
Serbia proposed its plan for a political solution through
territorial autonomy and firm institutional guarantees
as the only possibility for protecting the remaining
Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija. At the same time, the
plan creates the only realistic preconditions for the
return of internally displaced persons now in central
Serbia. The plan does not offer final solutions to all
issues and is open to amendment. It does, however,
proceed from a realistic assessment of the situation in
Kosovo and Metohija. The situation in the province is
not comparable to any other in Europe. As rightly
indicated in the Secretary-General's report, "there
remains a long way to go until standards, particularly
in the areas of minority protection, returns and freedom
of movement, are met" (S/2004/613, para. 3).

The plan of the Government of the Republic of
Serbia guarantees institutional mechanisms for the
protection of the rights of minorities, with special
status for churches and monasteries and a lasting
security role for the international forces in the
protection of minorities. The plan would provide a
situation of safety in which, inter alia, parents would
not have to fear for their children as they leave for
school, the sick and the frail would be able to receive
medical care, citizens would be able to attend to the
administrative affairs of their local communities in
municipal centres, farmers would not be afraid to go to
their fields and small businesses would be able to
function. None of this is now possible for most of the
Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija, and it will remain
impossible if the majority Albanian population
continues to decide these issues.

The plan also represents a realistic response, not
only to the pogrom, but equally to the events of the
past five years that have resulted in two thirds of Serbs
leaving Kosovo and Metohija since the deployment of
UNMIK. Autonomy and institutional guarantees for the
Serbs and other communities in Kosovo and Metohija
are the only way to preserve the preconditions for a
future multi-ethnic and multicultural society. The
international community's mission will avoid failure
only if institutions are created in which the majority -
specifically a majority that is constantly ethnically
defined - will not always be able to outvote the
minority and if institutions are established in which the
spirit of tolerance prevails and the legitimate concerns
of others are taken into account. It is our profound
belief that a Kosovo and Metohija without Serbs, and
one in which a cultural heritage more than six centuries
old continues to be torched and desecrated with
impunity, would not only represent the failure of the
international policy embodied in UNMIK, it would be
a defeat of the fundamental values of dignity and the
equal and inalienable rights of all people, on which
freedom, justice and world peace are based, as
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.

In past political activities concerning Kosovo and
Metohija, the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro
has steadfastly adhered to the goals specified in the
aforementioned plan and the resolution adopted by the
National Assembly of Serbia. We have noted that
international factors, in the weeks following the
presentation of the plan, have accepted this proposed
method of solving the problems in the province.
International circles showed great interest in the plan,
which was accepted as a good basis on which to start
talks on resolving the difficult position of the Serbs.
Some international factors initiated the establishment
of a working group within the provisional Government
of Kosovo and Metohija to formulate decentralization
proposals. The activities of the working group took
place as pressure was brought to bear on Kosovo and
Metohija Serbs to participate in its work, although they
had, in all forms of their political engagement,
embraced the Government of Serbia's plan as their
own.

The draft text on the reform of local self-
government prepared by the group does not address the
essential and current problems faced by the Serbs. The
draft may represent a good long-term basis for the
reform of the entire local self-government of the
province. However, it does not address the urgent
needs of the Serbs, since it does not contain
meaningful solutions for their survival and return, as
are offered in the Government of Serbia's plan. Under
such circumstances, the State authorities of Serbia are
not in a position to call upon the Kosovo and Metohija
Serbs to take part in the forthcoming parliamentary
elections. We would like to emphasize that the plan of
the Government of Serbia stipulates in particular that
the establishment of firm institutional guarantees for
the Serb community in Kosovo and Metohija would
serve as a significant encouragement to them to
participate in the October elections for provisional
authorities. We note with regret that no progress has
been made in that direction in the meantime.

Finally, Serbia and Montenegro considers that the
direct and heightened activities of the Contact Group,
which is representative of a wide spectrum of relevant
international factors, represent the best framework for
putting in place the possibility of an applicable policy
of standards in Kosovo and Metohija. The
implementation of those standards should lead to the
establishment of a system of European values. A
European character in Kosovo and Metohija, within
Serbia and Montenegro, would not be to the detriment
of Albanians, Serbs or others. It would be in the
interest of all citizens and peoples in Kosovo and
Metohija, in the interest of lasting Serbian-Albanian
reconciliation and common European future, and in the
interest of Serbia and Montenegro's best relations with
all its neighbours. Any other solution would breed
dangerous new hatred, conflicts and policies of
revanchism and would represent a constant potential
source of new conflicts in the Balkans and elsewhere in
Europe.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate Serbia and
Montenegro's readiness to continue to be a
constructive partner of the international community in
resolving all outstanding questions in Kosovo and
Metohija, and to express our hope that the members of
the Contact Group will continue to energetically pursue
their efforts.

