Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): My delegation joins the
delegations that have already spoken in congratulating
you, Mr. President, on convening this meeting. I must
recall that it is a consequence of a movement initiated a
long time ago by, I think, all members of the Security
Council. But I would like to pay tribute to five countries

 

which are no longer members and which started a
movement last year, with other members of the Council, to
make some proposals on the Council's working methods.
One proposal concerned the possibility of public meetings,
and we are very happy that it has been implemented. The
countries no longer on the Council that signed the relevant
document last year were Egypt, Chile, Guinea-Bissau, the
Republic of Korea and Poland. We should pay tribute to
them.

It is not only a question of transparency. As a matter
of fact, it is a question of better participation of all the
membership and of all of us working together towards the
same goals. This is why the Security Council is involved in
this question.

I must pay tribute to you, Mrs. Ogata. You started
practical steps that led us to this session today. We heard
you last year in informal consultations, following which we
had a presidential statement on the matter for the first time.
There was another presidential statement this year after we
had heard your suggestions and comments. These
statements that we adopted - and I think sometimes we
have to work in a more systematic way - contain some
ideas regarding protection of United Nations personnel and
other international personnel. For instance, in both
statements we recalled the Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel, adopted by the
General Assembly in December 1994, which has not yet
been ratified. I would like to profit from your presence,
Mrs. Ogata, by asking whether you think that, even with its
shortcomings, people would like this Convention to have an
enlarged scope, and whether we could do something to
ratify it. Can you do something to help implement what we
have already said twice in our presidential statements?

This is also mentioned in the report of the Secretary-
General on protection for humanitarian assistance to
refugees and others in conflict situations, where we see a
certain number of recommendations that are very useful,
some of which you have addressed today. I am very
encouraged to see that some of these recommendations are
already being translated into practical measures. That is
why my delegation welcomes so much your contribution
today and the idea that we are not working in theoretical
terms; we are doing something concrete.

I have no comments on what you said, Mrs. Ogata,
but seek some clarification. I do not need clarification on
Kosovo; you were very explicit on that. But clarification is
necessary with regard to the political support that you
receive for Kosovo compared with the lack of political
support for other situations - you mentioned Afghanistan
and Sudan. There are movements, even in the United
Nations, regarding these two situations, which are very
dangerous, and there are groups of countries and even
directors of non-governmental organizations in the
international arena working on them, and I would like to
hear what you think it is possible for this Council and this
Organization to do; it has been recalled that the General
Assembly has the primary responsibility here. But we are
all involved, including the Economic and Social Council.
What could be done to give the same or more consistent
political support to these two cases that you have
mentioned?

You mention a number of matters with regard to
Africa. We all know that Congo is central - the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda. These
are all the problems of refugees, internally displaced
people and forced population movements that you
mentioned. One you pointed to that worried us so much
in the past, in addition to demobilization and the
reintegration of ex-combatants, is the flow of arms.
Another is the separation of refugees from other entities
that sometimes use the refugee camps for other activities.
Are we doing something concrete about these questions?
Is UNHCR involved and doing something practical?

This point is mentioned in the report of the
Secretary-General, and addressed as well in the draft
resolution we are preparing on the security and
humanitarian and civilian character of refugee camps and
settlements. I very much hope the Council will be able to
adopt that draft resolution next week.

You mentioned three areas where all of us have to
work together. We have already mentioned the complexity
of wars and the fragility of peace. Your point that we
should look at the human displacement factor is also very
important. I think we can do something only if we look
at the rights of the human being, at human rights.

There is another central problem, one I know you
are very concerned with, as you yourself have already
told this Council on previous occasions; I would like to
ask you about the question of coordination between your
own Office and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. Are they working
together? Is the coordination working? I will return to the
question of coordination with regard to the third area you
mentioned.

 

In the second area, you mentioned "soft" options and
"medium" options. I exclude the fourth option, mentioned
by Ambassador Lavrov, but you mentioned three other
options and very much recommended the adoption of
"medium" options. I agree with you on that. My country,
for example, is very much in favour of the creation of a
rapid deployment force to be used, if necessary, to help
secure a certain kind of critical situation. But are we
working towards creating that? I know that you are
probably suggesting it, and in the draft resolution we are
preparing we have something relating to stand-by
arrangements on this. I know you work very closely with
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and Member
States on these draft resolutions, but do you think that we
can and should really move more quickly in this area?

You mentioned the link to subregional peacekeeping,
and this is very important. For instance, you mentioned the
situation in Guinea-Bissau. Is your Office already preparing
something for the new phase? We have an agreement, we
have a subregional effort by the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG), and are we already preparing something
concrete to help this operation? I know you are making an
enormous effort in Sierra Leone. In regard to your point
about the necessity of dialogue and national reconciliation:
we have that in Guinea-Bissau. Are we therefore doing
something on this question in concrete terms?

Finally, regarding post-conflict situations and the
return of refugees, this is often a factor that complicates
situations. That is why I think coordination is so important,
coordination among all the bodies and departments of the
United Nations and with other international actors, as well.

Here I would like to ask you one thing. I know
amnesty is very important as an element of confidence-
building, and I believe that is what is being prepared in
Kosovo. On the other hand, the rule of law should
guarantee that situations cannot happen again, that people
and leaders are accountable for their own acts. I know you
are very much in favour of the International Criminal
Court, and I would like to know if we are working in that
sense. Because I think this is very important; human
security is the only way of guaranteeing stability and peace.
Therefore, I would like to know what, in these more critical
situations, you are doing in that sense. I would appreciate
it if you could give us more details.

