Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
I thank the delegation of Rwanda for organizing
today's meeting on peacebuilding. I am grateful to
the former and current Chairmen of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Ambassadors Drobnjak and Patriota, for
their informative briefings and skilful leadership ofthe
Commission.

It is clear to all that the prevention or timely ending
of armed conflict is the most effective way to establish
conditions to restore lasting peace and security. A
decisive role in consolidating the outcome of that
process is played by peacebuilding support, which
should be delivered in a timely manner and in sufficient
quantity and focus on tasks that are directly related to
the underlying causes of the conflict. That conclusion,
which has been reiterated today, has become especially
relevant in the light of recent events in various regions
of the world, in particular the new waves of instability
in several countries of Africa.

The United Nations has been assigned a central
role in the area of peacebuilding. In that context,
we commend the work of peacekeeping missions,
peacebuilding offices, the country configurations
of the Peacebuilding Commission, United Nations
programmes and funds, and regional organizations.
We note, moreover, that international cooperation in
that field remains fragmented. It is important to ensure
a clear division of labour among all the structures
involved so that they can work strictly within the scope
of their mandates and on the basis of established norms.

The Russian Federation supports the work of
the Peacebuilding Commission in enhancing the
effectiveness and strengthening the coordination of
international efforts in assistance to post-conflict States
on the part of the United Nations and the international
financial institutions. This should be done in strict
respect for the prerogatives of the principal entities of
the Organization, the Security Council above all, and
in line with the Charter of the United Nations and the
principle of State sovereignty.

From the moment of its establishment, the
Peacebuilding Commission has gained considerable
experience, in close cooperation with national
Governments, in achieving success. We are convinced
that the Commission's current mandate and unique
intergovernmental composition and structure are fully
aligned with its role as a key body in the coordination
of peacebuilding support. The many positive examples
of this include the stabilization of the situations in
Sierra Leone, Liberia and Burundi. We need to build
on those successes, inter alia, by focusing our efforts
on such areas as ongoing security sector reform,
progressive socioeconomic development, and the fight
against poverty and unemployment. United Nations
programmes and funds have a particularly important
role to play in that regard.

At the same time, negative experiences - such as in
Guinea-BissauandtheCentralAfricanRepublic-require
a thorough analysis of bottlenecks in peacebuilding
efforts. The development of a balanced strategy
dictates the need to set the right priorities, with a focus
on assistance in addressing the most critical problems
and taking into account the particular features of
post-conflict situations, without squandering scarce
resources on what may at first to be very noble goals.

That having been said, the mechanisms and
methods of the Commission's work require further
adaptation, development and streamlining. Much needs
to be done to optimize and enhance the practical impact
of its work, including through closer coordination with
the Peacebuilding Fund. In that regard, we welcome the
first session of the Peacebuilding Commission devoted
to the issue of resource mobilization, held in June. We
hope that the event will have significant added value in
strengthening cooperation among all the participants in
the peacebuilding process and facilitate a future open
dialogue and exchange of Views on the broad range of
issues related to post-conflict recovery. We expect that
such forums will be held on a regular basis.

The 2015 review of the peacebuilding architecture
will seek to improve the Commission's functioning,
enhance its practical impact and consolidate its role as
the central peacebuilding structure. Priority attention
should be focused first and foremost on the work of
its various components: the Commission, the Fund
and the Peacebuilding Support Office. It will also
be important to consider the functional capacities of
those relatively new components and their interaction
within the United Nations system, above all with
the General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council. It will be important to
analyse the lessons learned, including its successes and
disappointments, including in specific countries. Such
a focused approach will allow us to develop concrete
and feasible recommendations to improve the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture.

We are convinced that any peacebuilding support
of the international community must be undertaken
with the consent of national Governments and taking
into account the particular characteristics of their
respective countries. Any successful post-conflict
peacebuilding must be based on national responsibility
and efforts to enhance the institutional capacities of
countries involved in the peacebuilding process and
in developing peacebuilding strategies, all undertaken
at the earliest stages of post-conflict reconstruction.
Russia plays an active role in international efforts
towards peacebuilding and the recovery of countries
and regions that have undergone armed conflict. We
intend to continue increasing our national contribution
in line with international efforts and with active
participation of our partners.

