Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) ofresolution 1970 (2011), of26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security Council
on the work of the Committee established pursuant to
that resolution concerning Libya. My report covers the
period from 5 March to 15 July 2015, during which time
the members of the Committee met once in informal
consultations.

At the outset, I would like to briefly touch upon
the activities of the Committee related to the six
recommendations contained in the final report
(S/2015/l28) of the Panel of Experts under resolution
2144 (2014) on which the Committee had agreed to
follow-up action.

On 26 March, the Committee updated its sanctions
list, incorporating information provided by the Panel
on the existing entries in the list in its final report.

On 14 April, the Committee sent a letter to the
Permanent Representative of Libya to the United
Nations requesting to be informed about ports, oil
fields and installations that are under the control of the
Government of Libya, in the light of the measures put
in place by resolution 2146 (2014) concerning attempts
to illicitly export crude oil from Libya. On 22 April, the
Permanent Representative of Libya provided relevant
information. He further explained that the National
Oil Corporation, represented by its head, who is based

in Benghazi, was the only body authorized to sell oil
and gas. On 5 May, the Committee responded to the
Permanent Representative of Libya and encouraged the
Libyan Government to provide regular updates on this
issue to the Committee.

On 16 April, the Committee dispatched a note
verbale to all Member States drawing attention to two
recommendations of the Panel related to arms brokering
activities and cargo inspections, reminding Member
States of their obligations under resolution 2213 (2015)
regarding cargo inspections and encouraging Member
States with the necessary expertise and resources to
assist those Member States that lack the legal capacity
to implement the assets freeze measure.

On 21 May, the Committee wrote to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
Mr. Bernardino Leon, regarding the facilitation of Panel
access to Libya and invited him to brief the Committee.
The Committee received a response on 9 June.

Allow me to now provide a brief overview of the
Committee's other activities during the reporting
period. On 16 April, the Committee approved the slate
of proposed candidates to serve on the Panel of Experts
on Libya during the period mandated by resolution
2213 (2015).

On 21 May, the Committee received a letter from
the Panel containing an update on an investigation
relating to the freezing of the assets of an individual,
purportedly in relation to the Libya sanctions regime,
but who had, in fact, not been designated under the
assets freeze measure by the Committee.

On 2 June, the Committee started the consideration
of proposals for the designation of two individuals under
the assets freeze and travel ban measures. However,
these proposals were subsequently put on hold.

On 8 June, the Committee held informal
consultations to hear from the Panel of Experts on its
work plan. The Committee further discussed the issue
of sanctions designations.

Since the Chair's most recent periodic report to the
Council (see S/PV.7398) in relation to the arms embargo,
the Committee responded in two cases that the items to
be supplied did not require approval, given that they
constituted non-lethal military equipment under the
terms ofparagraphs 9 and 10, respectively, ofresolution
2095 (2013). In the first instance, the Committee urged

the supplying State and the recipient organization to
exercise caution and due diligence to guard against
possible misuse or diversion of the materiel. In the
second, the Committee urged the recipient State to take
all the necessary steps to guard against any possible
diversion.

Furthermore, no negative decision was taken by
the Committee in connection with an arms embargo
notification under paragraph 13 (b) of resolution 2009
(2011). The Committee also started the consideration of
an arms embargo exemption request, under paragraph 13
(a) of resolution 2009 (2011), as modified by paragraph
8 of resolution 2174 (2014), which was subsequently
put on hold. The Committee further exchanged letters
with four Member States in follow-up to a request for
guidance on the arms embargo submitted by a Member
State regarding non-lethal military materiel it had
seized.

In relation to the assets freeze, the Committee
responded to a request for guidance regarding an entity
on its sanctions list and responded to a note verbale
received from a Member State regarding a subsidiary
of an entity on its list.

