Mr. Pleuger (Germany): Let me first welcome
Ambassador Sinclair and thank him very much for his
very informative and complete report; we appreciated it
very much. I would also like to thank the representative
of Papua New Guinea for his statement. He gave us a
very encouraging and positive assessment.

I am very pleased that stage II could finally be
completed. We greatly appreciate the commitment of
the United Nations Political Office in Bougainville
(UNPOB) in that matter. In that context, we would also
like to assure the countries participating in the Peace
Monitoring Group of our greatest appreciation. We
warmly welcome the further regional engagement of
Australia and New Zealand in the Bougainville
transition team, in which they will shortly be joined by
Fiji and Vanuatu.

We must not, of course, forget the active
involvement of the people of Papua New Guinea and
Bougainville, without which the ongoing peace process
will not be able to succeed. Their support for the
United Nations Political Office in Bougainville and
their active participation in the weapons collection
have led to the verification of stage II. Furthermore,
Papua New Guinea showed its commitment to the
peace process by facilitating the quick acceptance and
implementation of arrangements which were required
for the Bougainville Transition Team to take up its
work.

Given the full ownership of this process by the
people of Bougainville and Papua New Guinea, the
departure of the United Nations Office by the end of
this year will, in our view, be the right next step. For its
last month in action, UNPOB should set out a rigid
timetable to ensure the progress of constitutional work.
Therefore, all possible assistance should be made
available to Ambassador Sinclair and his staff. In our
View, the Secretariat is indispensable in this respect.

With regard to stage III, we highly recommend
the complete destruction of all weapons, as a lasting
peace cannot be ensured otherwise. The parties should
be aware that without an agreement in this regard the
peace process might be held up and the holding of
elections might also be delayed unnecessarily. We hope
that the meeting announced by the representative of
Papua New Guinea will be successful in that regard.

The achievements reached thus far show that the
peace process is under way and will not be stopped.
Therefore, efforts to have Francis Ona and his
movement join the peace process should be maintained.
At the same time, he needs to know and to understand
that the peace process and the people of Bougainville
cannot wait for him.

In conclusion, let me say that Germany will
continue, within the framework of the European Union,
to contribute to the further development of a
functioning civil society in that region.

