Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing earlier this morning.
We all agree that nuclear terrorism is one of the
greatest threats to global peace and security. The recent
Nuclear Security Summit in the Republic of Korea
reinforced political will and mobilized the technical
expertise necessary to fulfil the commitments made in
Washington, DC, two years earlier. In Seoul, we saw
53 countries make more than 100 new commitments to
improving global nuclear security.

To maintain that momentum, we need a serious
discussion around standards and common rules for
nuclear security. To that end, we encourage countries to
engage with international nuclear security initiatives
and adhere to relevant conventions and for those that
have not yet done so, to ratify the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) amended Convention on the
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and the United
Nations International Convention for the Suppression
of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism. We also encourage all
States to work with and through the Nuclear Suppliers
Group in the context of civilian nuclear use.

For our part, the United Kingdom Government is
committed to the long-term objective of a world
without nuclear weapons and has pledged to press for
multilateral disarmament in line with our commitment
under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT). We are determined to work with the
international community to control proliferation, to
make progress on multilateral disarmament, to build
trust and confidence between nuclear and non-nuclear-
weapon States and to take tangible steps towards a
safer and more stable world where countries with
nuclear weapons ultimately are able to relinquish them.

The United Kingdom wants to work with the
international community to tackle effectively those
nuclear programmes of concern. On Iran, the United
Kingdom is committed to a peaceful negotiated
solution to the nuclear issue. We welcome the most
recent round of E3+3 talks, on 14 April, as a first step
towards that objective. We now need agreement on
urgent practical steps to build confidence that Iran does
not intend to build a nuclear weapon.

We are also deeply concerned about the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea's failed
satellite launch on 13 April, which is a clear violation
of resolution 1874 (2009). We urge the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to suspend all missile and
nuclear-related activity and to commit to re-engaging
with the international community, including by
returning to the Six-Party Talks. In that area, as in any
other, all Member States should comply fully with their
obligations under Security Council resolutions.

A fissile material cut-off treaty is a critical
component of achieving the long-term goal of a world
without nuclear weapons. That treaty would put a stop
to the future production of fissile material for nuclear
weapons purposes and a limit on the amount of such
material available globally. The United Kingdom is
committed to achieving a fissile material cut-off treaty
and to the immediate start of negotiations in the
Conference on Disarmament in Geneva. Unilaterally,
we have had a moratorium on the production of fissile
material for weapons since 1995. The international
community expects progress. Let us be clear. Progress
in the Conference on Disarmament in delivering
meaningful negotiations on a fissile material cut-off
treaty will determine the Conference's continuing
viability.

The United Kingdom continues to work to
universalize the Non-Proliferation Treaty and to
strengthen the non-proliferation architecture. We want
to see a universal, strengthened, safeguards system,
with the IAEA comprehensive safeguards agreement
and the additional protocol as the universal standard
and norm for verification. We are committed to
supporting the expansion of civil nuclear use while
ensuring that neither safety nor security is
compromised, nor nuclear proliferation tolerated.

The United Kingdom looks to see the
forthcoming session of the Preparatory Committee
build on the success of the 2010 Review Conference of
the Parties to the NPT, at which a cross-pillar Action
Plan was agreed by consensus for the first time. We
must maintain that positive momentum right through
this review cycle to the 2015 Review Conference.

The Council has a unique responsibility to ensure
that the atom is used for peace, and not as a threat to
peace and security. Working with the wider United
Nations community and Member States, we can ensure
that agreed rules and norms are enforced and
commitments met so that nuclear proliferation is
prevented, and the risk of nuclear terror with it, so that
a world without nuclear weapons is made a reality and
so that the atom is used to power development and
stability, not conflict.

