Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela welcomes the adoption of resolution 2334
(2014) in the conviction that it represents a unique
opportunity to advance the peace process and restore
trust between the parties, while allowing the Security
Council to abandon its habitual inaction by engaging it
in building an environment conducive to negotiations
between the parties that take into consideration the
aspirations and concerns of both and that upholds the
inalienable right of the Palestinian people to a free,
sovereign and independent State in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 181 (11).

Of course, this resolution represents a mere first
step, but it is a step in the right direction. This conflict
is extremely complex and fraught with obstacles. There
is an urgent need to respond decisively to the greatest
challenge to the two-State solution - the continued
expansion of illegal Israeli settlements on the occupied
territory of the State of Palestine. Illegal settlements
violate international law and the rights of the Palestinian
people by depriving them of their land, destroying their
homes and means of subsistence, restricting their free
movements and undermining their right to social and

economic development.

That is why the Council must speak categorically
against this terrible problem. The United Nations,
the General Assembly and the Security Council
have the obligation and mandate to defend peace and
international law. Furthermore, the United Nations and
the Security Council have the moral obligation to support
the Palestinian cause, as they are deeply responsible
for the tragedy and Nakba of the Palestinian people.
That is why they must adopt all the resolutions they
can to protect the weakest and force Israel to abide by
international law and openly enter into a peace process
based on the existence of two States.

The resolution we have adopted today is a first step
on the path to a peaceful negotiated solution between
Palestine and Israel with the support of the international
community. It is therefore necessary for Israel, the
occupying Power, to put an end to the policies derived
from the prolonged occupation of the territories of the
State of Palestine, as well as the inhumane blockade of
the Gaza Strip, which has lasted for almost a decade
and is a flagrant violation of international law. Those
are essential conditions for consolidating what we
have achieved today and for moving forward towards a
political solution in which Palestine, as a full member
of the United Nations and with East Jerusalem as its
capital, can live peacefully with Israel,within secure,
internationally recognized pre-1967 borders.

The members of the Council have recognized that
illegal settlements are a systematic obstacle to the peace
process and a threat to the two-State solution. Therefore,
it is becoming increasingly critical for Israel to assume
its responsibilities and comply with the resolutions of
the Security Council and the General Assembly urging
it to put an end to a pernicious practice that denies the
human rights of the Palestinian population.

Furthermore, Venezuela reiterates its condemnation
of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
no matter who the authors may be and what their
motives are. With the same emphasis, we condemn
the continued violation of the most basic rights of the
Palestinian population in the occupied territories and in
Gaza, which continues to be blockaded and besieged by
Israel, through the indiscriminate and disproportionate
use of force by Israeli military and security troops.

We repudiate the violence of extremist settlers
against the Palestinian population and the policies of
the occupying Power that subject Palestinian men,
women and children to prison and illegal administrative
detention. We call once again for the release of all
children who are unfairly languishing in Israeli jails.
Clearly, much remains to be done to reverse this
negative situation and ensure that Israel complies with
its obligations as an occupying Power. However, we
recognize that today's decision opens a space needed for
resuming dialogue and negotiation as the only means of
resolving a conflict that has marked the history of the
Middle East for almost 70 years.

We are pleased that at the end of our term in the
Security Council, the Council has today had the
vision and the courage to adopt this resolution. We
therefore acknowledge the contribution of those who
have participated in this historic outcome, especially
Egypt, New Zealand and the countries that sponsored
the resolution.

Venezuela reaffirms its unyielding commitment to
peace, international security and the Palestinian cause.
We will remain vigilant with regard to the evolution
of the inescapable task of helping to bring about a
negotiated peaceful settlement of the conflict, as
provided for in Article 2 of the Charter of the United
Nations. Similarly, we will support in other forums all
the efforts and initiatives directed to realizing the two-
State solution in accordance with international law.

