Mr. Kaiser (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia align
themselves with this statement.

First of all, I would like to express our
appreciation for having been invited to participate in
today's meeting on behalf of the European Union. I
would also like to thank Under-Secretaries-General
Malcorra, Pascoe and Le Roy for their respective
briefings, and extend my gratitude to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Somalia for his contribution to
today's debate.

The EU acknowledges the recommendations of
the Secretary-General contained in his report
(S/2009/210). Given the current security conditions,
we believe that the proposed phased approach of
continued support for the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the strengthening of Somali
security institutions is the best available option. The
European Union takes note that, after the two first
phases, the Secretary-General recommends that the
Security Council decide whether the conditions set out
in his report and the timing are conducive to a shift to
the final phase, in which a United Nations
peacekeeping operation could be established to take
over from AMISOM.

Despite the positive developments at the political
level and the powerful political momentum created by
the Djibouti peace process, the overall security

situation on the ground remains extremely volatile, as
demonstrated by the recent outburst of fighting in
Mogadishu. In that context, the EU welcomes the
continued efforts of President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh
Ahmed to reach out to those groups that remain
opposed to the Djibouti process.

The humanitarian situation, the continued plight
of the internally displaced persons and the dramatic
increase in pirate attacks off the Somalia coast and on
the international high seas are still of great concern.
The European Union welcomes the pledges made
during the International Conference in Support of the
Somali Security Institutions and the African Union
Mission in Somalia, which was held in Brussels on
22 and 23 April 2009, under the joint auspices of the
United Nations, the European Union, the African
Union and the League of Arab States. The pledges
made at that conference amounted to €l64 million -
both for AMISOM. needs not covered by the United
Nations logistical support package and to support the
Somali transitional security institutions - of which the
European Commission alone pledged more than €80
million. That testifies to the strong commitment of the
European Union to working with the international
community to help the new Somali Transitional Federal
Government to bring about peace and stability.

The European Union stresses that building up the
Somali security and police forces is vital to the
country's stability. The European Union also calls on
the international community to step up its support for
Somali institutions in order to take on challenges and
opportunities to further consolidate reconciliation,
restore peace and rebuild the country. The European
Union remains committed to engaging in such support.
In Brussels, the international community also
highlighted the need to continue to address the issue of
piracy, inter alia, through an international naval
presence, emphasizing that land-based solutions to the
root causes of piracy must be urgently addressed.

The European Union would also like to express
its gratitude to AMISOM. troop-contributing countries
for their contributions to stabilizing the situation in
Mogadishu, given the difficult operating environment.
It is also important to continue to support AMISOM
through the United Nations logistical support package,
through the United Nations trust funds and bilaterally,
with a coordinated approach.
10

In addition, the European Union and its member
States are supporting AMISOM. in the training of the
Somali National Security Force and Somali police.
With regard to support for AMISOM, the European
Commission has so far committed a total of €40
million. Moreover, several EU member States have
offered financial, material and logistical assistance.

The EU's priority is to support good governance,
human rights and the rule of law. At the Brussels
pledging conference, the European Commission
announced that it planned to allocate more than €215
million to those areas for the period 2008-2013. The
European Union also provides humanitarian emergency
relief and other forms of assistance to ease the
suffering of the Somali people.

The European Union is contributing to
international efforts to curb piracy off the Somali coast
and in the Gulf of Aden. The EU is ready to continue,
through the deployment of the maritime military
mission Atalanta, to protect United Nations vessels
delivering the logistical support package to AMISOM
and shipments of humanitarian relief, as well as
surveillance and patrolling in maritime areas. At the
same time, the EU is aware of and committed to
helping to meet the need to address the root causes of
piracy through sustainable development and the full
restoration of the rule of law in Somalia.

In conclusion, I wish to assure the Council that
the European Union, together with other members of
the international community, stands ready to continue
assisting Somalia. However, Somalia must do its part.
The immediate goal is to develop its own National
Security Force and civilian police force. A long-term
security strategy is a precondition for future
development. The European Union welcomes the
announcement by President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh
Ahmed in Brussels that the issue of security is one of
his Government's highest priorities. Any meaningful
progress can be based only on Somalia's ownership of
and responsibility for its implementation.

