Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): Ijoin other speakers in
welcoming His Excellency Ivica Daeie, Chairperson-in-
Office ofthe Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, to the Council today. I
wish to congratulate him on his assumption of the
post of Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) for 2015,
and we are grateful for his in-depth briefing, especially
in outlining the priorities of the OSCE under Serbia's
chairmanship.

As the largest regional security organization,
consisting of 57 countries of Europe, Central Asia
and North America, the OSCE plays a crucial role in
contributing to peace, security and stability in Europe,
as envisaged by Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter. Malaysia welcomes the reaffirmation by the
Chairperson-in-Office of the OSCE to continue close
cooperation with the United Nations in upholding the
purposes and principles of the Charter.

As mentioned by Mr. Daeie, this year marks the
fortieth anniversary of the Helsinki Final Act, which laid
down principles to guide relations among participating
States. Those principles, which include sovereign
equality, refraining from the threat or use of force,
the inviolability of frontiers, the peaceful settlement
of disputes, non-intervention in internal matters and
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
remain as relevant today as they were 40 years ago.
In upholding the aforementioned principles, which
provide the basic tenets for the work of the OSCE, we
welcome the efforts made by the Serbian chairmanship
to focus on dialogue and compromise, the peaceful
resolution of disputes, confidence-building, solidarity,
responsibility and cooperation. We also believe that the
motto of the Serbian chairship - "Rebuilding trust and
confidence in order to create a positive agenda for the
future" * is very timely, in view of the divisions and
numerous challenges facing the region today.

Three weeks ago, the Munich Security Conference
honoured the OSCE with an award for its outstanding
contribution to peace, stability and security in Europe,
and particularly for its efforts regarding the Special
Monitoring Mission in Ukraine, as well as its diplomatic
attempts to end the crisis there. We congratulate it
on a well-deserved award, especially in View of the
dangerous situation on the ground in eastern Ukraine.
Malaysia would also like to take this opportunity to
express its sincere gratitude to the OSCE for facilitating
the recovery and investigation efforts related to the
downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 in eastern
Ukraine. Last year, with OSCE assistance, the Dutch-
led recovery and investigation teams managed to get
access to the site, despite the ongoing fighting, in order
to recover the wreckage and the remains and belongings
of the victims.

We reiterate our commitment to a peaceful resolution
of the conflict in Ukraine, based on the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, including respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
We fully support the role of the OSCE in Ukraine, now
even more visible with the signing on 12 February of
a package of measures for implementing the Minsk
agreements that tasks the OSCE with monitoring and
verifying compliance with the agreements. We are very
concerned about the fact that the OSCE has been denied
entry into some conflict areas in eastern Ukraine.
We strongly urge all relevant parties to abide by the
obligations laid down in the Minsk agreements and
endorsed by the Council, and to cooperate fully with
the OSCE in order to enable it to carry out its mandate.

We take note of the fact that the Western Balkans is
a key priority for the Serbian chairmanship ofthe OSCE.
We fully support the OSCE's continued presence in
the Western Balkans, including its missions in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Kosovo, in support of the post-
conflict transition processes. By building institutions
and promoting reconciliation, the OSCE has been vital
to enabling the countries of the Western Balkans to
make progress with their political, judicial, electoral,
economic and social reforms.

Concerning various protracted conflicts, including
those in Central Asia, the Southern Caucasus and
Moldova, we hope that the Serbian chairship's focus
on dialogue and mediation will provide a new impetus
for resolving the conflicts that is consistent with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter
and various United Nations resolutions, as well as the
Helsinki Final Act.

We fully agree on the urgent need to combat
terrorism, extremism and radicalization as one of the
OSCE's key priorities. We also welcome the statement
made by Mr. Daeie at the special meeting of the OSCE
Permanent Council in Vienna on 15 January, in which he
said that our societies should remain united in the face
of attempts to create divisions on the basis of religion.
At the same meeting, he also called on Governments
to take the necessary measures not only to counter
terrorism and provide their citizens with security, but
also to foster tolerance and non-discrimination in their
societies.

Malaysia hopes that the Serbian chairmanship of
the OSCE will further intensify its efforts to combat
all forms of racism, xenophobia and discrimination,
including Islamophobia. Malaysia has long called for the
voices of moderation to unite and prevail against those
espousing hatred, violence and extremism. We reaffirm
our strong and unequivocal condemnation of all violent
acts, methods and practices of individuals or groups
against innocent civilians, with the intent to create fear
and terror for religious, political or ideological reasons.
We strongly believe that terrorism must be addressed
in a comprehensive manner and not necessarily through
the use of force alone. Countering it effectively requires
a multifaceted approach that addresses the underlying
factors that breed terrorism and extremism. In that
regard, we stand ready to support the work of the OSCE
in combating terrorism and extremism.

In conclusion, we wish Serbia success with its
chairship for 2015. As an outsider, since Malaysia
is not a member of the OSCE, we have observed that
the organization has played a rather quiet, behind-
the-scenes role in resolving conflicts and contributing
to peace, stability and security in Europe. However, that
approach has proved effective time and again, since it
builds trust and confidence, whether by engaging with
stakeholders, mediating between conflicting parties
or building institutions in post-conflict societies. We
greatly appreciate the OSCE'S valuable contribution
to the maintenance of peace and security and its close
and complementary relations with the United Nations.
We would like to assure the OSCE of our continued
commitment to supporting its efforts under its Serbian
chairship for 2015.

