Mr. Malok (South Sudan): First, let me express my
deepest condolences to the delegation of the Russian
Federation for its loss.

I congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency for this month. I would also like to
acknowledge the successful tenure of your predecessor
and the positive role he played in leading the Council
last month.

Let me also thank the Secretary-General and
Mr. Stephen O'Brien, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for their kind briefings.

The Government of South Sudan has demonstrated
political will by expressing its commitment to fully
implementing the Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. There is
not much more to be said other than to reiterate some
important points.

Recently the Government of South Sudan agreed and
accepted the deployment of Regional Protection Force
(RPF) without conditions. If there is any failure or delay
in the deployment of the Regional Protection Force, it
is not on the part of South Sudan. The Department of
Peacekeeping Operations has not informed us of any
failure on the part of the Government of South Sudan.
We have allocated land for the RPF, concerning which
we have communited officially to the Security Council
through the monthly presidency.

The Government has also formed a committee
that will look into the obstruction and the complaints
lodged by the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) about any possible roadblock. From the
time the committee was established, there has been no
further report presented for us to look into.

Recently, the President of South Sudan, His
Excellency Mr. Salva Kiir Mayardit, announced a
national dialogue that will include all the stakeholders
in the country. The dialogue is the only viable means
of solving the political and socioeconomic problems
in South Sudan. Unfortunately, it was rejected by Rick
Machar.

We disagree with the characterization by Mr. Adama
Dieng, the Special Adviser ofthe Secretary-General for
the Prevention of Genocide, of the ongoing conflict in
South Sudan, which according to him could become an
outright ethnic war, perhaps verging on genocide. Such
description is a bit exaggerated and does not reflect
the reality on the ground. There have been no attempts
that we are aware of on the part of the South Sudanese
masses to turn against each other. Recently, the rebels
have resorted to killing innocent civilians because of
their ethnic background, but the Government has not
planned or launched a campaign to target specific
ethnicities or communities and has no intention
whatsoever to engage in anything of that nature.

We recognize the importance accorded to the
protection of civilians and the safeguarding of the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, but it is our
sincere hope that UNMISS will also pay due attention
to capacity-building of Government institutions,
which have crucial roles to play during the transitional
period. It should assist the activities of the South Sudan
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Commission, the National Constitutional Amendment
Committee and the National Elections Commission, and
provide technical expertise on security sector reform.
In other words, UNMISS should attach importance to
supporting the implementation of the agreement.

Some members have spoken of a lack of progress,
but I can report that there has been tremendous progress
made in the implementation of the peace process in
South Sudan. Council members did not mention that
people have been voluntarily leaving the protection
of civilians camps for their respective home regions.
Over the past two days, over 2,000 citizens have left
the protection of civilians camp in Juba to return to
Unity state, and the Government is assisting them by
providing transportation. If there had been progress,
they would not have risked their lives to go back to
their homes.

The proposed arms embargo and threats of
sanctions on all the parties engaged in the conflict in
South Sudan are unfortunately another indication of a
moral equivalency that does not distinguish between
a legitimately elected Government and an armed
rebellion intent on overthrowing the Government. To
deny the Government the necessary means to discharge
its responsibility is to fundamentally undermine
its sovereignty, which is totally unacceptable. The
imposition of sanctions would be counter-productive.

To conclude, I would like to reiterate my
Government's commitment to implementing the
agreement in letter and spirit, and emphasize the need
to encourage and support political dialogue and the
efforts of the Government of National Unity to fully
implement the peace agreement. The road to final
peace may be long and difficult, but with the support of
our partners we are optimistic that we will shall see the
light at the end of the tunnel.

