Mr. Wittig (Germany): I should like to make
some brief comments in my national capacity, first
with regard to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and secondly on the Committee
established pursuant to resolution resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities. I preface this
statement by saying that Germany aligns itself with the
statements to be delivered on behalf of the European
Union and of the group of like-minded countries.

At the most recent briefing of the three
Committee Chairs on 14 November 2011 (see S/PV.6658), I announced an industry outreach
conference in Germany in order to promote the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Six months
later, I am pleased to report that my Government,
together with the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs, successfully organized a
conference of international, regional and subregional
industry associations at Wiesbaden, Germany, from
23 to 25 April. The conference, we felt, was innovative,
useful and forward-looking. It was innovative because
never before had a conference related to resolution
1540 (2004) brought together such a variety of
different actors, in particular from the private sector.
Through over 25 participating industry associations,
interaction between the 1540 Committee and industry
in more than 100 countries - representing several
thousand private enterprises - has become a reality.

The conference was useful because it fulfilled
requirements spelled out in the Council's resolutions to
reach out to industry in the fight against the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Industry
associations expressed their willingness to disseminate
relevant practices. More awareness-raising and the
establishment of a two-way communication channel
between the Committee and the private sector are only
two of many tasks deriving from the event.

It was forward-looking, we felt, because many if
not all participants expressed their desire for a follow-
up mechanism. The Wiesbaden process will be
continued. My country stands ready to actively
contribute to a substantial follow-up in order to
facilitate the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
More specifically, the Germany Foreign Ministry
would be willing to co-host further conferences and
focused workshops on a regular basis. Germany also
counts on the commitment of partners in this regard.
I should like to make some additional remarks on
the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee. Germany attaches
the utmost importance to the implementation of the
mandate of the Ombudsperson, who is tasked with
assisting the Committee in ensuring that the right of
listed individuals to a fair, independent and effective
process is safeguarded. As Chair of the Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee, we will continue to focus on
ensuring that procedures and timelines are respected
and reasoned decisions provided. We commend the
Ombudsperson, Judge Kimberley Prost, for her
professional work and her tireless efforts.

In conclusion, regarding cooperation between the
three counter-terrorism-related Committees, Germany
shares the view that there is room for further
improvement. The degree of cooperation should be
taken to an even more ambitious level of integration,
also in view of the proposal of the Secretary-General
that Member States approve the establishment of a
United Nations counter-terrorism coordinator.
Committees and expert groups should agree on
representing each other at outreach events more
frequently. Cases in which representatives of more than
one expert group participate in the same outreach event
should be limited to well-reasoned exceptions. This
will help to save limited resources for more focused
and effective outreach activities, and to enhance the
Security Council's impact in the field of counter-
terrorism.

