Mr. Chaderton Matos (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We are pleased, Sir, to
see you presiding over the work of the Security
Council. Your country, Ghana, has been a pioneer in
the history of liberation and the consolidation of Africa
as a region of free States.

Our commitment to international social justice
and our sense of solidarity with our brothers and sisters
of West Africa prompt us to support initiatives and
programmes to enhance cooperation within the United
Nations system, not only to eliminate real or potential
causes of war but also to consolidate peace in the
region: peace that will generate freedom, growth and
justice - and Vice versa, in a virtuous circle.
Lasting peace and sustainable development are
complementary and mutually inclusive terms. In its
process of historic democratic institutional and social
change, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has
deepened and broadened its relations with Africa based
on a foreign policy that draws upon our African roots
to develop a multi-ethnic and multicultural society. For
us, rhetoric has been outpaced by events. In recent
years, President Hugo Chavez and other high
Venezuelan officials have frequently visited Africa.
Thus far, we have more than doubled the number of
Venezuelan embassies in the continent; we have
created a unit within our Ministry for Foreign Affairs,
headed by a Deputy Minister, dealing exclusively with
that friendly and fraternal continent. This ideological,
political and spiritual commitment was highlighted by
the participation of our head of State in the African
Union (AU) summit held at Bajul.

We have moved forward in applying the
principles of solidarity and complementarity through
tangible, productive actions such as the signing of
cooperation agreements with Benin, the Gambia,
Libya, Mali and the Sudan, as well through measures
in support of specific programmes in Burkina Faso,
Mauritania, Mali and Niger. We have worked with the
secretariat of the United Nations Convention to
Combat Desertification, to support the efforts of Benin,
Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Cameroon, Mali,
Mozambique, Niger, Senegal and Togo. Further
examples include our support for the programme for
woman and young people in the Sahelian region;
agreements on energy cooperation with Mali and
Senegal; and tripartite education and health projects
among Venezuela, Cuba and Africa, which are to be put
in place by the end of this year. In Venezuela, we have
established institutions such as the following: African
Friendship House, created in an area with a large
population of African descent; a regional study centre
for African historical heritage; and an educational
cooperation programme with Mali, which is open to
grant-holders from that country. That is the practical,
peaceful way in which we contribute to international
peace and security.

Extreme poverty is the greatest threat to peace.
Half of the world's population survives on less than
two dollars a day, and some 1.2 billion people live on
barely one dollar. That is both a potential and a real
source of political destabilization and social
disintegration. Hunger and the lack of health care and
education trigger violence which the most powerful
have come to meet with the ultimate response of
further violence: war.

We believe that, last year, we lost an important
opportunity to reverse those trends when we failed to
address the economic and social elements of the Goals
adopted at the Millennium Summit. The Bolivarian
Government of Venezuela is looking to the South for
new responses to old questions that we have sought to
resolve, questions imposed from the North. At present,
we are developing projects such as Televisora del Sur
(TeleSUR) to provide free and accurate information
that will show the other side of the coin, as well as
projects such as the Banco del Sur, the Universidad del
Sur and Petrosur: areas in which African nations can
work together with us.

We are focusing priority attention on education,
which is a basic tool for the liberation of peoples.
UNESCO has verified that Venezuela is now free of
illiteracy. Now, we are freer, and we want to share our
experiences.

We must support the countries of West Africa in
their democratic progress towards peace, respect for
human rights and development. That requires
continued commitment on the part of the international
community. We encounter specific problems in West
Africa, including poverty, famine, the spread of
HIV/AIDS, the role of women, the reintegration of
child soldiers and the trafficking of small arms and
light weapons. Those issues need to be addressed
together with the development of political democracy.
We support the initiatives of the New Partnership for
Africa's Development (NEPAD), launched by the
African Union in 2001, which addressed the primary
responsibilities of the peoples and Governments of
Africa in defining their economic growth and their
sustainable development.

My country hopes that the General Assembly will
be able to establish machinery, whereby nations that
make contributions to promoting the development of
African countries can present voluntary reports
concerning their achievements. Venezuela reaffirms its
concern for the well-being of our brothers and sisters,
the peoples of Africa, which will only be possible if
their most pressing needs are met in the framework of
complete freedom and the full enjoyment of human
rights.

06-46 124
At the same time, it is essential for the
international community to give all the support
requested in order to ensure that African nations have
direct control over their political and economic
processes, in keeping with the principle of the self-
determination of peoples.

The United Nations Charter was crafted in order
to ensure respect and enjoyment of such principles and
to pave the way to peace, not to allow war to prevail.

