I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing on the developments in Mali. I would also like to thank Mr. Pierre Buyoya, African Union High Representative for Mali and the Sahel, for his insightful remarks. The situation in the Sahel region, including in Mali, is highly complex in terms of both security as well as political developments. The rapidly evolving dynamic situation in the region needs our constant attention. In addition to the active presence of terrorist groups, tensions are escalating within communities. The lines between jihad terror and ethnic violence are becoming increasingly blurred. Further to the already fragile situation, the global coronavirus disease pandemic has added another layer of insecurity. Estonia appreciates the efforts of the Malian authorities and the United Nations agencies on the ground for taking immediate measures to halt the spread of the virus. Estonia is a troop-contributing country to United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), and we participate in the European Union training and capacity-building missions. We are currently doubling our contribution to counter-terrorism Operation Barkhane, and in particular to its special operations Task Force Takuba. It is therefore with great concern that we are following the negative trends in the security situation of the entire region. We commend MINUSMA for its constant efforts to support the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and implement its mandate on the protection of civilians in central Mali. We also commend MINUSMA for the support that it provided to the Malian authorities in carrying out the legislative elections. The Peace Agreement remains the basis for a political solution to the conflict in Mali. To that end, we support the leadership and efforts of the Malian Government in the implementation of the Peace Agreement. Recent efforts to re-establish the presence of the central Government in parts of central Mali are necessary and welcome. We are also encouraged by the positive steps towards the redeployment of the reconstituted units of the Malian armed forces to the north. We must take into account that progress and, at the same time, keep in mind that any local power vacuum can be used by extremist groups trying to fill it with instability. The presence of national security forces and institutions acts as a deterrent, and their role in protecting civilians is vital. Furthermore, that presence will make room for functioning State services that are urgently needed. Long-lasting peace in Mali can come about only through an inclusive political process. In that connection, the efforts to increase women's full and meaningful participation need to continue. That includes implementing the recommendations made during the high-level workshop on the participation of women in the decision- making process in January. We are encouraged by the fact that the parliamentary elections in Mali resulted in a nearly threefold increase in the elected female representatives in the National Assembly. We stress the importance of practical measures to support and facilitate women's political participation, building on the experience gained. An integral part of restoring the State presence is the fight against impunity. We need to ensure that all counter-terrorist activities are conducted with full respect for international human rights and humanitarian law. We must address all grave violations and abuses of human rights and hold all perpetrators accountable regardless of their status. The attack on two villages in Mopti region last week, which killed more than 30 civilians, requires a transparent investigation. Without accountability for crimes committed and justice for victims, community grievances will continue to erupt and perpetuate the cycle of violence. I would like to stress the critical importance of the protection of the civilian population, especially in the worsening situation in central Mali. All attacks against civilians, as well as the national and international forces, are unacceptable and must be stopped. In that regard, the Malian authorities have a main role in protecting civilians, reducing violence and restoring peaceful relations among local communities. To increase MINUSMA's ability to provide security and protect the local population, MINUSMA's adaptation plan should focus on increasing the mobility and flexibility of the Mission. MINUSMA's early-warning systems should also be strengthened in order to be better prepared for the protection of both civilians and the peacekeepers themselves. But the key to success is the responsibility and willingness of the troop- contributing countries to ensure that their troops have adequate training, equipment and capabilities specific to the operating environment in Mali. Allow me to express Estonia's full support for the work of MINUSMA, as well as the other United Nations agencies in Mali, in supporting the Government of Mali to achieve a lasting peace in the country. We share the Secretary-General's assessment that the eventual exit of the Mission needs careful planning and must not take place prematurely. Estonia fully supports the Security Council's extension of the mandate.
