The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on their behalf:

"The Security Council welcomes the continued
participation by the wider membership in the open
debate held on 20 October 2015 under the agenda
item 'Implementation of the note by the President
of the Security Council (S/2010/507)'.

"The Security Council expresses its intent to
continue to hold an annual open debate on its working
methods and affirms its commitment to continue
to keep its working methods under consideration
in its regular work, with a view to ensuring their
effective and consistent implementation.

"The Security Council recalls its commitment
to making more effective use, as appropriate,
of open meetings, and to this end expresses its
commitment to continue to take steps to improve
the focus and interactivity of its open debates. In
this regard, the Security Council welcomes joint
statements by both Security Council members and
other Member States.

"The Security Council underscores the
importance of increased coordination, cooperation
and interaction among the principal organs of the
United Nations, in particular the Security Council,
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and the Secretariat, as well as with other
relevant bodies, including the Peacebuilding
Commission and regional organizations,
including the African Union, and reaffirms that
the relationship between the principal organs of
the United Nations is mutually reinforcing and
complementary, in accordance with and with full
respect for their respective functions, authority,
powers and competencies as enshrined in the
Charter. In this regard, the Security Council takes
notes of the adoption, on 11 September 2015, by
the General Assembly, of resolution 69/321, and the
continued cooperation between the President of the
Security Council and the President of the General
Assembly.

"The Security Council appreciates the work
undertaken by the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
and requests the Informal Working Group to
continue reviewing and updating relevant notes by
the President of the Security Council, in particular
note S/2010/507, of 26 July 2010, including with a
focus on implementation.

"The Security Council takes note of the efforts
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions to enhance the
transparency of its activities, including by the
Chair providing regular briefings to interested
Member States, in consultation with its members,
and encourages the Working Group to make further
progress in this regard.

"The Security Council further appreciates
the efforts on working methods undertaken by its
other subsidiary bodies aimed at enhancing the
effectiveness and transparency of their activities,
and encourages them, as appropriate, to make
further progress."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2015/ 19.

Before I adjourn the meeting, I would like to
express my most sincere gratitude to all the members of
the Security Council for their efficient cooperation with
the presidency this month. I express my thanks for the
flexibility of all members. I think that Spain has met the
goals it set for itself at the beginning of its presidency.
I believe that, working together, we have succeeded in
moving forward on genuinely relevant and important
issues for the maintenance of international peace and
security, as well as for improving the efficiency of the
Security Council.

One could say that the presidential statement we
have just adopted is in fact the first such document the
Council has ever adopted, as the only existing precedent
is a very short presidential statement of just about one
paragraph. I think it is a good sign that we are able to
adopt texts that bind us in future to continue to work
with greater efficiency and dedication.
I would also like especially to thank the Security
Council Affairs Division (SCAD) for its ongoing
assistance and guidance to the presidency. We serve
only 30 days in the presidency; SCAD is always
there - a permanent voice and astute and effective
counsel. I also express my gratitude to the interpreters
for their dedication and patience throughout all of the
Council's meetings. And I thank all the States Members
ofthe United Nations for following our open meetings.

In addition, I would like to express my thanks to
my team at the Spanish Mission. Without them, nothing
would have been possible. They have shown boundless
enthusiasm and dedication, which nearly exhaused this
Permanent Representative in carrying out his duties.

Last but not least, I want to wish all the best to the
British Ambassador, who is not with us today 7 I am
sure because he is preparing for his presidency.

The meeting rose at 10.15 am.
