Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We wish to thank the Secretary of State for Foreign
and Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom,
Mr. Philip Hammond, for having convened a meeting
on this important issue. We would like also to thank
Ms. Susanna Malcorra for her briefing, on behalf
of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, and that of His
Special Representative for Somalia, Mr. Nicholas Kay.

We welcome the Prime Minister of the Federal
Republic of Somalia, Mr. Omar Abdirashid Ali
Sharmarke, and Mr. Tete Antonio, Permanent Observer
of the African Union.

In recent years, we have been witness to the
joint efforts undertaken by the Somali authorities,
international partners, the African Union and the United
Nations system to bring about peace and development in
Somalia. Given that the year 2016 will be a key one for
Somalia, the international community must redouble its
efforts to support that country. Political actors must also
continue to contribute to the achievement of unity and
consensus, especially in the areas of the restoration of
the rule of law, the constitutional process and political
and federal integration.

We value the indications given by Somali leaders
with regard to their intention to continue on the path
of a broad and inclusive political process. In this
regard, we hope that women will be included as active
participants at all stages of peacebuilding, as they are
powerful agents for change.

The security situation remains a source of concern.
We value the efforts of the Federal Government of
Somalia, the African Union Mission in Somalia
and other international actors in the fight against
Al-Shabaab, and we reiterate that this offensive, in
keeping with international law and human rights,
must go hand in hand with a process of stabilization
and consolidation. As we have repeatedly stressed in
the Council, terrorism cannot be overcome through
military means alone. It is vital to address the issues
of social exclusion, poverty and limited access to
education, all of which provide fertile ground for the
spread of extremism and terrorism.

We are concerned by the humanitarian situation
in Somalia and its impact on boys and girls. The
international community must respond to the regional
crisis by supporting the various humanitarian calls
made.

We welcome the adoption of resolution 2245
(2015). Given the pivotal role that the United Nations
Support Office for the African Union Mission in
Somalia has played, it was deemed necessary to adapt
its configuration to the current situation on the ground,
so that it could continue to be a relevant actor. We hope
that the United Nations Support Office in Somalia will
address and respond to the existing administrative,
coordination and structural shortcomings.
The resilience of the people of Somalia and their
desire to overcome conflict are encouraging, which is
why at this stage the international community cannot
fail them. As President Michelle Bachelet so rightly
stated in the Council last January (see S/PV.7361), peace
is a prerequisite for the protection and promotion of
fundamental rights, and social inclusion and inclusive
development are preconditions for peace.

