Mr. Ryan (Ireland): My delegation is grateful to
the Mauritian presidency for arranging today's Council
discussion on the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001).

May I join with previous speakers in saying hasta
muy pronto to our colleague and good friend,
Ambassador Jorge Navarrete of Mexico.

I also welcome the presence earlier of the
Secretary-General on this very important occasion. I
fully agree with his comment that the United Nations
system is now being used fully as an instrument to
forge a global defence against a global threat. I would
also wish to associate Ireland fully with his assertion
that there can be no trade-off between the fight against
terrorism and the protection of human rights.

Ireland agrees fully with the statement which has
just been made by the Permanent Representative of
Spain on behalf of the European Union.

The terrorist attacks of 11 September were an
assault not only against the United States but against
the entire international community and the values we
cherish. Here in the United Nations - the supreme
symbol of international cooperation and the
embodiment of international law 4 we responded
decisively and with strong determination to the attacks
of 11 September. In resolution 1373 (2001), we placed
the United Nations where it belongs: at the centre of
the international struggle to combat terrorism.

Resolution 1373 (2001) is an agenda for resolute
and systematic action in combating terrorism. It
imposes clear and explicit obligations on all States to
combat and suppress international terrorism and to
prevent its operation.

My delegation warmly commends the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee in its role of monitoring
the implementation of the resolution. We especially
thank Ambassador Greenstock, as well as the Vice-
Chairmen of the Committee, the Secretariat and the
experts appointed to advise the Committee, for their
work to date. I hope that Ambassador Greenstock will
not mind if I pay special tribute to him for his
commitment and his skill in chairing the Committee
and for his approach of openness and transparency to
the work of the Committee.

The replies received to date from Members on the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) show that
the international community is setting a firm pace in
addressing the requirements binding on all of us. Soon,
the three subcommittees established by the Committee
will start assessing these responses.

Ireland views the resolution as a shared
endeavour and, for this reason, we view as a main role
of the Committee the task of facilitating, supporting
and encouraging States in implementing it. We agree
fully that the replies of the Committee on national
reports, often seeking additional information or
clarification, should be confidential, unless, of course,
the reporting State wishes otherwise. We welcome the
openness adopted by the Committee in its procedures,
such as the practice of inviting representatives of States
to attend the subcommittee for at least part of its
consideration on individual national reports.

Ireland attaches particular importance to strong
regional cooperation in the struggle against terrorism. I
would be interested in hearing how Ambassador
Greenstock views this dimension in the context of the
implementation of the resolution.

There are two central points I would like to make
as to how Ireland views the work of the Committee in
assessing national reports and, indeed, the work of
States in implementing the resolution.
First, many of the requirements in resolution
1373 (2001) require, for many States, the putting in
place of complex legislation and administrative
frameworks. For some States, for example, in the area
of financial and banking systems, this may require
substantial technical support and assistance. Ireland
therefore strongly shares the View that the Committee
should adopt a pragmatic, reasonable and open
approach to the efforts of States in this regard.

Resolution 1377 (2001), adopted by the Council
at the ministerial level meeting in November,
emphasizes the importance of assistance programmes
and best practices in helping States meet their
obligation. Ireland welcomes the proposed directory of
assistance outlined by Ambassador Greenstock, as well
as the idea of a United Nations trust fund.

It is worth emphasizing that development
cooperation programmes have an important role to play
in this area, since building necessary administrative
structures in many least developed countries requires
support and assistance. This support must be
forthcoming. Equally, it is the case that while
supporting measures to implement the resolution,
existing development cooperation funds should not be
diminished in other areas of partnership and
cooperation.

The economic systems in many developing
countries, in large measure because of their exclusion
from the benefits of the globalized economy, need
support and assistance in putting in place more formal
financial structures. This support must be generously
given.

The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ireland,
Mr. Brian Cowen, said in his statement to the Council
on 12 November that:

"International terrorism can fester through
our own complacency if we fail to tackle
vigorously its capacity to act. We have now
finally learned the lesson, at a terrible cost. We
must also tackle the wider conditions - and there
are such conditions - that can allow terrorism to
survive and even flourish." (S/PV4413, p. 8)

A second point I would emphasize in terms of the
international struggle against terrorism is the
importance of full respect by all States, at all times, for
the full body of international law, including the
conventions on universal human rights.

Resolution 1373 (2001) is an agenda for action,
but this agenda must not ever be at the price of any
State's violating the human rights of its citizens or of
any human being.

We all understand and appreciate that the role of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee is to monitor
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

We equally owe it to ourselves to emphasize that
here in the United Nations, the implementation of this
resolution must, since it is being done in our name,
respect in every detail the wider human rights
requirements whose elaboration are a signal
achievement of this world body over many years.

This debate today is an opportunity to register the
progress we have made in a fight against the common
enemy of terrorism, a journey that will be long and
arduous. We have made a good start, but this is a
process that will go on for a long time. States will
rightly not "graduate" from the work of the Committee
or the requirements of resolution 1373 (2001), but will
instead move forward together in strengthening our
common work against terrorism for the benefit of all of
us. Ireland will strongly support this work, and we will
also strongly support the pivotal role of the United
Nations in this area. We, too, hope that agreement can
be achieved as soon as possible on a comprehensive
convention against terrorism, and we will actively
work to this end.

