Mr. Vento (Italy): Italy, speaking also as a member
of the European Union, welcomes the initiative of the
United States presidency of the Security Council, which
enlarges the notion of insecurity and of the response of the
international community by opening the agenda of this
body, with clear priority granted to the challenges arising
from the African continent, in the broader context of the
initiatives by the Secretary-General and the General
Assembly on Africa. Furthermore, the important statement
of the President of the World Bank this morning delivers
clear and authoritative confirmation of the need for an
integrated international strategy, which the present initiative
has emphasized.

Italy obviously subscribes to the statement made by
the Portuguese Presidency of the European Union.
Therefore, like a number of Permanent Representatives
from other European Union member States who have
already taken the floor, I will confine my remarks to a few
factual comments and data on the specific contribution that
Italy is planning to make for the year 2000 in the
framework of the International Partnership against
HIV/AIDS in Africa.

The Italian initiative is grounded in two specific areas
of policy: first, the experience of Italy itself as a country
which has been engaged with African countries for decades
in development cooperation and official development
assistance, specifically in fields related to health, scientific
education and the environment; and secondly, the major
flows of African immigrant workers that have moved to our
country in the last 10 years, which have enhanced our ties
with Africa.

Our integrated strategy of support for the national
efforts of African countries is based on the scientific
knowledge and therapies developed in my country through
a yearly allotment of resources amounting to about $163
million since 1993 in the field of research and related
contacts carried out by Italian institutions, academic bodies
and specialized hospitals. This cooperation strategy will
focus primarily on actions of prevention through
vaccination programmes and education and
communication campaigns in schools, workplaces and the
media; epidemiological surveillance; decreasing the rate
of maternal transmission; assistance to orphans and
families affected by HIV/AIDS; capacity-building;
personnel training; and research support.

The overall size of Italy's financial contribution to
fight the HIV/AIDS epidemic in Africa will be
approximately $20 million in the year 2000, and it will be
channelled through multilateral and bilateral programmes.
A contribution of $8 million will be provided to the
World Health Organization, in addition to the
disbursement of $2 million to the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS). Furthermore,
bilateral emergency intervention amounting to about $5.5
million will be organized in the most affected African
countries. Finally, we envisage, on a bilateral basis, about
$4 million for a specific subregional programme for the
Great Lakes area, in Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda.
Wherever possible we shall seek to involve non-
governmental organizations and local Italian communities
in order to help build and consolidate a grass-roots
approach.

We owe it to the African people affected by this
scourge to deploy every means necessary to defeat the
pandemic, without ignoring or disregarding the other
serious problems affecting the African continent in the
areas of basic needs, poverty, environment, infrastructure
and development financing, which interact with this
plight.

