Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura for his briefing, and we reiterate
our support for his continued diplomatic endeavours to
facilitate a political solution to the Syrian conflict. He
has devoted his full energy and decades of experience
and knowledge to facilitate a peaceful end to the Syrian
crisis. We are deeply grateful for his indefatigable
efforts and sense of optimism while dealing with one of
the most difficult diplomatic assignments.
Although there are still clashes in some areas, the
relative calm in Syria is encouraging. Particularly, the
implementation of the demilitarization agreement,
reached between Russia and Turkey, has averted
a possible humanitarian catastrophe in Idlib. The
sustained and full implementation ofthe Idlib agreement
is indeed vital, and we thank Russia and Turkey for their
endeavours in that regard. We note the relentless efforts
that the Special Envoy has continued to make in order
to establish the constitutional committee. In addition,
there have been international diplomatic initiatives,
including the quadrilateral summit, held in Istanbul
on 27 October, which called for establishing and early
convening of the constitutional committee in Geneva
by the end of the year. In that regard, we stress the
importance of supporting the Special Envoy to form the
committee as soon as possible, according to the Sochi
final agreement and resolution 2254 (2015). That would
be a significant step in revitalizing the Syrian-owned
and Syrian-led political process under the auspices of
the United Nations. We encourage all Syrian parties to
engage constructively with the Special Envoy. All other
Member States with influence should also support the
efforts of the Special Envoy.

The Syrian people have endured an unspeakable
tragedy over the past eight years. As there is no
military solution to the Syrian conflict, the current
situation should be seized as a window of opportunity
to reinvigorate a comprehensive political dialogue that
could support the legitimate demands and aspirations
of the Syrian people. The Council should also speak
with one voice and support the work of the Special
Envoy and his successor in facilitating progress on
the political track to resolve the Syrian crisis. We look
forward to hearing from the Special Envoy next month
and to receiving his comprehensive assessment of the
Syrian peace process and the way forward.

