Mr. Celem (Turkey): The situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina continues to occupy a very important place
in the agenda for peace and security in the Balkans and
beyond.

The developments which took place prior to the
Dayton Peace Agreement proved once again that a lack of
firm and prompt international response to aggression leads
to further aggravation of crises, causes untold human
suffering and makes it all the more difficult to find
solutions. We have witnessed this tragic development in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement therefore
constitutes a turning point in the unfolding of the events
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In this respect, we would like
to express our full support for the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
annexes thereto signed in Paris on 14 December 1995,
which constitute the key mechanism for the achievement
of a durable and just peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as for stability in the region and for reintegration of
the country at all levels. The international community has
to exert every effort to help Bosnia and Herzegovina on
this path, and also in the reconstruction efforts under way,
in order to heal the wounds of the war and to achieve
peace, security and stability in this vitally important
country of Europe.

Turkey, along with other States, is actively
participating in the implementation of both the military
and civilian aspects of the Dayton Peace Agreement. We

 

feel duty-bound to continue observing the level of
compliance of the parties with the implementation of the
Dayton Peace Agreement. Turkey strongly opposes the
selective approach adopted by the Serbian Entity with
regard to the implementation of certain provisions of the
Agreement.

For this purpose, it is essential that all the conditions
envisaged by the Dayton Peace Agreement, including the
return of refugees and displaced persons to their homes, are
put in place without delay. While we welcome the attention
given to the protection and promotion of human rights in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and to the establishment of the
new common institutions in accordance with the provisions
of the Peace Agreement, we regret the continuing
obstruction faced by the refugees and displaced persons
wishing to return to their homes. We call upon all parties,
including the relevant international organizations and
Member States, to contribute to the formation of conditions
necessary to facilitate their return.

We would like to stress the importance of the work of
the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia for the
process of reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina among
its constituent peoples. Turkey supports fully the efforts of
the International Tribunal aimed at the prosecution of
persons responsible for serious violations of international
humanitarian law committed in the territory of the former
Yugoslavia since 1991 and believes that States and parties
to the Peace Agreement must meet their obligations to
cooperate with the Tribunal. In this context, we would like
to draw the attention of the Security Council to the third
annual report of the International Tribunal, which in part
states:

"The degree of cooperation encountered has varied
remarkably among these States and Entities. The
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina has been by far
the most cooperative party: it has replied to nearly
every warrant addressed to it, explaining its inability
to execute arrest warrants in Bosnian territories
outside its control". (5/1996/665, para. 167)

In the report, it is also stated that the Republika Srpska has
failed to execute any of the scores of arrest warrants which
have been addressed to it or to explain its inability or
failure to do so.

Unfortunately, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro) has been portrayed as a party with
an almost equally dismal record of cooperation with the
Tribunal. It is important to note that, under the Dayton
Accord, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) is responsible for the Serbian Entity's
cooperation and compliance as well as its own.

Turkey welcomes the positive steps taken toward a
normalization of relations between the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We encourage the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to fulfil the
requirement of establishing diplomatic relations with
Bosnia and Herzegovina without any preconditions. We
believe that such a development will eliminate another
hurdle en route to normalization.

We also welcome the subregional arms control
agreements signed in Vienna on 26 January 1996, and in
Florence on 14 June 1996, as vital instruments in
ensuring regional stability. However, we are alarmed by
reports of non-compliance by some parties with the
provisions of these agreements. The international
community's unwavering attention to the implementation
of these instruments is also crucial for the realization of
peace, security and stability in the area.

We hope that the irregularities and violations
encountered, especially by Bosnians, at the 14 September
election will be eliminated in the future and that, with the
cooperation of all parties with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), free and fair
elections throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina can be
realized at the municipal/local level promptly.

On the reconstruction front, we are pleased to note
the positive impact of the two previous pledging
conferences held on 21 December 1995 and 13-14 April
1996 and chaired by the World Bank and the European
Union. We believe that we cannot overemphasize the
urgency of providing the pledged financial and technical
assistance to the reconstruction efforts. Economic
revitalization is essential for the process of reconciliation,
for the improvement of living conditions and for the
maintenance of durable peace both in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in the region.

Turkey also welcomes the conclusion of the meeting
of the Ministerial Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council and the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina held in Paris on 14 November 1996, in order
to define the guiding principles of the civilian
consolidation plan of the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in accordance with the Peace Agreement.

 

Lastly, Turkey welcomes the conclusion of the Peace
Implementation Conference held in London on 4 and 5
December 1996, at which the Bosnian parties and the
international community committed themselves to a detailed
action plan to implement the Peace Agreement.

In this respect, we would like to point out that lifting
of the economic sanctions should not be seen as a lack of
resolve on the part of the international community. It ought
to be seen as a goodwill gesture of the international
community in encouraging the Republika Srpska to become
a unifying element and a reliable partner of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Security Council resolution 1074 (1996), in its
operative paragraph 5, does not rule out the reimposition of
the sanctions if any party fails significantly to meet its
obligations under the Peace Agreement. This fact is also
recognized in the fifth paragraph of the guiding principles
of the civilian consolidation plan of the peace process.

The Implementation Force (IFOR), led by the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), has played a crucial
role from the time it was deployed until now in preserving
peace and order and in ensuring progress on the rough road
the peace process has been travelling on. The fragility of
the general situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina requires
that the international community move with caution and
determination in contemplating the future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

It is significant to note that IFOR has brought together
33 NATO and non-NATO countries in an unprecedented
coalition for peace, stability and political and economic
reconstruction. Although IFOR's mission has been
accomplished, an international military presence is still
required to provide the stability necessary to consolidate the
peace. As indicated in the statement of the Ministerial
Meeting of the North Atlantic Council held in Brussels two
days ago, NATO is prepared to organize and lead a
Stabilization Force (SFOR), to be authorized by a United
Nations Security Council resolution under Chapter VII of
the United Nations Charter, to take the place of IFOR.

Turkey believes that SFOR, as a successor to IFOR,
will contribute to a secure environment necessary for the
consolidation and stabilization of peace and deter or, if
necessary, halt a resumption of hostilities. The duration of
the SFOR mission is also significant to its success. Turkey
is also prepared to contribute to SFOR.

We would like to emphasize that it is very important
for the Security Council to reaffirm its full support for the
sovereignty, legal continuity and territorial integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and to call upon those who are
obstructing the peace process to comply fully with the
relevant provisions of the Dayton Peace Agreement and
its annexes, including the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

We also take this opportunity to call upon all parties
to cooperate fully with SFOR and with the International
Police Task Force.

In conclusion, this is the most appropriate time to
show that the Security Council is strongly committed to
supporting and ensuring compliance with the provisions
of the Peace Agreement and that it expects all parties to
do the same. There is no doubt in our minds that the draft
resolution before the Council will send the right and a
clear message in this respect.

