Mr. Buffin (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the President of the Security Council for
taking the initiative to organize this debate, which
allows us to address the important issue of cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union on
peace and security. I would also like to express my
gratitude for the briefings.

Belgium fully endorses the statement just made
on behalf of the European Union. I wish to add the
following remarks in my national capacity.

Today's debate is important because it is on the
African continent that cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations is the most developed.
At the same time, it is there that such cooperation is
the most necessary, in view of the numerous challenges
to peace and security that arise there. This debate is
also important because it makes it possible to recall the

added value of regional organizations in resolving and
preventing conflict thanks to their knowledge of the
terrain, the protagonists and mindsets, not to mention
their interest in promoting stability in their immediate
environment. In short, there is a complementarity
of action between the United Nations and regional
organizations that should be strengthened, in particular
in view of finding African solutions to African
problems. I should like to make the following comments
on the specific issue of cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union on peace and security.

First, in recent years we have noted the development
of a growing and varied partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union. That partnership has
resulted in very concrete results, such as the takeover
of an African Union mission by a United Nations
mission, in Mali and in the Central African Republic,
and the logistical support provided by the African
Union Mission in Somalia, to name just a two. Those
developments are encouraging insofar as they reflect
an increasing interaction and a shared vision of
peacekeeping.

Furthermore, I believe that there is another area
of operation to explore with regard to peacekeeping
technical capabilities. The Department ofField Support
has developed unequalled know-how in that area,
especially in organizational and logistical matters.
In that regard, the African Union might benefit from
a transfer of knowledge for the development of its
security architecture.

As a State member of the European Union
(EU), Belgium is, moreover, in favour of pursuing
a relationship of tripartite cooperation among the
European Union, the United Nations and the African
Union. I recall that the European Union has played
a pioneering role in the area of cooperation with
the African Union. To this day, it remains the main
financial contributor to the peacekeeping operations
of the African Union. The tried-and-tested European
Union African Peace Facility should be maintained.
For all that, the search for a lasting solution to the
issue of financing for African Union peacekeeping
operations must continue. In that regard, we welcome
the commitment undertaken by States members of the
African Union at the January 2015 Summit to shoulder
25 per cent of the cost of those operations by the end of
the decade.

In practical terms, deepening cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union that
Belgium would wish to see could advance through the
implementation of some simple and practical measures.
In terms of information exchange, for example, we
would suggest that United Nations representatives
and special envoys be regularly invited to speak
before the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union. Conversely, the various envoys and facilitators
of the African Union should also appear regularly to
express their views before the Security Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission when crisis situations
or matters of mutual interest so require. That would
promote the direct exchange of information and good
practices and more consistent analyses.

Another area in which the importance of close
cooperation between the two organizations is crucial
is support for electoral processes. Elections are an area
of activity where the African Union and the United
Nations must work together in a concerted effort of
mediation and conflict prevention. The 2007 African
Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance
could be a useful reference point in that regard.

In that regard, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo provides us with a specific situation where the
African Union is working to launch a dialogue between
the opposition and the Government in order to shape
the electoral process, and could benefit from significant
support from the United Nations. In Burundi, too, the
good understanding between the United Nations and
the African Union, via coordinated action between
their respective special envoys, is essential to support
subregional mediation. A complementary approach
could be adopted, as necessary, between the observers
of African Union, who are already deployed in the
country, and the future United Nations police mission.
Furthermore, the United Nations has mediation
expertise that can be very useful in such situations and
should be shared with the African Union.

In conclusion, Belgium welcomes the initiatives of
the African Union aimed at implementing resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. I am
thinking specifically of the appointment in January
2014 of Ms. Bineta Diop as Special Envoy for Women,
Peace and Security by the President of the African
Union Commission. I also note the launch in June 2014
of the five-year Gender, Peace and Security programme,
which was designed to increase the participation
of women in promoting peace and security, while
enhancing their protection in conflict and post-conflict
situations in Africa.

There is a complementarity of action and clear
common goals between the African Union and the
United Nations in working for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Political, operational
and logistical cooperation is possible. It is therefore our
wish that our debate today helps to lay a new milestone
on the path of strengthening the partnership between
those two organizations with a View to ending the too
many conflicts that still plague Africa and its peoples.

