The Secretary-General: Last June in this
Chamber, the members of the Political Committee for
the Implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement
met with the Security Council to discuss advancing the
peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Much has changed since last June, and in
recent weeks some things, at least, have changed for
the better.

First, the parties have been talking to each other
at the highest levels, with renewed determination to
find a peaceful solution. Secondly, the way has been
opened for the Congolese people to take part in the
governance of their country and to have a real say in
determining their future. Thirdly, a de facto cessation
of hostilities prevails throughout much of the country.

As the Council and all of the parties are aware,
however, great challenges lie ahead which require the
will to peace and the ability to implement the
commitments made.

Today the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
divided by a line of confrontation between the forces of
five foreign armies in a line that stretches from Lake
Mweru on the Zambian border to the banks of the
Ubangi river, the border with the Republic of the
Congo. I think that Council members have maps in
front of them.

For the last five weeks, calm has descended on
that line. In accordance with the plan devised by the
Joint Military Commission and approved by the
Political Committee, the opposing troops can soon
begin to withdraw from their advance positions and
take a step back from the line of confrontation. Such a
move could be the first step towards an eventual
withdrawal of all foreign forces from the territory of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Since the Lusaka Agreement was signed in July
and August 1999, this has been our common goal. In
spite of the obstacles, misunderstandings and delays
that have prevented its implementation so far, all of the
parties can take a measure of credit for the recent
progress. All of the parties remain responsible for
seeing this process to its logical, rightful and long-
awaited conclusion.

The plan for the disengagement of forces was
signed at Harare on 6 December. I have since submitted
to the Security Council a concept of operations under
which United Nations military personnel would be
deployed to monitor and verify the actions taken by the
parties in implementing the disengagement plan.

The Council is now ready to endorse that concept,
and the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and the
Secretariat have already begun to take the necessary
steps to put it into practice. Once the Council has
finished its discussions here, a date will be set to begin
the disengagement and redeployment exercise. The
troops can then start drawing back, supervised and
monitored by United Nations military observers. The
implementation date should be chosen with care - not
too late, so as not to lose the momentum already
generated, but not before all of the necessary
preparations have been put in place to ensure an
efficient and transparent operation.

These military movements will take place in a
political environment, which, however troubled and
volatile, has also shown clear signs of improvement. I
welcome the decision of President Kabila's
Government to permit the neutral facilitator, Sir
Ketumile Masire, to work with the various Congolese
parties in conducting the national dialogue. Without
broad political agreement among the Congolese people
based on a dialogue leading to free and fair elections,
no military solution can bring lasting peace and
stability to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In View of the recent positive signs in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo peace process, I
urge all those donors who have pledged to support the
work of the neutral facilitator to move quickly to fulfil
their promises. At the same time, I urge the members of
the Security Council and the wider international
community to provide financial and other support to
President Masire's important work.

Before achieving the long-term political goals,
however, we must address the humanitarian crisis that
still affects large numbers of the Congolese people. At
this point, in too many parts of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, humanitarian assistance
workers are being prevented from reaching populations
in dire need of aid. At least 2 million people in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have been driven
from their homes by the fighting. Fewer than half of
them receive humanitarian assistance. There may be as
many as 16 million people with not enough to eat.
More than half of the population lacks access to
drinkable water, and almost two-thirds cannot obtain
essential medicine.

Finally, the security of neighbouring countries not
involved in the war has been placed at risk, not least
through flows of refugees as well as armed men fleeing
the fighting. I wish to highlight the tragic fact that
civilians, especially women and children, have been the
principal victims of the fighting. Terrible crimes have
been committed against women, including rape as a
weapon of war. Children have been inducted into
armies and sent to the front. They must be given a
chance to build a better future.

The world has been waiting for the parties to this
conflict, the parties that signed the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement, to prove their determination to end the
fighting and lay the foundations for peace and
recovery. Only as they do so can the international
community and the United Nations materially assist
them. We have heard complaints about the slowness of
the United Nations to act or the small size of the forces
it plans to deploy. But the Governments that contribute
troops to United Nations peacekeeping operations are
not convinced that they should risk their soldiers' lives
in circumstances where those most responsible are not
themselves reliably committed.

We may wish it were otherwise, but these are the
facts.

That is why these meetings between the Security
Council and the Political Committee are so important.
Let us now build on the advances of the past few
weeks, the agreements that have been signed and the
careful plans that have been made. Let the parties to
the conflict show the world that they are willing and
able to keep their promises to end the shameful and
disastrous conflict and to work reliably with the
international community in laying foundations for
recovery.

In this connection, I welcome the confirmation by
President Kagame to me in a telephone conversation on
19 February of his decision to withdraw his troops
from Pweto and pull back all his forces 200 kilometres,
in accordance with the Harare disengagement and
redeployment plan.

I have instructed my Special Representative,
Mr. Morjane, and the Force Commander, General
Diallo, who are with us today, to assist in preparing
this withdrawal. I hope that this move by Rwanda will
help set the tone and lead other parties to take similar
steps towards an ultimate withdrawal of all foreign
forces from the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I am therefore pleased to note the statement
issued yesterday by the Ugandan Government that it
intends to withdraw two battalions from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. This is a further
welcome development. The parties should be given a
clear message today. Let the disengagement of forces
and the inter-Congolese dialogue begin. Draw up plans
to bring all foreign forces home from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo territory. Work with your
neighbours and with us to find innovative and creative
ways to resolve the problems of armed groups and
border security. These are the outcomes expected from
this meeting. I wish you every success in achieving
them.

