Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for your work as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), and for presenting the 90-day report of the
Committee.

Resolutions of the Security Council - an organ
that, according to the Charter of the United Nations, has
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security - are binding upon all Member
States and must be strictly implemented. Azerbaijan
attaches great importance to the work of the Committee
concerning the implementation of Security Council
measures, the objective of which we have seen in
contributing to a political and diplomatic solution to
the problem based on international law. The Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, the statute
of the International Atomic Energy Agency and the
NPT's safeguards agreement provide solid bases to that
end.

During the reporting period, the Committee
adopted its programme of work for the period from
1 July to 31 December 2013. It also continued to
receive information from Member States relating
to actions taken to implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions. It is essential that Member States
cooperate with the Committee and the Panel of Experts
by providing information about the implementation
measures.

We note that the Committee has made progress
in reviewing the recommendations contained in the
final report of the Panel of Experts, although to date
none of them has been approved by the Committee.
We also note the Panel's visits to several Member
States to discuss matters pertaining to the mandate
of the Panel, including the implementation of relevant
Security Council resolutions. It is essential that the
Panel continue its outreach activities, which play an
important role in increasing the number of national
implementation reports from Member States.

I would also like to refer to the report of the IAEA
Board of Governors of 28 August (GOV/2013/40),
which, inter alia, points out that despite 10 rounds of
talks held between the Agency and Iranian officials
with a view to reaching agreement on the structured
approach document, no concrete results were achieved
and it was not possible to begin substantive work on
resolving the outstanding issues.

It is important that the Government of the
Islamic Republic of Iran continue its efforts to build
international confidence in the exclusively peaceful
nature of its nuclear programme. It is essential to
continue dialogue and cooperation on the issues, on
which progress is urgently needed to ensure regional
stability. We look forward to the next round of talks
that is planned for 27 September in Vienna. We hope
that diplomatic efforts will help make concrete progress
and move the resolution of the problem forward.

