Mr. Laborde (spoke in French): Terrorism is a
global threat that requires a comprehensive response.
In that context, the first task for the international
community is to not tolerate impunity in any way and
to bring terrorists to justice whenever possible so that
honour and dignity can be restored to the victims. The
successful implementation of that line of action must
rely on the relevant Security Council resolutions and
the 19 universal counter-terrorism instruments.

That is why I welcome the Council's adoption
today of resolution 2322 (2016). In the framework of
its mandate and with regard to the political guidelines
provided by the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the
Executive Directorate is absolutely determined to
provide the Council, especially through the Committee
and as directed by it, all the necessary support for the
implementation of the resolution.

It must be said that international commitment is
essential, forwe continue to face acomplex, decentralized
and dynamic threat that is not limited to any region.
Our policies and methods must go beyond traditional
security measures and employ a broader perspective
based on enhanced international cooperation - not
only among Member States but also with specialized
organizations and regional organizations.
Of course, to help States bring terrorists to justice
and to maintain international cooperation on criminal
matters and on the financing of terrorism, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate is already
collaborating closely with the International Association
ofProsecutors, the Organization ofIslamic Cooperation,
the International Organization of La Francophonie, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the League of Arab States, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), to mention but a
few of those organizations. I have certainly forgotten
some. Moreover, as we clearly noted at the 1 December
special meeting of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
the Committee and its Executive Directorate have
established links of cooperation with some of the
largest players in the private sector, as well as with
key representative of civil society, in the context of
preventing and fighting the exploitation by terrorists of
information and communications technologies.

That cooperation and those agreements on mutual
legal assistance will further strengthen the capacity
of central authorities to support prosecutors and
investigators in their efforts to obtain digital data
in a timely and effective manner. Thanks to those
partnerships and the projects we develop together,
we are contributing in a very practical way to the
implementation of the standards developed by the
Security Council that enable international cooperation
on criminal matters to yield results. Rest assured,
Mr. President, that for the resolution on international
cooperation on criminal matters, which follows
the original resolution on the matter - resolution
1373 (2001) - we, along with the members of the
Council, with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and with the organizations I mentioned, will have
better communication and cooperation with a view to
bolstering efforts in that sphere.

The most striking example is Kenya - a case I will
leave to Ms. Dorcas Oduor to address more fully-where
we have proposed collaborative solutions between
police and prosecutors, and where UNODC, through
its work, has truly supported the country in the fight
against terrorism and, above all, in bringing terrorists
to justice. We have also supported the organization
by partnering on workshops of the same type, and we
will continue to do so in South and South-East Asia
and in Nigeria to promote that type of cooperation in
criminal matters. In sum, we will continue the work
we are doing in the Counter-Terrorism Committee in
everything related to joint investigations.
In that connection, I should mention an existing
regional mechanism, which represents a good practice,
and that is the Additional Protocol to the Council of
Europe Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism. It
stipulates the establishment of a network of contact
points for prosecutors that operates around the clock,
seven days a week, but also for police, with the
police aspect being piloted by INTERPOL, which is
working closely with us on that project. The Executive
Directorate of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
has contributed to that initiative from the start, by
supporting and encouraging the Council of Europe up
to the moment when the representative of the Council
of Europe, at the 1 December special meeting of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, announced that the
network was operational. We will continue that work
with other organizations, on the basis of the Security
Council resolution. We call on regional organizations
to follow that model by making them aware that we are
ready to provide any necessary advice, and now with
the support of resolution 2322 (2016).

Another good practice is the participation of many
regional or specialized organizations in the independent
assessment missions carried out by the Executive
Directorate on behalf of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, particularly INTERPOL and UNODC
in the assessment visits. It goes without saying that
Executive Directorate is ready to support INTERPOL
in the implementation of its new counter-terrorism
strategy, recently adopted and implemented, and to aid
Member States, specialized organizations and regional
organizations to enhance international cooperation
among intelligence services and police services and,
indeed, among the various services in the criminal
justice system. As you have so aptly pointed out today,
Mr. President, justice must be present. It must be in the
middle of that international cooperation and must be
one of the major players in it.

I welcome Spain's initiative today to advance this
aspect of the fight against terrorism, one which is
too often neglected but is the only way to effectively
respond to the needs of the victims and to expedite
legal proceedings, all while respecting the rights of the
individual. In that regard, the Spanish Government has
spared no time or effort in enabling us to take explicit
measures in that area.

Thanks to your action, Mr. President, and that of the
Spanish Ministry for Foreign Affairs, we have been able
to establish these procedures based on the principles of
Madrid, for which your Government should be warmly
thanked. Faced with the terrorist organizations that act
with agility, speed and flexibility by using financial
means, the Internet and social media, we can and must
meet this challenge.

As Albert Camus said in The Rebel, true generosity
towards the future consists in giving our all to
the present.

