Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting and we are grateful for the briefings given
by Mr. Fall and Mr. Allam-Mi. We welcome the work
they carry out under particularly difficult political and
security conditions.

We wish to emphasize the importance of adopting
regional and subregional approaches to addressing
shared challenges, building sustainable peace and
responding to the root causes of conflicts, and of the
role played by the regional and subregional offices of
the United Nations.

The United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA) is an example in that regard, as it
deploys good offices and coordinates and promotes
agreement among relevant stakeholders, thereby
contributing to the prevention and resolution of conflicts
and humanitarian crises affecting over 11 million people,
in addition to supporting various efforts and reforms
in the development and strengthening of institutions.
We commend the coordination and partnerships that
UNOCA has established with the African Union,
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), the Gulf of Guinea Commission and the
Economic Community of West African States.

We look forward to the holding of elections in
the five countries of Central Africa. We underscore
the importance of political stability and the broad
participation of citizens, especially women and
young people, in those elections. Promoting inclusive
and accountable institutions is essential to building
sustainable peace. However, we must express our
concern about the ongoing violence and numerous
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law observed in the subregion. UNOCA's
action should enable the international community to
closely monitor the situation and promote prevention.
We condemn and are particularly concerned about the
ongoing terrorist threat of Boko Haram in the Lake
Chad basin, including attacks on schools and the abuse
and exploitation of women and children, as well as the
actions of the so-called Lord's Resistance Army in the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

We welcome the joint strategy, under the auspices
of ECCAS, aimed at preventing and combating
terrorism, in particular measures to combat the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons and other
activities linking terrorism to organized crime. The
international community must staunchly support these
efforts. We also welcome the reform of the Council for
Peace and Security in Central Africa, and stress its
complementarity with the counter-terrorism actions of
the African Union and its coordination with the Lake
Chad Basin Commission and the United Nations system.

We must recall that the subregion is facing a severe
humanitarian crisis. Some 11 million people depend
heavily on external assistance, and millions are also
displaced by hunger and violence. The international
community must redouble its efforts to address that
vulnerable situation.

In conclusion, I would like to express Peru's
support for the extension of the mandate of UNOCA and
recognize once again the work it is doing to serve the
people of Central Africa and to maintain international
peace and security.
