I thank you, Madam Minister, for presiding over this important debate. We join others in thanking High Commissioner Michelle Bachelet, Special Representative David Shearer and Mr. Dismas Kitenge Senga for their informative briefings. Encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, regardless of race, sex, language or religion, is one among the primary purposes of the United Nations. I am inspired to acknowledge that since 1991, when the United Nations Observer Mission in El Salvador was mandated to verify compliance by the parties with a related agreement on human rights, United Nations peace operations have persistently contributed to the realization of that purpose. However, year after year, we continue to receive heart-wrenching reports of, among other things, the recruitment and use of children, widespread sexual and gender-based violence and situations that have caused a vast number of internally displaced persons with which United Nations peace missions have had to grapple. In that context, my delegation would like to stress the following points. First, on the role of host countries, it is important to reiterate that peace operations must be carried out in accordance with the basic principles of political impartiality, consent of the parties and non-use of force except in self-defence and defence of the mandate. The promotion and protection of human rights remain primary responsibilities of host countries. Therefore, peace operations should support the host countries in undertaking those responsibilities with a constructive approach based on the aforementioned principles and an awareness of the economic, social and cultural context of local societies. Secondly, as to the accuracy and relevance of information, reports and analysis become influential through the process of monitoring and making policies. Accordingly, peace missions must prepare their work based on accurate, unbiased, balanced and verifiable information. Moreover, to avoid any overlapping with the work of other United Nations agencies specialized in the promotion and protection of human rights, the scope of that information should fall within the boundary of peace operation mandates. Thirdly, with respect to areas of concentration, as can be seen in, among others, the latest reports of the Secretary-General, 2019 was a year of suffering for civilians in armed conflict. Sexual violence remains a cruel tactic of war, and record numbers of refugees and internally displaced persons have been recorded. In conflicts, vulnerable persons suffer the most. Peace operations that are so mandated should pay considerably more attention to the promotion and protection of the rights of those persons. Fourthly, concerning conduct during deployment, in the provision of services peacekeepers must be the champions of adherence to human rights. We call on mandated peace missions to strictly implement and observe United Nations strategies and guidelines to address all forms of misconduct. In that connection, we support peacekeepers being adequately prepared and given specific technical skills and substantive knowledge on the matter, both before and during deployment, in order to be well-equipped for their task. In conclusion, I would like to salute the great courage and contribution of United Nations peacekeepers who have spared no effort and made sacrifices, especially in the face of current coronavirus disease pandemic to assist host countries in navigating the long and challenging path from armed conflict and instability to peace.
