Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow us to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this open debate on the working methods of the
Security Council and for the lucid concept note that has
been circulated. We hope that this debate will renew
our commitment to making further progress in
improving the efficiency and transparency of the
Security Council.

Our delegation associates itself fully with the
statement to be made by the representative of Egypt,
who will speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, and we also support the statement to be
made by, and the proposals to be submitted by, the
group of five small nations (8-5), with which we
traditionally identify ourselves. From a national
perspective, we will make just a few brief comments.

We take this opportunity to recognize the
significant advances and improvements in some
practices and new measures, which were reflected in
the 507 note. Along those lines, the unusual detail
provided in the report of the Security Council for the
period 1 August 2010 to 31 July 2011 (A/66/2),
especially in its introduction highlighting some of that
progress, is commendable. However, we think that
there is still ample room for improvements. In that
regard, we would like to highlight some of the
practices that we feel should be improved or
implemented more consistently.

First, we attach importance to the interaction with
the broader membership through briefings, not only at
the beginning of each presidency, but also at the
conclusion thereof. It seems a very timely and useful
practice, which we see as a voluntary exercise in
accountability. We recognize, in that regard, the
initiative taken by Brazil, which has, unfortunately, not
been replicated by other members of the Council.

Secondly, we believe it is important to continue
improving the interaction between the Chairs of the
Committees and Working Groups and all Member
States. In particular, it seems necessary to us to
develop a mechanism of interaction with those member
States that will assume the chairmanships, especially
with those entering for the first time as members of the
Council, and to allow them, if not the opportunity to
express their preferences, at least the possibility of
better preparing for the role and work being assigned to
them.

Thirdly, we also consider it appropriate to
emphasize the importance of the interaction between
Council members and their respective regional groups.

I refer specifically to our experience in the Latin
American and Caribbean Group, where we consistently
receive a monthly report of the activities of the Council
during the course of each month. I take this
opportunity to thank the delegations of Brazil and
Colombia, which have kept us constantly informed this
year. Of course, we would like to see the reports
become more candid, especially because they are often
restricted to an account of the meetings and decisions
adopted by the Council without going into detail as to
the most interesting aspects of why one or another
action was adopted by the Council.

A fourth and final aspect that we would like to
highlight is that of the rationalization of the
programme of work. We are pleased to see the progress
in the disclosure of the programme of work and its
availability. However, we consider it possible to
improve on the Council's allocation of time to its
routine work, allowing greater availability for conflict
prevention and resolution. Along those lines, the
rationalization of the Council's agenda is also still a
work in progress; despite the progress made in
establishing a procedure for the elimination of items,
there have been few concrete results.

