Mr. Al-Dosari (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
My delegation would like to express its appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report; to the
International Mediation Committee, under the chairmanship
of President El Hadj Omar Bongo of Gabon; to the
Chairman and members of the International Monitoring
Committee; to the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB); and
to the countries concerned.

We should also like to extend our gratitude to the
United Nations Development Programme and all the United
Nations agencies and programmes that are making efforts
in the Central African Republic to achieve lasting peace,
stability and national reconciliation in that country.

My delegation shares the concern expressed by the
Secretary-General, in paragraph 24 of his report, regarding
the fragility of the progress made in improving the situation
of the Central African Republic. My delegation therefore
requests the urgent implementation of all the Bangui
Agreements, which will of course require a commitment by
all the parties to their implementation.

My delegation also calls for continued support by the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), by other
specialized agencies of the United Nations and by Member
States for the Central African Republic and for security and
stability there. We reiterate how important it is to ensure
the security and political stability of the Central African
Republic.

For these reasons we shall vote in favour of the draft
resolution before the Security Council, convinced as we are
that it will support the peace process in the Central African
Republic.

It is not possible to foretell the situation that will
follow the withdrawal of the African troops, and we must
therefore give serious consideration to establishing a United
Nations peacekeeping operation in the Central African
Republic. We support this, and look forward to the report
of the Secretary-General on the details of the
establishment of such an operation, as requested in
paragraph 11 of the draft resolution before us. This would
have a positive effect and would strengthen security and
stability in the Central African Republic.

