Mr. Shin Kak-soo (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, let me join previous speakers in thanking you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
peacebuilding. Given the emerging consensus on the
proposed establishment of a Peacebuilding
Commission, the subject of today's debate is especially
timely.

The cessation of armed conflict does not always
instantly bring peace on the ground. Rather, it is only the
first step in the long, hard peacebuilding process.
Peacebuilding comprises all efforts to assist countries and
regions in their transition from war to peace,
encompassing a wide range of political, development,
humanitarian and human rights programmes and
mechanisms. In particular, peacebuilding is all the more
important in the light of the fragile and vulnerable
situation that exists following the restoration of peace, as
almost 50 per cent of armed conflicts recur within five
years of their cessation.

It is our firm conviction that conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding are so closely
interlinked that it would be more effective to pursue
them simultaneously rather than sequentially.
Concerted efforts to build durable peace in countries
and regions in a post-conflict situation are critical to
establishing the conditions for sustainable long-term
development and thus preventing the resurgence of
conflict.

My Government is pleased to note that the
Secretary-General's recommendation to create a
Peacebuilding Commission has the broad support of
the general membership of the United Nations. This
innovative proposal would fill an institutional gap
within the United Nations system, allowing the
Organization to provide coordinated assistance to post-
conflict societies, which must traverse the difficult and
often treacherous path from violent conflict to
sustainable peace and economic development.

Member States have discussed the major issues
with respect to a Peacebuilding Commission at great
length, including its mandate, reporting structure,
composition and funding. Reaffirming our strong
commitment to the creation of a Peacebuilding
Commission, I would like to take this opportunity to
focus on two outstanding issues: its reporting structure
and composition.

Post-conflict peacebuilding will require close
coordination and collaboration between the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council. Indeed,
owing to the mixed nature of peacebuilding functions,
it is difficult to make a clear delineation between the
mandates of the two organs. Furthermore,
peacebuilding efforts do not always unfold in a linear,
step-by-step fashion; the simultaneous involvement of
both the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council is thus required. Hence, it is imperative to
ensure close coordination between those two principal
organs throughout the whole process of peacebuilding.
Another important consideration is that the
expertise of the Economic and Social Council in the
social and economic arenas should be deployed at an
early stage of the peacebuilding process in order to
optimize the outcome of peacebuilding efforts in the
long-term perspective. In its reporting, a Peacebuilding
Commission should make recommendations, taking
into account the medium- and long-term development
needs of the countries in transition.

Regarding the composition of a Peacebuilding
Commission, we have proposed one possible model,
which includes two permanent and three non-permanent
members of the Security Council and six members of the
Economic and Social Council, ensuring an adequate
balance between the two bodies. It is also crucial that a
Peacebuilding Commission establish close links with two
important stakeholders, the funds and programmes of the
United Nations and the Bretton Woods institutions and
regional development banks, by allowing for their
representatives' participation as observers in its
deliberations.

The Republic of Korea attaches great importance
to peacebuilding as a vital instrument of the United
Nations in the maintenance of international peace and
security. We note with satisfaction that peacebuilding
has now become an ongoing mainstream activity
integrated into the Secretariat's daily operations, with
10 peacebuilding missions currently in the field.

Let me conclude with the hope that with the
establishment of a Peacebuilding Commission at an
early date, the United Nations will become more
efficient and effective in its comprehensive efforts to
promote peacebuilding.

