Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Le Roy for his
presence at today's meeting. I have listened attentively
to the statements made by the four Force Commanders
of United Nations peacekeeping operations. I wish to
express my warm welcome to all the Force
Commanders present here at today's meeting. They are
working under extreme difficulties all across the world,
implementing the Council's mandates and making
contributions to world peace and security. The Chinese
delegation pays tribute to them and to all peacekeepers
all across the world.

For over 60 years United Nations peacekeeping
operations have been making great contributions to
maintaining world peace and security. In recent years,
with the changing environment, peacekeeping
operations are also faced with a series of new
challenges.

I do not have questions to raise at this time, but I
have listened to the statements of the Force
Commanders, and I want to make some comments on
principle. I wish to emphasize the following four
points.
First, we must strengthen coordination between
peacekeeping and peacemaking. As important as
peacekeeping is, it is not a panacea. To establish lasting
peace, the key is to promote political dialogue and
reconciliation. The Secretary-General and his Special
Representatives can play a greater role in this regard in
mediation.

Secondly, it is important to strengthen
coordination and coherence between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. The parties concerned should pay
attention to and tackle the root causes of conflicts, in
particular economic and social development. A holistic
approach must be taken in considering the relationship
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and the
division of labour between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding must be clearly defined. Timely
formulation and gradual improvement of an exit
strategy are very important.

Thirdly, we must effectively implement the
mandate to protect civilians. The host countries must
bear primary responsibility for protecting civilians.
Peacekeeping operations, while implementing the
mandate of protecting civilians, should abide strictly
by the Council's resolutions and follow the principle of
impartiality, so as not to become a party to the conflict.
At the same time, they should respect the sovereignty
of the host country, so as to do more to promote
political and national reconciliation.

Fourthly, we must also strengthen the capacity-
building function of peacekeeping operations. We hope
that the countries with the resources and the technical
capacity to do so will increase their input so as to
provide the necessary resources and technical
guarantees for peacekeeping operations. We support
United Nations efforts to improve the speed and
efficiency of deployment of peacekeeping operations
and make them more targeted and flexible and to
strengthen coordination and partnership with host
countries and regional organizations.
