Ms. Lee (Singapore): Today's debate is timely. It
has been 15 months since the Council last reviewed the
developments in the situation between Iraq and Kuwait
in this Chamber. The Security Council is also presently
engaged in discussions on new arrangements to
facilitate the flow of goods and commodities into Iraq
and other types of economic cooperation with Iraq in
the civilian sectors.

Security Council resolution 661 (1990) was
adopted 11 years ago. The impact of its measures has
been too broad in Iraq. The innocent people of Iraq
have borne the heaviest burdens of Iraq's continued
economic isolation, while the Government continues to
defy Security Council resolutions and has succeeded in
recasting its international image from a belligerent to a
victim. Furthermore, after more than a decade, Kuwait
continues to be deprived of the sense of closure on this
issue that the return of key Kuwaiti property and
Kuwaiti nationals and their families seized by Iraq
could bring.

The oil-for-food programme, which the Council
enacted in 1996 to bring need relief to the Iraqi
population without compromising the objectives of
resolution 687 (1991), has evolved over the years. It
has contributed to improvements in key economic and
infrastructure sectors in Iraq, such as the oil industry,
electricity, agriculture, water and sanitation, education,
housing, transportation and telecommunications, But,
rightly or wrongly, the growing perception is that the
programme has not done enough to help ordinary Iraqis
and has not been effectively implemented. Many have
argued that the programme has not made much of a
dent in arresting the deterioration of the Iraqi economy
and alleviating the humanitarian situation in Iraq.

In the meantime, the unchecked smuggling of
Iraqi oil through Iraq's borders and the levying of
illegal oil surcharges by the Government of Iraq have
generated substantial revenues for the Government
outside of the escrow account. This has further
conspired to undermine the credibility of the United
Nations policy in Iraq. The erosion of support for the
programme and United Nations sanctions is also
fuelled in part by the existence of sharp differences
within the Security Council on this issue. As a result,
we have witnessed challenges to the United Nations
Iraq policy in the last several years. We agree with
Ambassador Lavrov, who pointed out at the beginning
of today's debate - as did subsequent speakers - that
the status quo is unacceptable.

Against this backdrop, the unanimous adoption of
Security Council resolution 1352 (2001) on 1 June
2001 assumes great significance. It signals the
intention of the Security Council to adopt and
implement new arrangements that would modify the
Iraq programme in a significant way. The proposed
new arrangements will free the flow of legitimate
civilian goods and commodities to Iraq, which will
significantly improve the welfare of the Iraqi people.
Only exports of items on a limited list of goods that
would compromise items expressly prohibited under
previous resolutions and other items that could be
deployed in ways that are inconsistent with resolution
687 (1991) would be subject to review by the 661
sanctions committee.

The new arrangements will also address in a
pragmatic way the problems of cross-border smuggling
and oil surcharges, as well as clarify a few long-
standing issues arising from the implementation of the
sanctions policy, including arrangements that would
authorize the return of Iraqi civilian aircraft and
remove common restrictions on civilian flights to Iraq.
Iraq's neighbouring States have expressed their
concern over the implications of the proposed new
approach on their economic well-being.

We support efforts to consult them and obtain
their cooperation. We are confident that arrangements
can be worked out that would adequately take into
account their special needs and circumstances within
the framework of existing Security Council resolutions.
We would like to emphasize the point made by
Ambassador Cunningham that the Council does not
seek to impose any arrangements on the neighbouring
countries of Iraq against their will.

We have a unique opportunity to make substantial
improvements in the Iraq humanitarian programme and
more generally in the United Nations sanctions policy
in Iraq. For this to take place, it is important that the
international community, and the Security Council in
particular, unite behind such efforts. There remain
many outstanding issues in current efforts to develop
the new arrangements, including the contents of the
goods review list and provisions relating to the
arrangement with the neighbouring countries and the
scope of economic activities that should be permitted
under the new arrangements. Ambassador Levitte has
earlier eloquently listed these issues.

We should bear in mind that the Council is
embarked on a project to refocus its sanctions policy
with respect to Iraq that requires striking a delicate
balance between two objectives. They are increasing
the effectiveness of sanctions to compel Iraq to comply
with all relevant resolutions, on one hand, and ensuring
that the measures will not impose unduly onerous
burdens on the Iraqi population and the neighbouring
countries, on the other.

Complications are therefore quite natural. But if
the discussions in the Council are conducted in good
faith, and in a genuine spirit of cooperation, we should
be able to resolve outstanding differences within the
time-frame envisaged in resolution 1352 (2001). That
is what is expected of the Council. We may never
resolve the different views we have on the cause and
effect of the humanitarian situation in Iraq. Neither will
we agree completely on how far the Council should go
to dismantle aspects of the sanctions policy to achieve
the humanitarian objectives without weakening our
leverage to get Iraq to comply with all Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 667 (1990)
and 1284 (1999). But we should see such efforts as part
of a process.

This is not the first time that the Council has
reviewed the implementation of the Iraq programme.
We should recall that since the adoption of resolution
986 (1995), the Council has adopted a series of follow-
up resolutions. They are resolutions 1153 (1998), 1284
(1999) and 1302 (2000). These were to expand and
improve upon the Iraq programme. The ongoing
discussions in the Council on the new arrangements are
therefore parts of that evolutionary process to focus the
impact of the sanctions, a process that began a few
years ago. But for this process to be effective and
positive the Council needs to do this incrementally and,
more importantly, together, taking into account at the
same time the views of the larger international
community.

