Mr. Plasai (Thailand): Today's meeting and some
of the points raised by today's briefers highlight the
diverse challenges across the peacekeeping realm
and point to the need for a more robust, coherent and
comprehensive approach. Determining how to improve
our approach to peacekeeping will be particularly
important for us in the immediate future in light of
the currently proposed reform of the United Nations
system. To ensure that peace is sustained, the following
elements are crucial.

First, we need a change in mindset from reactive
to proactive. The concept of sustaining peace, adopted
by the General Assembly and Security Council in
April 2016, represents a fundamental shift in how
we think about peace and how we address conflicts.
It urges us to view peacebuilding more holistically
as part of the peace continuum that spans from
conflict prevention and resolution to laying down the
foundations for sustainable peace. Achieving the goal
of sustaining peace is therefore a long-term process
and a comprehensive approach that covers the periods
before, during and after the conflict. For peace to take
root and grow in strength, efforts for sustaining peace
cannot solely depend on peace and security operations
but require an approach that ensures the well-being
of the local population, as well as maintains and
promotes their political and social rights. Therefore,
sustaining peace is both an enabler and an outcome of
sustainable development.

Secondly, sustaining peace relies on national
ownership. We believe that for any community to
achieve the goal of sustaining peace, the journey
must always be led by the people. Inclusive national
ownership is therefore a prerequisite for successful
peacebuilding and durable peace. This must begin
with genuine dialogue and inclusive participation
from the entire society in governance structures and
the economy. In particular, mandates of peacekeeping
operations must be realistic and tailored made to each
local context. Their implementation must be conducted
in a participatory manner that takes into account
national and local perspectives. This is necessary to
instil a sense of ownership in the local institutions and
population, as well as to restore their legitimacy in the
process of achieving and sustaining peace.

Advancing, in the local context, the women
and peace and security agenda is also crucial in
strengthening national ownership and moving the
international community towards the paradigm of
sustaining peace. Women's participation is politically
indispensable and necessary also for the operational
effectiveness of the whole process.

Last but not least, it is the quality of peacekeeping
operations that determines their effectiveness in
achieving the goal of sustaining peace. In this regard, I
wish to touch upon three particular aspects.

First, identifying the right types of capabilities
is crucial for delivering effective peace operations
and achieving the goal of sustaining peace. We must
ensure that peacekeepers are equipped with the exact
knowledge, skills and attitudes that are required for the
performance of their duties.

Secondly, transition towards an exit strategy must
be properly managed. For this purpose, careful mission
transition planning and post-mission United Nations
support should be in place from an early stage. It is also
important that missions' mandates are aligned with and
supportive of national priorities. This can be achieved
only by restoring what is in disrepair and needs fixing,
and by analysing, understanding and utilizing existing
mechanisms in society to build up positive resilience
and drivers of peace.

Finally, we must enhance regional and subregional
organizations' capacities, as they are essential both in
the context of our collective response to international
peace and security challenges, and in our efforts to
achieve the goal of sustaining peace in the respective
region. We must also encourage enhanced exchanges of
views and dialogue between regional and subregional
organizations and the Security Council, as well as

other United Nations bodies, in order to ensure synergy
and complementarity.

The Kingdom of Thailand's fundamental peacekeeping
philosophy is that the issues of security, human rights
and development are all linked together. We stand
ready to continue and to increase our support to United
Nations peacekeeping in a sustainable manner and
closely aligned to the sustaining peace perspective. For
these reasons, the Kingdom of Thailand appreciates
the Secretary-General's efforts in proposing and
reconceptualizing a more comprehensive approach
to preventive diplomacy and sustaining peace. We
look forward to working closely with all stakeholders
to implement these crucial concepts that we believe
are complementary to the current peace and security
architecture and the overall United Nations agenda.

Let me conclude with a simple appeal. We all need
to work better together. We need to adapt to changes and
be open-minded. We have to calibrate our ambitions to
our strengths and needs, to enhance and modernize our
capacities, and to stay relevant in order to achieve the
goal of sustaining peace more effectively.

