Mrs. Cedano (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Ms. Henrietta Fore and Ms. Mueller for their briefings. We once again address the humanitarian situation in the Syrian Arab Republic where - with great regret - we have to witness a bleak picture for so manypeople with humanitarian needs. For the Dominican Republic, what has been described by the representative of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs today and in the days preceding this meeting is a cause for deep concern, not only because of the deterioration of the situation, which is regrettable, but also because of the inability of the international community - of all of us - to stop the violence and suffering in the north-west of the country. Women and children continue to pay the highest price in this conflict at the mercy of violence for which they are not responsible but are its victims. We appreciate the efforts of the Secretary-General and the Special Envoy for Syria to get the relevant parties to recommit to the ceasefire agreements and to implement them fully. This must be the priority at the present juncture. We are resolutely accompanying these efforts because we are convinced that there is no military solution, but rather one derived from political negotiation, with a view to a future based on peace and reconciliation and respect for the fundamental rights of all Syrians. Having said that, the Dominican Republic would like to highlight a few points in the context of humanitarian assistance, which is the subject of today's meeting, and to try to be as constructive as possible. We reiterate that attacks against civilians and such civilian infrastructure as hospitals, schools and camps for displaced persons are serious violations of international humanitarian law. They are unacceptable and must stop immediately. We appreciate the efforts of both international and Syrian humanitarian organizations to meet the needs on the ground. We advocate for full funding of the humanitarian response plan for Syria, including the provisions necessary to cover the needs of the hundreds of thousands of displaced persons in the north-west, many of them housed in makeshift tents in the cold, rain and snow. But all of this must be accompanied by safe and unhindered humanitarian access, including for the United Nations. In this regard, we would like to welcome the report of the Secretary-General on modalities and alternatives for the Al-Yarubiyah crossing in the north-east of the country (S/2020/139). The Dominican Republic recognizes the enormous challenges on the ground in reaching the affected populations, and we therefore believe that this remains the best option. Even so, and given the circumstances, we understand that any decision must respond only to the level of existing needs, in the most direct manner possible and in accordance with humanitarian principles. Guarantees to facilitate a humanitarian response must precede any decision by the Council. In the absence of such guarantees, and without the direct and extended assistance of the United Nations, we believe that there is still a long way to go. We welcome the recent authorization of air and land deliveries of medical supplies to the north-east - and by land to all of Syria - as Ms. Mueller has announced. In conclusion, we reiterate the need to make further progress on - and obtain better results with regard to - the release of arbitrarily detained persons, in particular women, children, the elderly and the disabled, and to provide credible information on missing persons to their families. Family reunification reaches the deepest fibres of any society and is at the heart of building trust and reconciliation. That is why my country calls for even more progress in that area, while advocating the commitment and political will needed to advance the political process - the only credible way to bring peace to the Syrian Arab Republic.
