Ms. Pillay: On this anniversary, Ijoin the Secretary-
General in paying tribute to our fallen colleagues,
including my predecessor, High Commissioner for
Human Rights Sergio Vieira de Mello, and support the
call of the Secretary-General for greater protection of
humanitarian and human rights workers.

As we mark this day, civilians in many conflict
zones face unacceptably high levels of threat to their
lives, security and dignity. This past July was the
deadliest month in years in Iraq, as Violence killed
more than 1,000 people. In Afghanistan, in the first
half of 2013, 1,319 deaths as a result of conflict were
reported. In Syria, more than 100,000 people have been
killed since the fighting began. The number of Victims
of the ongoing violence in the Central African Republic
is still unknown, but reports give rise to concern.

I draw the attention of the Council to the important
recommendations concerning the protection of
civilians made at the recent Oslo conference, which
gathered 94 States and various organizations, including
my Office. They reiterated that all parties to a conflict
must apply and respect both international human rights
law and international humanitarian law. The protection
of civilians is necessarily norm-based.

In that respect, I welcome the adoption, by the
General Assembly, of the international Arms Trade
Treaty (ATT). I hope that the ATT will become a
powerful tool for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and the prevention of human rights Violations. I
strongly encourage States to ratify it as soon as possible.

Throughout the past year, my Office and human
rights components of peace operations and political
missions have continued to work in key country
situations on the Council's agenda to improve respect
for international human rights and humanitarian law.

In coordination with the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic,
we are closely monitoring the situation in that
country. Recently, I dispatched a fact-finding mission
to collect information on human rights Violations,
and I am working to increase the number of human
rights officers on the ground. I appeal to the Council
to urgently authorize the deployment to the Central
African Republic of a large multinational force with
a strong protection mandate, as stressed by Assistant
Secretary-General Simonovic' in his 14 August briefing
to the Council (see S/PV.7017).

In Mali, 25 human rights officers have been deployed
within the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission, to monitor, investigate and
report on compliance with international human rights
and humanitarian law. Human rights mobile teams
have been dispatched to critical areas to document
and analyse patterns of violence and to advise on
action to prevent further violations. The human rights
component is also playing an essential role in devising
the Mission's strategy for the protection of civilians.

I am deeply concerned about the recent resumption
of Violence in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo. The Office ofthe United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights within the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo reported that the
latest fighting between the Mouvement du 23 mars and
the Forces armees de la Republique democratique du
Congo resulted in at least 200 cases of sexual Violence,
as well as many other gross human rights violations.
The Office has increased field Visits and advised on
mission strategies to protect civilians.

United Nations Deputy High Commissioner for
Human Rights Flavia Pansieri will visit the Democratic
Republic of the Congo next week.

As regularly demonstrated, undertaking monitoring,
causality checking, analysis and reporting of violations
of international human rights and humanitarian law is
critical for informing appropriate responses. In that
regard, I welcome both the increasing use by United
Nations bodies of international commissions of inquiry
and fact-finding missions to investigate violation
in conflict situations and the Council's developing
practice of referring to their findings.

Currently, my Office is supporting the international
commissions on the Syrian Arab Republic and the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. As part of our
active monitoring and documenting of violations in
conflict situations and making information available to
the Security Council and beyond, earlier this year my
Office published the shocking results ofa study into the
number of individuals killed in the conflict in Syria.

Providing humanitarian access and ensuring
accountability for violations of international human
rights and humanitarian law are obligations grounded in
international law. They are not only morally imperative
but also legal requirements. That was clearly recalled
in the report of the Secretary-General's internal review
panel on the United Nations action in Sri Lanka.
States Members and the United Nations should make
conserted efforts to ensure that the protection of
civilians integrates, in a complimentary and mutually
reinforcing manner, humanitarian access and full
respect for the norms of international human rights,
humanitarian and refugee laws.

In a recent joint statement, Under-Secretary-
General Valerie Amos and I urged all parties to the
conflict in Syria to allow humanitarian organizations
safe access to all people in need. Today I renew my call
to the Syrian Government to grant representatives from
my Office and the Commission of Inquiry on Syria full
access to the country.

Following the recent upsurge in inter-communal
Violence between rival Nuer and Murle tribes in South
Sudan's Jonglei state, thousands of civilians fled to the
bush, where their access to humanitarian aassistance
has been extremely limited. The authorities need to
redouble efforts to create a secure environment that
would allow civilians to return to their towns and
Villages.

I welcome the resumption of direct peace talks
between Israel and Palestine. That process can only
achieve a tangible result if the protection of the human
rights of all Palestinians and Israelis is placed at its
centre. Ensuring accountability for all human rights
and humanitarian law violations is essential in that
regard. The illegal blockade of the Gaza Strip imposing
restrictions on the enjoyment of fundamental rights
must be lifted. The freedom of movement throughout
the occupied Palestinian territory should be ensured.

I am also seriously concerned about the ongoing
prevalance of impunity, which undermines the fabric
of societies and is detrimental to any lasting solution to
instability. States must adopt the necessary measures for
combating impunity, in compliance with international
standards. In that respect, I welcome consideration
given in Guinea-Bissau for the establishment of an
international commission of inquiry to investigate
crimes of political violence and other serious crimes,
as well as gross violations of human rights committed
since March 2009.

It is also of the utmost importance for perpetrators
to be held fully accountable for Violations committed
in the Central African Republic. I welcome the recent
statement by the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court that her office will, if necessary,
investigate and prosecute those most responsible for
committing serious crimes there. That has followed the
mission of Mr. Ivan Simonovie to the country, during
which he discussed with national authorities ways to
tackle the ongoing impunity.

With regard to Syria, 1 reiterate my call for
the Security Council to refer the situation to the
International Criminal Court. A referral would serve
to make it clear to all actors that they will be held to
account for their failure to abide by international human
rights and humanitarian law. It is my hope that it will
also contribute to preventing further violations.

I also remain seriously concerned about the human
rights implications for the protection of civilians of
armed drone strikes carried out in the context of counter-
terrorism and military operations, including in Pakistan,
Yemen and Gaza. The current lack of transparency
surrounding their use creates an accountability vacuum
and affects the ability of victims to seek redress. I urge
the relevant States to clarify the legal basis for such
strikes as well as the safeguards in place to ensure
compliance with applicable international law.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the
protection of civilians is critically linked to the
protection of all human rights. As the tragic events
unfolding over the past few weeks in Egypt have
shown so clearly, a failure to ensure respect for all
human rights, including those aimed at ensuring vital
democratic space, can culminate in bloody violence
and the loss of lives. The response should equally be
based on international law, including human rights.
Otherwise, such failures are likely to have long-lasting
and far-reaching consequences.

