Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Special
Representative Leila Zerrougui, UNICEF and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations for their
indispensable efforts. I also thank Forest Whitaker,
UNESCO Special Envoy for Peace and Reconciliation.
We are all in debt to his commitment and empathy. We
welcome, as always, the presence of Foreign Minister
Asselborn. Luxembourg's leadership of the Working
Group on what is - but should never be - a politically
challenging issue has been exemplary. I also thank
Sandra Uwiringiyimana. We are so fortunate that that
young soldier let her go. The Council needs to hear such
direct testimony, and we hope that others with Sandra's
courage will continue to help keep the Council focused
on why what we try to do here can mean so much to so
many and why the cost of her own failures, whenever
they occur, can be so high.

You have asked us to be brief, Madam President, so
I will not repeated the details of the situation that has
been outlined to us this morning. We all know that the
situation of children in conflict throughout the world
is dire and that children continue to suffer each of the
six grave violations. There has been some progress, as
people have noted, including the delisting of Chadian
forces, the Somali Government's recommitment to
making its army child-free, Yemen's action plan
issued in May, Afghanistan's endorsement, finally,
of a road map to implement its action plan, the recent
commitment of the Free Syrian Army to end child
recruitment and, in Australia's own region, Myanmar's
continuing release of many child soldiers. Despite that
progress, important though it is, much more must still
be done, as has been indicated. I shall briefly highlight
three key concerns.

First, the Children, Not Soldiers campaign will be
instrumental. But we must also maintain our efforts to
end recruitment and other grave violations by non- State
actors, who make up the vast majority of listed parties.
For example, we have seen good progress in the
Philippines over recent months in the implementation
of the action plan between the United Nations and
the Moro Islamic Liberation Front - the only action
plan currently in place with a non-State actor. My own
country will continue to support UNICEF's efforts to
help the Front implement the plan.

Secondly, we need to do more to protect schools,
teachers and students during conflict. Attacks on
schools and their military use are depriving children of
their basic right to schooling and endangering the lives
and safety of students and teachers. Military forces
and non-State armed groups have turned schools into
barracks, detention facilities, torture centres and firing
positions - not play grounds but battle grounds, as has
ben noted. Schools are also being used as shelters. An
estimated half of the schools in the Kurdistan region of
Iraq are being used to house displaced populations. We
must ensure, urgently, that schools remain safe places
for students and their teachers, before generations of
children lose access to an education.

Finally, there is much more that we can do to end
impunity for those responsible for violations against
children during armed conflict. We strongly support
the active efforts of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) to end impunity through the investigation and
prosecution of violations against children, which include
the recent confirmation of charges against Congolese
ex-militia leader Bosco Ntaganda for enlisting and
conscripting children. The ICC's prominent focus on
crimes committed against children will be important in
deterring violations in future conflicts and situations of
armed violence.

We also support efforts to address perpetrators of
violations against children through targeted Security
Council sanctions. Resolution 2134 (2014) establishes
targetted sanctions and designates those in the Central
African Republic responsible for recruiting or using
children in armed conflic and those who attack schools
and hospitals. That demonstrates the role that sanctions
can play in denying perpetrators the means to continue
violating child rights during conflict and sends a strong
message that they will be held to account. We encourage
Ms. Zerrougi to continue to brief the relevant Sanctions
Committees to strengthen the effectiveness of those
measures.

In conclusion, as we know only too well, the
intensity of the conflicts that the world faces is currently
dangerously increasing, as is the level of violence
deliberately targeting civilians. As Ms. Zerrougi has
just reminded us,

"in a large majority of conflicts throughout the
world, children are targeted and used deliberately.
Conflict confronts them in their homes, at school,
in hospitals and when they seek to run away."

Protection for those children is an intrinsic element of
the Council's work. We have the tools, the mechanisms
and the legal framework. But, demonstrably, we have to
do much more to ensure that they are put to better use.
Again, as Ms. Zerrougi condluded, the child victims
around the world count on us.

