Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I wish to thank Mr. Kai
Eide, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan and head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his
comprehensive, down-to-earth and compelling briefing
on the situation in Afghanistan.

It will be recalled that during his last briefing to
Council, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General outlined key benchmarks which he hoped
UNAMA would meet in six months. These included
specific criteria to measure aid effectiveness,
strengthening the Government's mechanisms for
combating corruption, determining the kind of police
force required, designing an agricultural reform
programme and improving the Pakistan-Afghanistan
relationship.

We would like to commend UNAMA for its
important role in promoting peace and stability in
Afghanistan. UNAMA has spearheaded the efforts of
the international community, in conjunction with the
Government of Afghanistan, in rebuilding the country
and strengthening the foundations of peace and
constitutional democracy. We know it is not an easy
task that UNAMA has, but the Special Representative
and his staff should be commended for pressing on
with the implementation of UNAMA's mandate.

We have noted in the report before us
(S/2009/135) the serious challenges in Afghanistan, but
there has also been some progress. We commend the
Government and people of Afghanistan and the
international community for their tireless efforts.

We welcome the upcoming elections that have
shaped and dominated the political landscape in the
country. We note the decision of the Independent
Electoral Commission to extend presidential elections
to 20 August 2009, and we note that this may continue
to elicit mixed reactions. Uganda encourages a smooth
and transparent electoral process, which we believe is a
cornerstone of long-term stability. As the country

prepares for the August presidential and parliamentary
elections, every effort must be made to ensure that
calm and stability prevail in Afghanistan.
Reconciliation among Afghans of all shades of opinion
should be seen to be an important component of an
inclusive political process beyond elections.

We are concerned by the serious security
situation in Afghanistan today. The security situation
has continued to deteriorate, with the civilian
population bearing the brunt of the causalities. Security
remains key to progress in all areas of Afghanistan. We
welcome the integrated approach that is being put in
place by the international community and the
Government of Afghanistan to ensure a more coherent
and effective use of civilian and military resources.
More efforts have to be made to protect the civilian
population from attacks.

We also believe that, at the regional level, the
Government of Afghanistan, with the support of the
international community, should find a way to involve
regional stakeholders in a comprehensive regional
security strategy. We therefore welcome the joint
declaration on bilateral cooperation, signed in January
with Pakistan, as a significant step forward.

It is necessary for the rule of law to be
sufficiently institutionalized in order to ensure long-
term peace and stability in Afghanistan. We urge the
Government to effectively address those issues which
are undermining the legitimacy of Afghan law
enforcement and judicial institutions, but which also
erode people's confidence in Government and public
institutions. The Government will require increased
support from the international community in
institution-building, rather than pushing quick fixes.
We welcome the report that the drug eradication
campaign, conducted by the Government with support
from the international community, has yielded some
positive results. However, with poverty still
overwhelming, any long-term solution would, among
other things, have to address alternative sources of
income for those who, driven by poverty, indulge in the
drug trade.

The briefing has shown that Afghanistan still
faces social and economic challenges that require a
holistic approach. Durable peace and stability in
Afghanistan will be achieved faster after tangible
results have been achieved in governance, rule of law,
respect for human rights and economic recovery and

development. It is therefore important that resources
are used in a coordinated and comprehensive way to
empower Afghans to bear responsibility for their
future.

Uganda urges the international community to
fully align their efforts behind the financing and
implementation of the agreed development strategies
by delivering assistance in a coordinated way and
increasingly through the national budget. We call on
the Government of Afghanistan to play its role and
make progress in strengthening institutions and
introducing accountability mechanisms to provide the
international community with the confidence to
commit more assistance to the ongoing effort.

If our joint endeavours in Afghanistan are to
succeed, it is imperative that UNAMA has the
necessary resources to fulfil its mandate. We therefore
urge the international community, and the United
Nations Member States in particular, to support
UNAMA in its efforts to rebuild Afghanistan. In this
regard, we fully support the renewal of UNAMA's
mandate.

