Mr. Sorreta (Philippines): The nature of conflict
over the decades has changed dramatically. In the First
World War, 90 per cent of the casualties were soldiers;
today, 75 per cent of the casualties are civilians.
Therefore, it is truly imperative that the Organization
be cognizant of this issue.

The report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2012/376) is
worth examining. We are glad that the report discusses
in detail the global state of affairs of the protection of
civilians.

For those of us who find many of our nationals
outside of our territory and in areas of armed conflict,
the protection of civilians is of the utmost concern. We
are very grateful to the many nations that have assisted
Filipinos in areas of conflict by protecting them and
helping to take them out of harms way. As a nation, we
will always do all that we can to protect our nationals
in areas of conflict. That is a commitment that we
diligently observe in our own country. That is why we
have undertaken a comprehensive peace process with
rebel and secessionist groups, including adopting the
necessary measures to protect civilians.

The Secretary-General's report mentions conflicts
over territories as among those that can lead to
civilian casualties. The Philippines, involved as it is,
unfortunately, in such conflicts, strongly believes that
civilians must never be hurt, regardless of the stage or
level of a territorial or maritime conflict.

Recently, a Filipino fisherman was killed and
four others remain missing in an incident in the West
Philippine Sea, also know as the South China Sea, in
an area that is subject to conflicting claims. We await
confirmation of the facts of this sad incident and will
act accordingly - of course, always in accordance with
international law.

The Secretary-General's recommendations all
point to the need for the observance of the rule of law
at the national and international levels. The rule of law
is the bedrock upon which nations build flourishing
societies and foster strong relations. The rule of law
emphasizes the protection of rights and underscores
compliance with obligations. Those are crucial in order
to exact responsible behavior from both individuals
and States. It is in that particular context that we look
forward to the holding of the high-level meeting on the
rule of law in September.

The observance of the rule of law likewise
necessitates a robust international legal framework.
The International Criminal Court deters and punishes
violations of humanitarian law. Other international
judicial bodies play a vital role in preventing and
resolving conflicts.

We likewise need to provide support for our
peacekeepers. Efforts on the ground must be
complemented by the enhancement of the civilian
aspects of peacekeeping. The Philippines notes
with interest current efforts in that area, including
CapMatch, designed to help match the supply and
demand of civilian capacities.

Civil society also has an important role to play.
The Philippines is working very closely with Benin,
Belgium and Costa Rica in bringing attention to the
contributions of civil society.

Time and again, conflicts - ideological, political,
military and even territorial - have arisen when
the rule of law was weak. We need to continue to
work as one to prevent the escalation of conflicts
by respecting the rule of law. This year, we have the
added opportunity to reaffirm our collective desire
and obligation to settle disputes peacefully with the
commemoration of the thirtieth anniversary of General
Assembly resolution 37/10, the Manila Declaration on
the Peaceful Settlement of Disputes.

Thirty years ago, we all expressed our high regard
for law and justice when faced with actual or potential
disputes. We should renew that pledge this year and
comply with our obligations to protect civilians in
armed conflict.

