The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of a large number of countries, namely,
Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh, Benin,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Chile, Egypt,
El Salvador, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Guatemala,
Honduras, India, Jamaica, Liechtenstein, Mexico, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan,
Papua New Guinea, Peru, Qatar, the Republic of
Korea, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Switzerland, Thailand and Turkey, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. I am obviously
delighted that there is such a large number of countries
that want to contribute to this debate. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I request the Protocol Officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. Nikola Spirie, Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to a seat at the
Council table.

Mr. Nikola Spirie, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, was
escorted to a seat at the Council table.

The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Nikola
Spirie, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

On behalf of the Council, I also extend a warm
welcome to Her Excellency Mrs. Zainab Hawa
Bangura, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Sierra Leone.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side ofthe Council Chamber.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Marwan Muasher,
Senior Vice-President of the World Bank; to
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, who is well known to us; and to
His Excellency Mr. Yukio Takasu, Chairman of the
Peacebuilding Commission and Permanent
Representative of Japan.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to document S/2008/291, which
contains a letter from the Permanent Representative of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland transmitting a concept paper on the item under
consideration.

Our intention in calling for this debate is to put
the international spotlight on what can be done to
ensure that stabilization and recovery efforts are more
effective, in particular in the period immediately
following a ceasefire or peace agreement. There is a
huge challenge before us, namely, to remove millions
of people from the prolonged effects of conflict, to take
away the fear that they will suffer the same horror
again and to give them the hope of sustained peace,
security and prosperity.

There are some admirable examples of the United
Nations and the international community tackling
conflict and saving lives, with bravery, intelligence,
dedication and skill. But those examples are not the
rule; in fact, sometimes they are the exception. We are
not doing enough, and we are not doing well enough.
Our concept paper offers our thoughts on the critical
gaps that hamper international efforts and I look
forward to hearing participants' perspectives in the
course of this debate.
To start, it is important that we hear the testimony
of people with direct experience of these challenges. I
look forward to Foreign Minister Bangura's
contribution. We also look forward to the contribution

of the Senior Vice President of the World Bank. And
we look forward to the contribution of Mr. Brahimi,
with his experience in Afghanistan, Iraq and other
areas, as well as with his being the author of the
landmark report on peacekeeping (8/2000/809).

But first, I would, of course, like to welcome the
presence of the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, at this meeting. He is on his way
within the next hour and a half to Bangkok and then to
Rangoon on very important business. We are very
privileged to have him here. I know he has to leave
immediately after his speech, but we are all very much
looking forward to hearing what he has to say. I give
him the floor.


