Mr. Saltanov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The problem that we are discussing today in
the context of the situation in the Middle East is one of
the most sensitive in terms of deciding the final status
of the Palestinian territories. The way in which it is
resolved will largely determine the future configuration
and solidity of peace between the Palestinians and the
Israelis. Therefore, today's discussion is useful and
timely.

Our approach is defined by the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, in particular
resolution 242 (1967), which refers to the West Bank
and the Gaza Strip as occupied territories, with all of
the ensuing international legal consequences. We
believe that the settlement activities are illegal. In
addition, the restrictions imposed on the Palestinians'
freedom of movement and the Israeli incursions into
areas administered by the Palestinian National
Authority have been major irritants in the Annapolis
negotiations and within the framework of the Road
Map.

I wish to recall the Joint Understanding
announced following the meeting in Annapolis in
November 2007, according to which:
"The parties also commit to immediately
implement their respective obligations under the
Performance-Based Road Map".

As members are aware, that document calls for the
parties to refrain from taking any action that would
determine the final status of the Palestinian territories
and for a freeze on all settlement activities, including
so-called natural population growth.

The failure to abide by those obligations has
created serious difficulties in the Israeli-Palestinian
talks. It has also negatively affected the political
situation of the Palestinian National Authority and
complicated the management of such sensitive
problems as Jerusalem. More important, it calls into
question the possibility of establishing a unique and
viable, territorially connected Palestinian State.

The complex talks currently under way are far
from being concluded. Therefore, the parties must
refrain from taking steps that create new realities on
the ground, which would hamper the reaching of an
agreement. Of course, this also applies to the
Palestinian side. The Palestinians must also fully
comply with their obligations, in particular in the area
of security. As everyone is aware, the Palestinian
leadership has achieved much, but much remains to be
done.

Right now it is important to encourage the sides,
including through the Security Council, to continue
talks to settle final status issues, including the question
of the settlements. This would help in moving towards
a comprehensive resolution of the Israeli-Arab conflict
on a generally recognized international legal basis.

That is the goal of Russia's policy in the Middle
East. We intend to actively help to advance this as a
member of the Quartet of international mediators as
well as in our national capacity.

