Mr. Niyonzima (Burundi) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the Government of Burundi, which it is my
privilege to represent here, I would like first of all to
express our gratitude for the attention and manifold
support that the Security Council has given to Burundi
and its people.

On Monday 2 July, the people of Burundi celebrated
the fiftieth anniversary of their national independence
with unprecedented joy and happiness. The fact is that
for four decades, Burundi lived under the yoke of a
dangerous and merciless military dictatorship, and any
democratic experiment ended bloodily every time, with
those elected assassinated and those who elected them
exiled to neighbouring countries in the hundreds of
thousands.

But since 2005, when the Security Council decided
to take charge of the Burundi issue, for the first time an
elected President has been able to complete his term.
Today the refugee camps are emptying out; we are in
an era of national reconciliation and reconstruction
of the country. The Government of Burundi is deeply
grateful. And when I thank the Security Council,
I do not do so in words alone. In recognition of the
international community's efforts on behalf of Burundi,
the Burundian Government, under the leadership of His
Excellency Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza, President of the
Republic, has decided to send troops to Somalia, Haiti,
Darfur and anywhere else that the Council asks it to, in
order to render to other peoples the services from which
it has itself benefited.

The Council owes its success in Burundi to the
quality of the men and women it sends there. Here, I
would like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for sending us Ms. Karin Landgren, a lady ofunequaled
brilliance, flawless integrity and extraordinary
professionalism. As Ms. Landgren is preparing to leave
Burundi, we wish her good luck in her new post and
commend her instructive efforts, advice and persistence,
which will continue to guide our determination to push
on with the struggle to achieve good governance.

I take this opportunity to congratulate the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Burundi, Ambassador Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, another
whose brilliance and human qualities are renowned
in the United Nations system and by whose presence
Burundians are honoured even before his arrival in the
country. The Government of Burundi promises to be
entirely at his disposal and to offer its full cooperation.

The Government of Burundi has made significant
progress in virtually all sectors of the socio-economic
and political life of the country. At the political and
institutional levels, we have enacted a law on the
organization and functioning of political parties;
a standing forum for dialogue has been set up; the
community administration code has been improved; a
bill regulating the opposition is before Parliament that
would promote dialogue between the opposition and
the Government, discussions on amendments to the
Constitution, the preparation of a new electoral code
and the return of exiled political leaders as we move
towards the electoral process for 2015.

Regarding good governance and the rule of law,
we can point to the national good governance and
anti-corruption strategy currently being implemented;
the holding in 2010 of elections and the institutions
that emerged from them; the effective implementation
of a zero-tolerance policy for acts of corruption and
economic fraud; the establishment and launch of
the Burundi Revenue Office; the establishment and
operationalization of an Ombudsman's office; the
establishment and launch of an independent human
rights commission; the significant representation
of women in various institutions 4 50 per cent
in the Senate, 43 per cent in the Government, and
40 per cent in the National Assembly; the publication
of a report on the national consultations regarding
the establishment of transitional judicial mechanisms;
a drop in the prison population; and a revision of
the criminal code including innovations relating to
human rights violations, particularly the abolition
of the death penalty, the elimination of amnesty and
a statute of limitations for rape, acts of torture, war
crimes, genocide and terrorism. The Government has
not forgotten the vulnerable groups. It has supervised
the return and resettlement of refugees and internally
displaced persons. Its achievements in the area of
peacebuilding are too numerous to mention.

But the remaining challenges are also numerous,
particularly the fight against extreme poverty, which
threatens to undermine our new peace. In a post-conflict
country of extreme poverty, where the private sector
is almost non-existent and the State is practically the
only employer and provider of goods and services, the
resurgence of armed conflict - driven by a thirst for
power, riding roughshod over democratic elections, and
resorting to such means as the establishment of armed
rebel groups - is a possibility that it would be naive
to rule out. It can never be overstated that a country's
peace and stability are dependent on its capacity to
enable its people to meet their basic needs.

The Government of Burundi is aware of the
situation, which is why it recently developed a strategic
framework for growth and the fight against poverty that
it will soon present at the donor conference scheduled
for 29 and 30 October in Geneva. I would like to
sincerely thank Ambassador Paul Seger, Chair of the
Burundi country configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, who understands what is at stake for peace
and stability in Burundi and has spared no effort to
convince Governments and international organizations
to help Burundi combat poverty.

Fighting poverty is the best way to prevent
armed conflict around the world. That is why the
socio-economic development of less developed
countries should be on the Security Council's agenda.
It is also why my Government is asking the Council

to involve itself resolutely and fully in ensuring the
success of the next donor round table in Geneva.

