Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month. We trust in your ability to promote the
principles of peace and harmony, and commend your
initiative to discuss the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, during Japan's
presidency. That clearly reflects your country's interest
and concern for this topic and a readiness to focus the
necessary attention to this problem. This is a subject to
which my country accords great importance owing to
our Arab and Muslim loyalties.

The situation in Palestine, and in Jerusalem in
particular, is deteriorating. We find that the international
community is being distracted by other developments.
But the importance of those developments must not
deter us from finding a solution to another important
conflict that has continued for many years, namely,
the Palestinian question, which is the pivotal issue par
excellence in the Middle East and the key to resolving
all other issues. We commend and support the French
efforts to address the situation and to find a means for
the parties to return to the negotiating table in order
to find a solution based on the two-State solution. The
Kingdom of Morocco and His Majesty the King support
the French initiative for peace in the Middle East, and
His Majesty has expressed that support more than once.
Our Minister for Foreign Affairs participated alongside
his colleagues from the Kingdom of Jordan, the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and Egypt, as a representative
of the Arab side, in the deliberations of the ministerial
conference held in Paris on 3 June. That meeting
culminated in an important communique that expresses
support for the two-State solution and underscores
the importance of returning to negotiations. Morocco
looks forward to the outcome of the French initiative
via an international conference to be held in the coming
months to revive the peace process in order to achieve
the two-State solution and an independent State for
Palestine based on the pre-1967 borders.

It is worth mentioning that, at the summit of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation hosted by Turkey
recently, His Majesty King Mohammed VI endorsed
the call by President Abbas of Palestine to convene
and international peace conference to end the Israeli
occupation. He deemed that as an essential step towards
ending the tragic and explosive situation in Palestine
and restoring hope in finding a lasting, just and
comprehensive peace, based on the two-State solution.
Morocco has taken note of the recently issued
report of the Middle East Quartet. We continue to hope
that the Quartet will live up to its role and overcome
the stagnation and the vicious cycle of Violence, which
leads youths of the region to extremism and terrorism.
We therefore call upon the Quartet to redouble its
efforts and to work with both parties and all the
relevant stakeholders to push forward the peace process
in order to achieve the two-State solution based on all
the relevant Security Council resolutions.

The Kingdom of Morocco, headed by His Majesty
King Mohammed VI, has reiterated on several
occasions the need not to Judaize Jerusalem and not
to violate the holy site of the Al-Aqsa Mosque. That
will not serve peace or regional security, but plays
into the hands of terrorists. We also reiterate that the
Arab Peace Initiative, based on the establishment of an
independent State, with East Jerusalem as its capital
and within the pre-1967 borders, is the only way to
resolve the situation.

In conclusion, we reiterate that, more than ever,
the international community must endeavour to
reinvigorate the peace process and set a clear time
frame on the basis on legally binding resolutions of the
Council. As ever, Morocco is committed to participate
actively in any initiative aimed at promoting the peace
process in order to achieve peace, security and stability
in the region and to establish a State of Palestine based
on the pre-1967 borders, living side-by-side with Israel
in peace and security. That is the only way to resolve the
Palestinian question and to achieve peace in the region.

