The Secretary-General: Thank you, Madam, for
the opportunity to address the Security Council on this
serious and timely topic. Throughout human history,
people and countries have fought over natural
resources. From livestock, watering holes and fertile
land, to trade routes, fish stocks and spices, sugar, oil,
gold and other precious commodities, war has too often
been the means to secure possession of scarce
resources. Even today, the uninterrupted supply of fuel
and minerals is a key element in geopolitical
considerations.

Things are easier in times of plenty, when all can
share in the abundance, even if to different degrees.
But when resources - whether energy, water or arable
land - are scarce, our fragile ecosystems become
strained, as do the coping mechanisms of groups and
individuals. This can lead to a breakdown of
established codes of conduct, and even to outright
conflict.

At the 2005 World Summit, Member States
renewed their commitment to promoting a culture of
prevention of armed conflict. They also pledged to
strengthen the capacity of the United Nations to that
end. The Security Council adopted resolution 1625
(2005) on conflict prevention, particularly in Africa,
and reaffirmed the need to address the root causes of
armed conflict.

In a series of reports on conflict prevention, my
predecessor, Secretary-General Kofi Annan, pointed to
the threats emanating from environmental degradation
and resource scarcity. I would like to quote from the
most recent of those reports:

"Environmental degradation has the potential to
destabilize already conflict-prone regions,
especially when compounded by inequitable
access or politicization of access to scarce
resources. I urge Member States to renew their
efforts to agree on ways that allow all of us to
live sustainably within the planet's means."
(A/60/89], para. 22)

Allow me to renew and amplify that call.
Compared to the cost of conflict and its consequences,
the cost of prevention is far lower - in financial
terms, but also, and most importantly, in terms of
human lives and quality of life.

I firmly believe that today all countries recognize
that climate change, in particular, requires a long-term
global response in line with the latest scientific
findings and compatible with economic and social
development.

According to the most recent assessments of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the
planet's warming is unequivocal and its impact is
clearly noticeable, and it is beyond doubt that human
activities have been contributing considerably to it.
Adverse effects are already being felt in many areas,
including agriculture and food security; oceans and
coastal areas; biodiversity and ecosystems; water
resources; human health; human settlements; energy,
transport and industry; and in terms of extreme weather
events.

Projected changes in the earth's climate are thus
not only an environmental concern; they can also have
serious social and economic implications. And - as
the Council points up today - issues of energy and
climate change can have implications for peace and
security. This is especially true in vulnerable regions
that face multiple stresses at the same time - pre-
existing conflict, poverty and unequal access to
resources, weak institutions, food insecurity and the
incidence of diseases such as HIV/AIDS.

Consider the following scenarios - all alarming,
though not alarmist. The adverse effects of changing
weather patterns, such as floods and droughts, and
related economic costs, including compensation for
lost land, could risk polarizing society and
marginalizing communities. That, in turn, could
weaken the institutional capacity of the State to resolve
conflict through peaceful and democratic means, to
ensure social cohesion and to safeguard human rights.

Extreme weather events and natural disasters,
such as floods and drought, increase the risk of
humanitarian emergencies and, thus, the risk of
instability and dislocation.

Migration driven by factors such as climate
change could deepen tensions and conflicts,
particularly in regions with large numbers of internally
displaced persons and refugees.

Scarcity of resources, especially water and food,
could help transform peaceful competition into
violence. Limited or threatened access to energy is
already known to be a powerful driver of conflict; our
changing planet risks making it more so. And, of
course, the economic costs and losses of all of those
scenarios would impede the ability of countries to
reach the Millennium Development Goals.

Those are, of course, only possible scenarios. But
we cannot sit back and watch to see whether they turn
into reality. The entire multilateral machinery needs to
come together to prevent that from happening.
We must focus more clearly on the benefits of
early action. The resources of civil society and the
private sector must be brought in. And the Council has
a role to play in working with other competent
intergovernmental bodies to address the possible root
causes of conflict discussed today.

The Secretariat stands ready to assist all entities
engaged in the pursuit of their respective mandates. I
personally look forward to engaging with Member
States on these issues and hope that, through
discussions in various forums, we can develop a broad
consensus on the way forward.

