Mr. Keating: Much has happened since the Council
visited Mogadishu on 19 May. Let me begin straight
away with what is no doubt for all of us the immediate
concern - the electoral process - before I turn to
related developments in Somalia.

About 24 hours ago, the Federal Indirect Electoral
Implementation Team (FIEIT) announced that Somalia's
electoral process would require an additional 30 days,
culminating in the election of a new President of the
Federal Republic by the end of November. The renewed
delay raises a number of fears. Let me name just two:
first, that the process is being politically manipulated,
and secondly, that this delay may only be one of yet
further rolling delays.

The scope for political manipulation of the process
remains high, but having closely accompanied the work
of the FIEIT and its regional counterparts, the state-level
indirect electoral implementation teams, I believe that
this further delay was not orchestrated by any actor
seeking immediate political benefit. Indeed, the FIEIT
insisted that it needed more time over the objections
of powerful political actors, including presidential
candidates, the international community and this very
Council. The President has actually shared his concerns
about the delay with me, as have other leading actors.
The Council repeatedly stressed that Somalia must
avoid an extension of the constitutionally mandated
term limits, but the Council has also emphasized
the importance of a transparent, inclusive, fair and
credible process that yields a Somali Government and
Parliament enjoying enhanced legitimacy. There is a
creative tension between doing this as thoroughly as
possible and doing it on time.

Parliamentary elections will now take place between
23 October and 10 November, and the presidential
election by 30 November. What is most critical at this
point is that the new extension does not create additional
space for manipulation or disruption by spoilers. Rather,
the urgency and momentum must be maintained and
the additional time used to ensure that the process is as
transparent and credible as possible. Much preparatory
work has been completed and implementation has in
fact begun. Registration of the 14,000 delegates and
hundreds of parliamentary candidates is in progress.
In parallel, the nomination of candidates for the new
federal Upper House is under way.

There is a further challenge. Under the constitution,
the mandate of President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud
was to have ended by 10 September. The Security
Council, in its presidential statement of 19 August
(S/PRST/2016/13), noted the National Leadership
Forum's consensual decision to extend the current
mandates of the federal institutions to respect the
electoral calendar adopted in early August. Against
the backdrop of an additional delay, it will nonetheless
be critical to avoid an institutional vacuum while, at
the same time stressing that this should be a de facto
caretaker period, with no major decisions or declarations
by any of the existing institutions.

The 2016 electoral process is a novel and exciting
experience for a country that last held national elections
in 1969. It is best described as a political process with
electoral features, rather than just as an election. Every
aspect of the electoral model has been politically
negotiated, with many painful compromises made
between interest groups and clans. There has been a
tendency among many actors to try and resolve long-
standing and highly complex political issues through
this process, including - to name just a few - the
status of the federal capital, Somaliland, Hiraan and
Middle Shabelle, the role ofpolitical parties, corruption
and illicit financial flows, the rights of minorities, and
women's long fight forjustice and equality .

The electoral model is imperfect. No one is entirely
happy with it, and that may be a good sign. It is literally
extraordinary - a one-off never to be repeated again.
It took over a year to fashion, in an exhaustive process
that included unprecedented public consultations. And
yet, this process has electoral features that are critical to
Somalia's aspiration to undertake one-person/one-vote
elections in 2020, and that signify the overall progress
that Somalia has made since 2012.

These features include the election of a new Upper
House on a geographical, not just clan basis; a step
away from the so-called 4.5 formula; the conduct of the
election in at least five locations around the country,
not just Mogadishu; genuine competition for seats
in both houses; the establishment of an independent
implementation body; and the setting of clear rules
of the game. They also include the broadening of the
electoral college fromjust 135 men in 2012 to more than
14,000 citizens, 30 per cent of whom must be women
and 20 per cent youth. And there have been a number of
hard-won provisions to realize the commitment made
by the National Leadership Forum to 30 per cent seats
being reserved for women.

Even though the numbers involved may seem
relatively modest, this is a complicated process
requiring a high degree of dedication, organizational
capacity and some bravery to implement. The security
and logistical challenges alone are considerable. Allow
me to pay tribute here to the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and Somali security authorities for
planning and protecting the process. There are likely
to be attacks by Al-Shabaab, and possibly violence
instigated by others.

The process includes not just a secret ballot and
instantaneous communication of results, but also
other measures put in place with United Nations
technical support to bolster the credibility of the
process. These include a code of conduct for all
candidates - parliamentary and presidential - and the
creation of an electoral dispute resolution mechanism.
The latter is now being established with, significantly,
the inclusion of advisors provided by the international
community. There shall also be electoral monitors
provided by the African Union, the European Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), the League of Arab States and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, as well as local
Somali organizations.

All this has been organized at great speed, in the
absence of national institutional capacity and with little
local experience of organizing anything on this scale
for many decades. I am therefore under no illusion about
the challenges ahead and the scope for things to go
awry, but if we remain vigilant and unified this process
could mark a positive, watershed moment for Somalia.

The road to peace and stability in Somalia will still
be a long one. The FIEIT declaration that the voting
for the regions of Hiraan and Middle Shabelle should
take place in Mogadishu rather than in those two
regions risks deepening clan differences related to the
formation of the last remaining proto-federal member
state. Efforts must therefore continue to advance an
inclusive and, ultimately, sustainable state formation
process in Hiraan and Middle Shabelle. Allow me to
recognize IGAD's valiant efforts in that regard.

Violence remains a feature of life for too many
people. Al-Shabaab has continued to mount spectacular
attacks against soft targets, notably in Mogadishu. The
most egregious of these were on 21 August in Galkayo
and on 30 August against the Somali Youth League
hotel in Mogadishu. Civilians have been the main
victims. These attacks have underscored the urgency
of efforts both to degrade, defeat and dismantle Al
Shabaab and to address the conditions that make it
possible for the group to survive. AMISOM. remains
vital to Somalia's security. Its troops are paying a heavy
price to bring security to the country. They need to be
supported in their effort to take the fight to Al Shabaab-
controlled areas.

Somalia has also seen the repatriation of an
unprecedented number of refugees from Dadaab in
neighbouring Kenya. This has raised anxieties about
Somalia's ability to absorb returnees, given an internally
displaced population already estimated at more than
1 million and extremely fragile host communities.
Efforts are under way, involving federal and federal
member state authorities, as well as the United Nations
and partners, to pursue durable solutions. Concerns
are also increasing about the growing number of
people - now close to 5 million - suffering from
malnutrition and food insecurity. I regret to say that
only 32 per cent of the humanitarian response plan has
been funded at this point.

And Somalis continue to face multiple human rights
deficits. On 4 September, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia, along with the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, issued a public
report on freedom of expression. While significant,
commendable legal and institutional measures are
being put in place by the Somali leadership - including
the passage of the national human rights commission
law - the fact is that harassment and intimidation of
journalists, members of Parliament and civil society
actors remains widespread.

The situation of women and children, including
children captured from Al-Shabaab and sentenced to
death, is of grave concern. The July visit of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict reinforced advocacy with both
the Federal Government and the Government of
Puntland regarding the need to uphold international
law, particularly the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, which Somalia ratified last year. Yesterday,
the Puntland authorities told my Deputy that they
would immediately transfer all children under 15 to a
rehabilitation centre and revisit the death sentences that
were handed down.

The challenges are considerable but, crucially,
progress is being made in almost every domain.
On 10 September, IGAD held a meeting of Heads of
State and Government in Mogadishu- the first such
summit on Somali soil in 42 years. The significance
and psychological impact of this should not be
underestimated. Central to continued progress will be
the arduous task of establishing institutions that are
both capable and trusted by all Somalis. Accountable
governance and capacity across the board is at the heart
of the State-building agenda. The good news is that
many of the conflicts between clans and power-brokers
that have plagued Somalia over the past decades have
been converted into politics. Administrative capacity
is gradually being established around the emerging
federal architecture - an architecture that did not
exist a few years ago - and the political basis for that
institutional capacity, whether to strengthen the rule of
law, generate revenues, provide public services, fight
corruption or improve security, is broadening.

An important development has been the
emergence of the National Leadership Forum as a
key decision-making body. Its status will need to be
resolved, like so much else, through the constitutional
review. But its political value as a forum for bringing
the country's leadership together, both from the
Federal Government and regional states, is beyond
doubt. That has been evident recently in the security
field, not only in approving the new policing model,
consistent with Somalia's federal architecture, but in its
latest meeting two weeks ago, by deciding to establish
a National Security Committee. That provides the
international community a docking point for advancing
a comprehensive approach to security that encompasses
policing, community recovery and the extension
of State authority, and efforts to counter violent
extremism. I am delighted that the Government issued
a national strategy and action plan for the preventing
and countering of violent extremism only two weeks
ago.

A major priority now is to define and implement
a plan for structuring and strengthening the
Somali national security forces, at the same time
as strengthening the capacity of security forces to
accompany AMISOM. in taking the fight back to
Al-Shabaab. The AU Commissioner for Peace and
Security has said that AMISOM'S transition will begin
in October 2018. There is therefore no time to lose
to build capable, accountable and affordable security
forces trusted by all Somalis.

Other key priorities, beyond the electoral process,
include the review and finalization of the federal
constitution, agreement on revenue and resource
management and sharing, preparations for one-person
one-vote elections in 2020, which will be a formidable
undertaking, and steps to attract both private and public
international investment, including through debt relief.
So there is no shortage of tasks at hand, but progress
towards them is encouraging.

Allow me to conclude by thanking the members
of the Security Council for their unified position on
Somalia and for the advice and support that I continue
to receive. We are determined to ensure that the
electoral process is implemented, fully aware of the
risks, with no further delays, and we are aware of the
consequences ifit is not seen as legitimate and complete.
But if all goes well, the stage is set for the Somalis to
take their country to a new level of membership of the
international community in the coming months.

