Mr. Ladsous (France) (interpretation from French):

Allow me, first of all, to extend to you, Sir, my
delegation's congratulations on your accession to the
presidency of the Council for the month of December and,
at the same time, my gratitude to the Ambassador of Oman,
as well as his delegation, for the way in which he presided
over the Council in the month of November.

The delegation of France voted in favour of the draft

resolution which was put to a vote today, but, I must
emphasize, we did so without fully supporting it.

Clearly, the Government of France has taken note of
the developments in the situation in Rwanda, as highlighted
by the Secretary-General in his report. We must point out
that in an area as critical as justice, developments -
positive developments - are taking place. It remains no
less true - and here we share the concerns of the
Secretary-General - that Rwanda and, more generally, the
Great Lakes region continue to face very serious problems.
Efforts to forge national reconciliation in Rwanda are not
bearing fruit. The refugees - numbering 1,600,000 - are
still in the very place where they installed themselves more
than a year and a half ago, and there is no real hope for
them to return home in the short-term. It must, finally, be
recognized that stability and security in that region of
Africa have not been re-established. Tension remains high
in the region and there is cause for concern for the future.

In this context, the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Rwanda (UNAMIR) has so far played a positive role,
as has the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
a role which the delegation of France would like to
emphasize. For this very reason, the Government of France
had hoped that this operation would remain in place to
carry out the tasks entrusted to it by the Security Council
last June.

The text we have just adopted allows the Blue
Helmets to extend their mission for a final period of three
months, within the framework of a slightly changed
mandate. Frankly speaking, we would have preferred not to
take a decision today to end the operation in March 1996.
But the Government of Rwanda took a different decision.
We note that decision but hope that the ultimate departure
of the United Nations does not coincide with a deterioration
in the situation in that part of Africa.

The Government of France followed with particular
attention the talks held by the Heads of State of the region
in Cairo and the Declaration they adopted on 29 November
1995. We have taken due note of the commitments they

 

made on that occasion and we continue to believe that the
countries that participated in the talks will, in due course,
need assistance from the international community to
promote a lasting settlement of the problems in the
region, of course within the framework of a conference
organized to that end under the auspices of the United
Nations and in cooperation with the Organization of
African Unity (OAU).

Similarly, the Government of France believes that it
will be even more necessary for the United Nations to
play a role in Rwanda once UNAMIR has departed. For
that reason, we urge the Government of Rwanda to be
flexible in the negotiations with the Secretariat on this
question, which will begin shortly.

We can understand that the Government of Rwanda
is hoping that the international community will provide
assistance for reconstruction and development. There is
no doubt, in our View, that a positive and understanding
attitude on the part of the Government can only serve to
encourage countries, international institutions and non-
governmental agencies that want to help Rwanda to do
just that.

