Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay deplores and condemns the terrorist attack
carried outjust a few minutes ago that targeted a bus in
Jerusalem. Uruguay deplores and condemns each and
every terrorist attack. Last week, we said that terrorism
could truly be labelled as an act of cowardice; that is the
only appropriate name for it.

At the outset, I would like to begin by thanking
the Secretary-General in particular for his presence and
for his briefing to the Security Council, in which he
referred to various elements and positions that Uruguay
shares. The impasse in the peace process between
Israel and Palestine, the events of recent months in
Syria, the situation in Yemen, the continuing impact
of the activities of terrorist groups in the region and,
in particular, the death and suffering of thousands of
innocent victims are but some of the challenges that the
Middle East continues to face.

On the issue of the Middle East peace process,
Uruguay would like to reaffirm its full support for
the right of Israel and Palestine to live at peace within
secure and recognized borders in a spirit of renewed
cooperation, free from any threats or acts that might
undermine peace, particularly including acts of
terrorism. Uruguay reiterates its full support for a
two-State solution, firmly convinced that it is the only
option that would allow the coexistence of Israel and
Palestine on a peaceful footing.

We stress the need for the international community
to increase its efforts to encourage the parties to return
to the negotiating table with a view to achieving a
peaceful, just, negotiated and lasting solution - one
that is in line with international law and takes due
account of the interests and needs of all the parties to
the conflict. We call upon them to refrain from adopting
unilateral decisions, which simply hinder dialogue. In
that respect, we believe that, as a result, there can be no
continuation of the settlement policy, the settlements
being illegal in the West Bank.

Uruguay also robustly condemns the stabbings and
other brutal attacks targeting Israeli citizens, as well as
the incitement to, and glorification of, those abhorrent
acts. We would like to reiterate the importance of
international cooperation. Such cooperation is essential
for contributing to the economic and social development
of the Palestinian people. The strengthening, and the
establishment where necessary, of national institutions
and basic infrastructure are also essential in order to
ensure the viability of the Palestinian State, a State that
has pursued the path towards confirmation as a full-
fledged sovereign State.

Uruguay would like to highlight the deep bonds of
friendship that unite us with both the State of Israel
and the Palestinian State. We would like to take this
opportunity to reiterate the willingness of Uruguay to
contribute to and support any initiative that could lead
to a successful conclusion ofthe peace process. We have
taken note of the statement delivered by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of New Zealand, Mr. Murray McCully,
and we would like to convey our willingness to work
with him.

With regard to the situation in Syria, we believe
that the efforts undertaken to find a political solution to
the conflict are crucial. In that context, we would like
to reiterate our full support for the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General to Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
and his entire team. They have engaged in important
work and made significant progress in bringing about
face-to-face talks between the two parties, thereby
making progress in finding a political solution to the
conflict, as provided for in resolution 2254 (2015).

The cessation of hostilities in Syria, in place
since 27 February, has allowed us an opportunity to
substantially reduce violence, improve humanitarian
access and foster a better climate for the negotiations
in Geneva. Despite the fragility of the current situation
and the fact that there have been some setbacks in
recent days, we believe that this is the best course of
action that might finally bring an end to the long and
bloody war in that country. Faced with the dramatic
humanitarian situation in Syria, Uruguay would like to
underscore the need to continue efforts to ensure that
humanitarian assistance makes its way to those who
most need it. We would like to reiterate our appeal to the
Syrian Government to grant, without further delay, the
necessary permits in order to ensure that humanitarian
agencies can continue their shipments and can continue
with their vital work.

Uruguay would like to stress the illegality,
inacceptability and immorality of using hunger as a
tactic of war. Such practices constitute war crimes, and
all who commit such crimes should be held accountable.
We also denounce all attacks on humanitarian and
medical personnel and the seizing ofmedical provisions
from humanitarian convoys. Such actions must come
to an end. They are in no way commensurate with
the standards of international humanitarian law. My
country, together with other members of the Security
Council, is working on a draft resolution to address the
situation in Syria that we hope will soon be accepted.

With regard to Yemen, Uruguay commends
the efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General to Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed,
and welcomes the recent agreement on the cessation
of hostilities in the country. Uruguay has confidence
in the negotiations, which were supposed to begin
today in order to achieve an exit point for the conflict.
Similarly, we would like to emphasize the vulnerability
of the Yemeni population at this time. It is alarming
that approximately 80 per cent of the population needs
some form of humanitarian assistance, which means
that it is urgent that we adopt measures to put an end to
the suffering of the civilian population.

Finally, turning to the situation in Libya, Uruguay
warmly welcomed the news of the arrival in Tripoli
of the members of the Presidential Council of the
Government of National Accord. We hope that that
event will constitute a turning point ushering in a new
phase in the history of Libya, a phase in which both
the new Government and the international community
will focus and pool their efforts on the unity, stability,
security and development of the country.

I would like to reiterate Uruguay's conviction that,
through diplomacy, dialogue and strict adherence to
international law, we can lay the foundations that will
allow us to deliver lasting peace in the Middle East.

