Mr. Cohen (Israel): Thank you, Sir, for allowing
my delegation the opportunity to address the Council
once again.

The Hamas terrorist organization that operates in
the Gaza Strip and is responsible for the current
situation facing the Palestinian people did not
materialize out of thin air. Hamas - like other terrorist
organizations, for that matter - is supported, financed
and backed by States in the region, such as Syria, in
violation of their obligations under international law
and, in particular, Security Council resolution 1373
(2001).

It is hence the height of hypocrisy, cynicism and
indecency for the representative of Syria to address the
Council and condemn Israel merely for defending itself
against the very Hamas terrorists that it supports.
Damascus is home and headquarters to numerous
terrorist organizations, including Islamic Jihad and
Hamas. Khaled Mashal, the political leader of the
latter, lives there while continuing to orchestrate the
killing of Israelis. Israel urges all States to end their
support for terrorists and terrorism, in accordance with
international law.

It is deeply regrettable that, during its statement
this morning, one State member of the Security
Council utilized the term "genocide" to refer to the
situation in the Gaza Strip. It is highly insensitive to
the survivors of genocide around the world and to the
sensibilities of this Council for language to be used so
cheaply. My delegation urges Member States to be
more responsible with the language used in their
statements.

Lastly, it is astonishing, though perhaps not
surprising, that some delegations that addressed the
Council today were able to refer to the situation in the
Gaza Strip through a one-sided prism, without any
understanding of the true causes of the situation. The
absence of reference to Hamas is validation of the fact
that the deliberations in this Chamber are often all too
detached from the reality on the ground.

I reiterate Israel's commitment to facilitating the
necessary humanitarian aid to the Palestinian civilian
population in the Gaza Strip. The current situation that
Israel faces is the same challenge that every democracy
confronts when dealing with terrorism - to uphold the
standards of international law even while the terrorists
it fights wilfully violate those norms.

