Mr. Prosor (Israel): Let me begin by thanking
you, Madam President, for your able stewardship of the
Security Council this month and for holding this very
important debate.

For the people of Israel, this is not an abstract
discussion. Day after day, trafficked arms explode in
our cities. Day after day, our citizens live with the
threat of growing terrorist networks and the States that
support them.

It was just over a year ago that a ship named MV
Victoria set sail on the Mediterranean from the port of
Latakia in Syria. From the outside, it looked like an
ordinary cargo vessel, but the MV Victoria was being
used for a mission very different from any job given to
the post office or Federal Express. Among a cargo of
lentils and cotton, three containers were concealed in
the MV Victoria's hull. They held 40 tons of Iranian
weaponry - not just guns and TNT, but sophisticated
missiles and other weapons normally held only by
modern militaries. Intelligence showed that Iran
intended to transfer those weapons to terrorists in
Gaza.

Fortunately, Israeli forces intercepted the MV
Victoria before its cargo could reach its intended
destination. Yet the weapon containers on the MV
Victoria held an important reminder for the Security
Council. Iran and its ally the Al-Assad regime have
absolutely zero regard for the basic norms and laws of
the international community. They systematically
violate resolution 1860 (2009), and many others,
transferring sophisticated weapons to terrorists in
Gaza, Lebanon and well beyond. The consequences of
their illegal smuggling activity can be measured in the
blood of many innocent civilians and the spread of
instability throughout our region. Each Iranian rocket
is armed with a warhead that could cause a political
earthquake well beyond Israel's borders.

In his report to the Council last October
(S/2011/648), the Secretary-General noted that
Hizbullah - a terrorist organization inside the
Lebanese State - had reached almost the capacities of
a regular army. Hizbullah carries Iranian arms, is
trained by Iranian forces, is funded by Iranian
petrodollars and acts as a proxy force for the Iranian
regime from the hills of South Lebanon to the streets of
Bangkok. It is the time for the Council to hold

accountable those United Nations Member States that
arm, train and fund terrorists. The international
community's failure to act today will only initiate a
bigger nightmare tomorrow.

The issue of illicit trafficking and the
infrastructure that supports it is not merely an Israeli or
Middle Eastern or African problem. It is a global
problem. Illicit smuggling is made possible by an
increasingly connected network of smuggling rings,
transnational criminals and terrorists. Such groups are
working together around the world as never before.
Terrorists understand that if you can smuggle narcotics
into a European capital, you can do the same with an
anti-aircraft missile. They understand that lawless
environments are fertile ground for radicalization, and
they recognize that selling drugs can pay for bombs.

Hizbullah's activities offer a disturbing example
of this trend. That terrorist organization has established
itself as a major player in the global narcotics market,
operating a network that extends from West Africa to
the Middle East to Latin America. It uses that global
network to fund its terrorist activities and provide the
logistical support needed to carry them out. The
Hizbullah network shows how a gap in one nation's
counter-terrorism capabilities is a weak link that can be
exploited with potentially devastating consequences for
the rest of the world. It is clear that instability in one
country can mean catastrophe in another.

Israel continues to share its unique expertise with
others in the global fight against these networks. We
are closely engaged in counter-terrorism capacity-
building initiatives with a number of States and
regional organizations in Africa, South America and
Asia. Those collaborative efforts cover a wide range of
issues, from terrorist financing to aviation security, and
from money-laundering to border protection.

Among all the issues related to illicit trafficking,
there is no greater threat than the spread of weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs). I have already described
Iran's behaviour without nuclear weapons. We can only
imagine how that regime would behave with them, and
who they would share them with. The proliferation of
WMDs is also great cause for concern in Syria, where
instability threatens to give terrorist groups like
Hizbullah the keys to the Al-Assad regime's stockpile
of weapons. That includes long-range missiles, as well
as biological and chemical weapons. As the regime of
our region's most dangerous ophthalmologist stands on
the brink of collapse, the international community must
keep a very close eye on his collection of very
dangerous weapons.

While the Victoria remains held in port, other
smuggling ships are streaming across the high seas
with cargoes full of rockets and explosives. One of
those rockets could spark the next major conflict. One
of those weapons could be used in the next mass
casualty terror attack. One of those bombs could be a
nuclear bomb. We cannot allow those who want the
Victoria to succeed to be victorious. Preventing such
weapons from reaching their destination is our
collective obligation. Terrorists and their backers
depend on divisions in the international community to
keep their operations afloat. No nation is free from
responsibility, and no nation can escape the
consequences of inaction.

