Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): I wish to extend our
warm congratulations to you, Mr. President, and our
best wishes on your assumption of the Council
presidency for this month, and to assure you of the full
cooperation of the delegation of Pakistan. I also avail
myself of this opportunity to express our gratitude to
Ambassador Lavrov and the Russian delegation for
effectively conducting the presidency last month.

We welcome Mr. Steiner into our midst. We are
grateful for his briefing but regret that this will be the
last such briefing which he gives to the Council in his
present capacity. We hope that this will not be his last
appearance in this Chamber.

In spite of our own viewpoint on the standards
versus status approach, Pakistan has always supported
and will continue to support the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) as it
works to implement the resolutions of the Security
Council, particularly resolution 1244 (1999).

With regard to the situation in Kosovo, I shall
limit my remarks to some key findings of the
Secretary-General's report.

First, we welcome the transfer of some non-
reserved responsibilities listed in chapter 5 of the
Constitutional Framework to the Kosovo Provisional
Institutions that have taken place. We are also pleased
to note the transparent, inclusive and responsible nature
of decision-making by the Kosovo Civil Service with
regard to the implementation of those new
responsibilities.

Secondly, we welcome the encouraging signs of
growing readiness on the part of Kosovo's leaders to
back minority returns, while noting that more needs to
be done to ensure that this commitment translates into
concrete backing and support for the returns process
throughout Kosovo's Provisional Institutions. In that
regard, we welcome the issuance of the open appeal
yesterday.

Thirdly, we support Mr. Steiner's initiative to
begin the dialogue on practical matters between
Belgrade and Pristina, and we welcome the positive
indications from both sides to initiate those talks.

Finally, we agree with the Secretary-General that
the rule of law remains a central challenge. Much has
been achieved by the painstaking work of UNMIK
under Mr. Steiner and his predecessor. Yet still more
work needs to be done to build on those achievements.

By all accounts, we regard the latest report of the
Secretary-General on UNMIK as Mr. Steiner's report
card. Given the difficult situation and political
environment of Kosovo, Mr. Steiner has passed with
flying colours. However, the recent achievements of
UNMIK must not blind us to the problems that remain.
We regret the divisiveness and mistrust that still prevail
in Kosovo, as well as the lack of cooperation by key
communities, especially in the Provisional Institutions.
We also regret the establishment of parallel institutions.
In a place where bridge-building is required, there is no
place for bridge watchers.

We condemn all violence against civilians,
present or past. Impunity must not be tolerated. We call
for the removal of all obstacles that hinder the right of
refugees to return in peace and safety and with dignity.

We believe that Kosovo will not truly recover from its
present situation without sustained assistance for its
economic growth and development. Those are the
challenges that still remain before us.

Let me conclude by conveying my delegation's
best wishes to Ambassador Steiner and by wishing him
luck in his next important assignment.

