Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): First of all, I should like to express our
satisfaction at the Security Council's decision to hold a
meeting today, open to all who wish to participate, for the
purpose of exchanging views on the situation in Somalia.
We hope that this discussion, which is a graphic
illustration of the unwavering attention the international
community is devoting to this problem, will help give
fresh impetus to the efforts to restore peace and stability
in Somalia.

Russia has always been a consistent advocate of
using political means to settle the internal Somali crisis
and at the same time preserve Somalia's territorial
integrity.

We have repeatedly expressed our deep concern over
the prolonged conflict there and the untold suffering of
the Somali people. Unfortunately, the situation in Somalia
continues to deteriorate, degenerating into what the
Secretary-General aptly describes as "a debilitating
stalemate". (S/1996/42, para. SD The ceaseless military confrontation between the leaders of the main Somali
factions is blocking all political efforts to settle the
conflict and is aggravating the already difficult

 

humanitarian situation, particularly in areas caught up in
hostilities. And there is the increased threat of epidemics.

We urgently appeal to the Somali factions to ensure
the safety and freedom of movement of humanitarian and
other international personnel and to open up, without
preconditions, the principal seaport at Mogadishu and other
transport facilities needed for providing humanitarian
assistance.

Events in recent years in Somalia have shown that
with the fluid internal political situation, the constantly
changing configurations of military and political alliances,
the crisis in Somalia is becoming increasingly persistent.
The situation there is charged with confrontation, for the
preservation of an approximate parity of strength among the
major warring parties. This alone makes it foolish for these
parties to attempt to resolve this conflict through force.
We appeal to all Somali leaders to refrain from
Violence, to put the interests of their country and people
above their own political ambitions and immediately restore
the process of consultations and negotiations, with a View
to achieving reconciliation and the establishment of a
national government on a broad basis. We are convinced
that finding a lasting settlement to the Somali conflict
requires agreement on methods and activation of the peace-
keeping efforts of the Organization of African Unity, the
League of Arab States, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and other regional organizations, neighbouring
States and interested countries.

We believe it important that all these efforts be closely
coordinated. In this regard, we must keep an equal distance
from all of the warring Somali factions. Of special
significance is clear compliance by all States with their
obligations strictly to observe the complete arms embargo
on all deliveries of weapons and military equipment to
Somalia, in accordance with paragraph 5 of Security
Council resolution 733 (1992). They should also refrain
from any actions which might further worsen an already
difficult situation in that country.

A major role in encouraging the Somali parties to
achieve peace might be played by the United Nations as
well, in particular by coordinating the efforts of the
international community in lending humanitarian assistance
to the population of Somalia and also by carrying out
individual programmes to revive and develop the most
stable regions in the country.

We believe that in the final analysis it is still up to
the Somali leaders. They bear the final responsibility for
achieving national reconciliation and the restoration of
peace in their own country. Their duty to their own
people is to show the political will, which is necessary in
order to achieve such a noble objective.

