Mr. McIvor (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes the Council's agreement to requests of
Member States, including ourselves, for a public
meeting on this issue. This issue has important
implications for all Members of the United Nations, as
well as particular implications for those States party to
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC).

The International Criminal Court was established
to give effect to the international community's shared
desire to end impunity for those who commit the most
grievous international crimes: genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes. It was established as a court
of last resort on the principle that national courts have
primary responsibility for the prosecution of crimes on
their territory or committed by their nationals. The
International Criminal Court may conduct a
prosecution only if impunity would otherwise result.
Further safeguards within the Rome Statute prevent
decisions on prosecutions being taken on political
rather than legal grounds. As such, New Zealand
considers the International Criminal Court to be a
landmark contribution to the fight against impunity. We
have been happy to accept the jurisdiction of the Court
as a State Party to the Rome Statute. Now that the
Court is established and ready to function, with its
judges and its Prosecutor elected, we will continue to
provide our full support to its operation.

When we addressed the Council prior to the
adoption of resolution 1422 (2002) on 12 July last year,
we expressed serious concerns about the use of the
specific procedure laid down in article 16 of the Rome
Statute in a generic resolution to provide an immunity
from the International Court's jurisdiction for
personnel engaged in United Nations-mandated or -
authorized operations.

We noted that we saw no need for such an
immunity in fact. In order to fall under the jurisdiction
of the ICC, personnel engaged in a United Nations
operation would need to commit the most grievous
international crimes, and those crimes would need to
go unprosecuted by the authorities of the contributing
State. That combination of events seemed to us
unlikely last year, and continues to seem unlikely now.

We saw no need for such an immunity in
principle. There should be no double standard for
personnel engaged in United Nations missions. To
attempt to place such personnel above the law places
their moral authority and the indispensable institution
of United Nations peacekeeping in serious jeopardy.
We put forward this view as a State that has been at the
forefront of efforts to protect the safety of United
Nations personnel.

We also expressed serious concern that the use of
the specific procedure laid down in article 16 in a
generic resolution, not in response to a particular fact
situation and with the intention to renew it on an
annual basis, was inconsistent with both the terms and
the purpose of that provision. As such, it touched
directly on the obligations assumed by States parties
under the Rome Statute, without their consent. Such an
approach, to say the very least, stretched the legitimate
limits of the role and responsibility entrusted to the
Council under the Charter.

Our views on the proposal before the Council to
renew Security Council resolution 1422 (2002) for a
further l2-month period should therefore be clear. We
regret that the need is felt at this time to continue that
resolution for a further year. However, now that the
International Criminal Court is fully established, we
hope that the Council will in future be able to draw
comfort from the Court's effective and responsible
operation and that, accordingly, the Council will see no
need to continue this resolution.

