Mr. Serrano: I wish to convey the thanks of the
European Union (EU) for having been invited to
participate in this debate.

The candidate countries Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and
Iceland, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the European Free Trade
Association country Norway, member of the European
Economic Area, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this declaration.

I would like to thank Special Representative
Staffan de Mistura for his briefing, and the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report on the situation
in Afghanistan (S/2011/590). Our thanks also go out to
His Excellency Foreign Minister Zalmai Rassoul for
his important presentation.

At the outset, let me reiterate how much
importance we attach to the United Nations efforts in
Afghanistan, especially those of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). The
work of the United Nations will remain vital to
Afghanistan's fate for years to come. That is why we
all have to continue to support it, both politically and
financially. The European Union itself is also in it for
the long haul - hence our long-term partnership with
Afghanistan that is currently under preparation.

In July, concrete transition began with the
handover of security responsibility from the
International Security Assistance Force to Afghan
forces in seven areas of the country. Elsewhere,
preparations are under way for more such security
transfers. We are encouraged by how well the Afghan
Security Forces have assumed their new role despite
the difficult context. That context should serve to
strengthen the international community's resolve to
contribute to the success of the transition by effectively
training these forces.

During the previous Afghanistan debate in the
Council (see S/PV.6574), we noted with concern that
insecurity was on the rise, making transition harder.
Those concerns have not abated. The level of civilian
casualties, the vast majority caused by insurgents,
remains unacceptably high. Civilians are no longer safe
from anti-Government forces, even in hospitals and
mosques. Recent months have also witnessed the
violent deaths of several high-ranking Afghan officials
and, just last week, of Mr. Rabbani, the Chair of the
High Peace Council.

I wish to reiterate the European Union's firm
condemnation of this heinous attack and convey our
condolences. Mr. Rabbani's legacy can best be
honoured by redoubling reconciliation efforts. We
applaud the Government for committing precisely to
such efforts.

Against this security background, it is all the
more encouraging that the Kabul process is, in many
respects, gaining momentum. The European Union
would particularly like to commend efforts towards
resolving the Kabul Bank crisis and progress towards
resuming the International Monetary Fund programme.
Successfully tackling the final outstanding issues ahead
of the Bonn Conference is crucial to bolstering the
confidence of donors, including the European Union
and its member States, as they seek to do their part in
the context of the Kabul process.

Among other hopeful signs, we have seen a
number of national priority programmes move forward,
including in the area of justice reform. We welcome
what has been achieved in that particular area. After
all, independent and professional justice institutions
are indispensable. Afghanistan needs them for a better
security climate, a better investment climate and a
better human rights climate. Legislation will remain
void without the institutions to implement it.

Afghanistan's commitments to international
human rights conventions are a case in point. On
human rights, let me say that the rights of women
deserve special attention, during transition and beyond.
That is exactly why we need female leaders around the
table as we prepare for Bonn.

Small steps forward on some national priority
programmes should not be allowed to give rise to
complacency. The transition process will be viable only
if all national priority programmes move forward
together. In the area of governance, such positive steps
as the launch of the anti-corruption Monitoring and
Evaluation Committee need to be backed up with
structural measures that will bring down corruption and
bring about more transparency and accountability with
regard to public finances.

There can be no accountability without
parliamentary control. That is why we urge the Afghan
Parliament to fully resume its functions. This means
getting important legislative work done and providing
the necessary checks and balances when it comes to
State-building in Afghanistan. New legislation should
thus be submitted for parliamentary approval. There is
room for improvement here, and it is in this context
that the European Union stands ready to support
Afghan commitments to long-term electoral reform.

Of course we need to look beyond Kabul to the
provinces and districts and sub-national governance.
We need to strengthen the capacity and accountability
of provincial and municipal institutions. Only then will
the right services be delivered to the right people in the
right way. Also, to get their fair share of aid, provinces
and districts should have a better connection to the
centre. After all, in a post-transition Afghanistan, funds
will increasingly be channelled through the central
Government.
Now that I have spoken about Kabul and the local
level, I want to briefly address the regional context.
The neighbouring countries have a strong stake in and
a special responsibility for a stable and secure
Afghanistan. Building on our ongoing programmes, the
European Union stands ready to throw its weight
behind initiatives that promote regional integration and
cooperation. We look forward to the upcoming Istanbul
Conference, which represents an opportunity to give
new impetus to the regional agenda ahead of the Bonn
Conference. The New Silk Road initiative, launched
just last week, offers a vision for promising economic
cooperation from which Afghanistan and its neighbours
could benefit greatly.
The Afghan people - most of whom are poor
and many of whom are currently threatened by
drought - need to see concrete improvements in their
lives and livelihoods. We all need to play our part in
that. As the late Mr. Rabbani said at the Millennium
Summit of the United Nations:

"The combination of extreme poverty with
extreme inequality within and between countries
is an affront to our common humanity, a tragic
situation which requires urgent global solidarity."
(A/55/PV.7, p.11)

