Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Today's
meeting is exceptional and historic. Indeed, it is rare for
the Security Council to meet on the occasion of closing
a peacekeeping mission. Yet, we are here doing just
that for the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire
(UNOCI), which will be phased out by 30 June, under
resolution 2284 (2016).

I would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for her briefing and especially
for her work at the head of UNOCI over the past four
years which, together with the work of her predecessor,
has enabled us to reach this point today. France is
very grateful.
This meeting is rendered even more historic as it
follows the brilliant election in the General Assembly,
this morning, of Cote d'Ivoire as a Security Council
member for the biennium 2018-2019. Through its
Minister for Foreign Affairs, I would like to warmly
congratulate Cote d'Ivoire on its election. Its experience
in peacekeeping will provide the Council a unique
perspective to help us more effectively tackle the
challenges of the world. We welcome the opportunity
to work alongside Cote d'Ivoire over the next two years
in our pursuit of international peace and security.

The upcoming departure of UNOCI is a turning
point for Cote d'Ivoire, as it is for peacekeeping. We
must take this opportunity to review the past, evaluate
the present and prepare for the future.

First, we must assess our accomplishments in
Cote d'Ivoire and draw lessons from them. In 28 days,
UNOCI will close after more than 13 years of existence.
At the height of the 2010-2011 crisis it consisted of
approximately 11,000 uniformed personnel. I pay a
special tribute to all UNOCI personnel - soldiers,
policemen and civilians - who, over the years, have
devoted themselves to the pursuit ofpeace and security
in Cote d'Ivoire. I honour the memory of the 150 men
and women who lost their lives in the course of that
mission. Their sacrifice will never be forgotten.

UNOCI stood by the country through a complex
trajectory, marked by the acute crisis from 2004 to
2011, but also accompanied by the hope ofrenewal and
the successful recovery starting in 2011. We must draw
useful peacekeeping lessons from such a resounding
success. Several factors have helped over the years.
First of all, the Council gave UNOCI a clear and flexible
mandate which was adapted to on developments on
the ground. Difficulties were met with a strengthened
mandate and personnel increases. When the crisis
abated, the Council transitioned UNOCI to best enable
long-term stability. The Council also developed new
tools adapted to the needs on the ground, such as the
rapid reaction force.

Secondly, since its inception, UNOCI also
participated in the political process which, pitfalls
notwithstanding, provided it a clear road map, including
an electoral timetable. The unity of the Council also
provided UNOCI with the necessary support in order
for it to carry out its mandate.

Thirdly, UNOCI has always enjoyed the united
support of the international community. The United
Nations, the Economic Community of West African
States, the African Union and the bilateral and
multilateral partners of Cote d'Ivoire came together in
tense times. France also did its part, primarily through
its ongoing support for UNOCI, under a Council
mandate, through the French forces it deployed to Cote
d'Ivoire throughout that period.

Finally, and importantly, UNOCI has enjoyed an
excellent relationship with the host country based on
trust and the pursuit ofpeace. It is an example to follow.
That relationship has been an essential prerequisite
to ensuring an effective transition.As a result, Cote
d'Ivoire has now fully taken its destiny into its own
hands. Today's Cote d'Ivoire has made great progress;
it is no longer the deeply divided - politically and
territorially - country of 2004 or 2011. Democratic
life in the country has become normalized and
strengthened; economic growth is contributing to
its development; the security situation continues to
improve, including at the border; and the country is a
major player in its subregion in all areas. The people
and the Government of Cote d'Ivoire have demonstrated
their determination to continue that positive trend.
They are now fully responsible for that transition.

C6te d'Ivoire is now in a position to continue
moving forward. As the Council recalled in resolution
2284 (2016), this means we need to continue to
address the important challenges that remain, and as
the Special Representative has pointed out, the last
few months have highlighted in particular the need
to finalize the security sector reform and reintegrate
the ex-combatants. This is an imperative for ensuring
lasting stability in the country.

The Government of Cote d'Ivoire has clearly
expressed its determination to tackle these issues
and to complete professionalizing its security forces.
We welcome and support this commitment just as we
support the announcement of the strengthening of the
country's participation in peacekeeping. This decision
represents a way of organizing what is to come. We
welcome its first illustration with the deployment
under way of an Ivorian contingent within the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali.

We also welcome the actions taken by the
Government of Cote d'Ivoire to strengthen social
cohesion, which need to continue. The fight against
impunity is also a constant imperative, particularly
with regard to the crimes committed during the
post-election crisis. Only fair and equitable justice,
which judges violations regardless of who are their
perpetrators, will be able to consolidate and sustain
the stabilization of the country. Progress in this
area, nationally as well as in cooperation with the
International Criminal Court, will be decisive for the
purpose of lasting reconciliation.

The closure of UNOCI does not mean, however,
that the country will be left alone to face the challenges
that persist. As many other States do, Cote d'Ivoire
will continue to benefit from the support of the United
Nations through several channels. The agencies, funds
and programmes operating on its territory assembled
within the country team will continue to help with
the country's recovery. Identifying the priority areas
within the action plan signed with the Government
in 2016 is particularly useful in this regard. We call
on international donors to support the country team
in this undertaking. The United Nations will also
continue to support Cote d'Ivoire as will its neighbours
through the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel, whose mandate covers the entire subregion.
Cote d'Ivoire should also be able to count on the
constant commitment of its bilateral and multilateral
partners in all fields.

Thanks to the strong links between our two
countries in all areas, France is committed to Cote
d'Ivoire. We will continue to support the country in
its economic and social development, as well as in
capacity-building, particularly in security and defence,
through bilateral cooperation. We will also continue
to support the deep and constant engagement of the
European Union with Cote d'Ivoire.

When the conditions are right, the best legacy a
peacekeeping operation can leave behind is to pass
the torch to the host country in order to anchor long-
term stability. This is the meaning of our meeting
today on Cote d'Ivoire. We are very happy about this
for Cote d'Ivoire, for the Security Council and for the
United Nations.

