Mr. Amorim (Brazil) (interpretation from French):
First of all, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
January. Under your wise and firm guidance, the work of
the Council has been conducted with great effectiveness. I
should also like to pay tribute to your predecessor,
Ambassador Fernando Berrocal Soto, for the manner in
which he led the Council last December.

Angola has been ravaged by one of the longest wars
in the history of Africa. After 37 years of conflict, for the
first time a stable peace and national reconciliation seem
about to be realized. The United Nations, the international
community and several countries, including Brazil, have
invested a great deal of energy and resources in the peace
process in Angola. At this critical time, the major political
consideration must be to ensure that MONUA can have
available a monitoring capability that will allow it
successfully to conclude the tasks entrusted to it. Here I
should like to emphasize the role of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Maitre Blondin
Beye, and of the troika of observer States.

At the beginning of January, the Government and
UNITA agreed on a timetable in accordance with which
the tasks provided for under the Lusaka Protocol would
be concluded by the end of February. Additional efforts
will have to be made to cover several key stages: the
normalization of State administration throughout the
country, including the regions of Andulo and Bailundo;
the effective demobilization of the remaining forces of
UNITA; a declaration by UNITA that it no longer has
weapons or armed personnel; the establishment of the
UNITA leadership in Luanda; and the transformation of
UNITA's radio station into an impartial broadcasting
facility. In a short period of time, UNITA thus will be
able to function exclusively as a political party. We are
convinced that in that new framework, UNITA will be
able effectively to contribute to national reconciliation and
to the consolidation of democracy in Angola.

The draft resolution that we are considering today
recommends the extension of MONUA's mandate for
three months. It also requests that the Secretary-General
submit in 45 days a report that would allow the Council
to reconfigure MONUA before the end of its mandate,
should that prove necessary. That clause sends a clear
signal that the Council will be ready to act immediately
if the approved timetable is not complied with.

We have carefully considered the proposal contained
in paragraphs 35 and 36 of the Secretary-General's report
concerning the reduction of the military component of
MONUA. Brazil decided to support the proposal after
having been assured that the existing structure could
complete the tasks entrusted to it, including the
verification of the demobilization of UNITA troops.

The approval of the timetable, the reduction of
tensions between the Government and UNITA, and the
prospect of the forthcoming meeting between President
Jose Eduardo dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi have raised
hopes. However, reports on the continuation of non-
authorized flights in the UNITA-controlled regions and on
remining activities show us that additional efforts are
required to ensure the consolidation of peace.

 

The draft resolution before us establishes that the
Secretary-General will have to submit in his report planned
for mid-March specific information on the issue of
sanctions. We emphasize that this section of the report
should not be limited to a routine recounting of the actions
of Governments. Indeed, we would hope that it would
present a general assessment of the situation.

If our hopes are fulfilled, Angola will very soon be
able to devote its energies to reconstruction and
development. Discharging the obligations provided for in
the Lusaka Protocol will open up a new stage that will
require continued participation by the international
community, perhaps in a renewed framework, so that the
peace and prosperity of the Angolan people can be ensured.
Brazil remains ready to contribute to this effort.

