Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We would first like to congratulate Mr. Martin
Griffiths on his recent appointment as Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Yemen and to thank him for
his excellent, clear and informative briefing. Although
his briefing was only preliminary, as he indicated, we
found it very detailed and comprehensive. We wish him
every success in the work that the Secretary-General
entrusted to him in Yemen, and we fully support him
and his entire team in carrying out their work. We
would also like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his detailed and
vivid briefing, which, as always, has given us a clear
idea of the situation on the ground. Our thanks also
go to Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Mr. Griffiths's
predecessor as Special Envoy, who during nearly three
years in that role did his utmost to find a viable solution
to the conflict in Yemen. We wish him every success
with his new responsibilities.

I will touch on three aspects of this issue that
will somewhat echo the views of our friends from the
Dutch delegation.

First, concerning the attacks on Saudi Arabia,
Equatorial Guinea firmly condemns the ballistic-
missile attacks allegedly launched on 25 March by
Houthis at the Saudi Arabian cities of Riyadh, Khamis
Mushait, Najran and Jizan. They endangered civilian
areas and caused a number of fatalities. The growing
number of such incidents, which was the bad news that
Mr. Griffiths gave us this morning, shows that those
weapons have fallen into the hands of non-State actors
in violation of the arms embargo imposed on Yemen
in accordance with resolutions 2216 (2015) and 2402
(2018). We therefore call on Council members to take
a united position condemning those attacks and, where
appropriate, to identify and sanction anyone who
has helped to violate the relevant Security Council
resolutions on the arms embargo, so as to prevent
any further escalation of this unending and troubling
conflict, which has resulted in the worst humanitarian
crisis that Yemen has ever known, and especially now
that actors are trying to harm populations well beyond
their national borders.

Secondly, we are very concerned about the impasse
in the political situation in Yemen. The military
conflict persists, the political process has failed to
yield satisfactory results and the humanitarian situation
continues to deteriorate. It is therefore important that the
parties involved in the Yemeni crisis understand that a
political process involving direct, sincere and inclusive
dialogue is the only way to arrive at a lasting solution to
this grave situation. The warring parties in Yemen must
support the efforts of the United Nations based on the
relevant Security Council resolutions and the Initiative
ofthe Gulf Cooperation Council. In that regard, Special
Envoy Griffiths told us this morning that the good news
is that a political solution is within reach, and that it can
be achieved through the establishment of a transitional,
inclusive Government and dialogue. But for that to
happen, as he pointed out, above all, the terrible war in
Yemen must end.

Thirdly, concerning the humanitarian aspect of
the situation, Equatorial Guinea joins other Council
members in echoing Emergency Relief Coordinator
Lowcock's message with regard to the need to honour
funding pledges as soon as possible in order to provide
the 22 million people in need of assistance - according
to information from Mr. John Ging, Director of the
Coordination and Response Division of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs - with aid to end the food insecurity from
which they are suffering and thereby also tackle the
disastrous situation that these conflicts have produced.
The humanitarian problems of cholera and the risk of
famine are still worrying, and it is important to ensure
that the international community continues to be ready
to help those most in need. For that, it is essential
that humanitarian actors be given free access to the
affected areas.

In conclusion, we hope that the Geneva conference
will lead to the disbursement of the $2 billion pledged
to alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people.

