Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): Let me say
how warmly we welcome the presence of the Foreign
Ministers of Afghanistan and Pakistan at today's
debate. It is very important that they are here, both
symbolically and because of the important substance
on the issues before us that they have given us. I would
like to wish a particularly warm welcome to Kai Eide,
following his first three months as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, as well as to
John Holmes, following his important visit to
Afghanistan.

Before I comment on the subject of this debate, I
would just like to reiterate how appalled we were by
the bombing of the Indian embassy in Kabul on 6 July.
We were also shocked by the attacks in Pakistan the
day before and on the same day. My Foreign Secretary,
David Miliband, has made clear, in the strongest terms,
our utter condemnation of all those attacks.

The United Kingdom welcomes the Secretary-
General's special report (S/2008/434) on the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in response to the Paris Conference, held on 12 June.
We are grateful to the Government of France for
holding such a successful conference, which provided a
timely and welcome reaffirmation of the international
community's commitment to Afghanistan.

I think there has been significant progress in
Afghanistan since 2001. We must bear that in mind as
we address the very significant challenges that still
face us. None of us is complacent about the scale and
importance of the task ahead, but we should be proud
of what we have achieved so far.

We should not underestimate what is at stake. As
this weekend's terrorist attacks in Islamabad and Kabul
have tragically illustrated, insecurity in Afghanistan
directly affects the people of that country and the wider
region. We have a collective responsibility to the
people of Afghanistan, and a common interest in
confronting those who seek to undermine democracy
and pursue their interests through violence, intolerance
and extremism. That responsibility falls both on the
international community and on the Governments of
the region. As we work in partnership with the
Government of Afghanistan, we urge them to take early
decisive action to improve accountability and combat
corruption, as well as to promote political dialogue so

that we can build confidence among ordinary Afghans.
We want to see early, demonstrable progress in
improving the lives of the Afghan people through
better security, improved governance and greater
prosperity.

Strong United Nations leadership will be essential
if we are to continue to make progress. We fully
endorse the report's call for all Member States to
support a strengthened UNAMA. We applaud Kai Eide
for the way in which he has re-energized UNAMA
since his appointment in March. We fully support his
work to further empower UNAMA as an organization,
and the role of the Special Representative. At the Paris
Conference, the international community agreed that
we must do all we can to support UNAMA in achieving
its final goals in Afghanistan. The international
community must now back those words with actions,
by supporting initiatives that increase UNAMA's
effectiveness.

We particularly support the report's proposals and
commitment to increase UNAMA's staff, expand its
field presence and make structural changes to the
Mission. We must ensure urgent implementation of
those changes so that they can facilitate better delivery
across the board, particularly delivery on governance,
delivery on the Afghanistan National Development
Strategy and aid effectiveness and delivery on
humanitarian challenges and improving United Nations
coordination. UNAMA will only be able to deliver on
these if it is properly resourced to do so.

We support the priorities identified in the report,
including addressing security concerns, support for the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy,
governance and institution-building, attacking
corruption and regional cooperation. We also welcome
the focus on elections and agree that there is a need for
urgent and decisive action to prepare for the 2009 and
2010 elections and ensure that they are held
satisfactorily.

We endorse the priority given by the report to
reducing the production and trafficking of drugs. We
are extremely concerned at growing evidence of the
links between the narcotics trade, the insurgency and
wider criminality. It is essential that counter-narcotics
efforts be mainstreamed throughout the Government of
Afghanistan's policies and that they be supported by
the international community.

The Secretary-General's call to focus our
collective efforts on the goal of improving the lives of
the Afghan people is an important reminder of why the
international community is so engaged in Afghanistan.
The United Kingdom will continue to play its full part
in achieving that objective, in partnership with the
Government of Afghanistan, Afghanistan's neighbours,
the United Nations and the international community.

