The Secretary-General: I thank the Burkina
Faso presidency for putting this important subject on
the agenda of the Security Council.

In recent years, drug trafficking has emerged as a
leading threat to international peace and security. We
see this most clearly in Afghanistan, Colombia and
Myanmar, where the production and trafficking of
illicit drugs fuel brutal and long-standing insurgencies.
But in many other places, too, in West Africa, Central
Asia, Central America, the Caribbean and parts of the
Mekong region, criminal groups spread violence, fear
and insecurity in their effort to control trafficking
routes. These groups undermine State authority and the
rule of law. They spread corruption, compromise
elections and hurt the legitimate economy. In some
countries, the huge profits generated through drug
trafficking can rival gross domestic product. Drug
trafficking also threatens to reverse advances in our
peacebuilding efforts in Afghanistan, Haiti, Guinea-
Bissau, Liberia, Sierra Leone and elsewhere.

This sobering reality underscores three
fundamental points. First, drug trafficking is evolving
into an ever graver threat that is affecting all regions of
the world. It will require sustained political will and
significant resources to counter this challenge.

Secondly, the transnational nature of the threat
means that no country can face it alone. This fight
requires a comprehensive international approach based
on a strong sense of shared responsibility. States must
share intelligence, carry out joint operations, build
capacity and provide mutual legal assistance. So far,
cooperation among Governments is lagging behind
cooperation among organized crime networks.

Thirdly, we need a more balanced approach to
drug control. Such an approach should focus on
reducing the demand for drugs and the harm done by

them; on promoting alternative development and the
rule of law at the source of the supply; and on
disrupting trafficking routes.

The United Nations plays an important role in
providing a framework for international cooperation in
addressing this challenge. This framework is built
around strong United Nations-backed legal
instruments, including the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime. But more
needs to be done to ensure that all States become
parties to those instruments and that they are
implemented more effectively.

The United Nations is also a centre of expertise.
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is seen
as the authoritative source of information on trends in
drug production, consumption and trafficking. It also
provides capacity-building in the areas of countering
drug trafficking, money laundering and corruption, and
those efforts must be properly resourced.

We should draw encouragement from the many
promising and innovative initiatives that are taking
place. These include regional partnerships with the
Caribbean Community, the Economic Community of
West African States and others, and strategic
cooperation with INTERPOL and other organizations.
From West Africa and the Caribbean to Central and
Western Asia, these efforts are improving drug control
cooperation, building consensus on cross-border issues
and promoting security and the rule of law.

Drug trafficking does not respect borders. Most
of all, it does not respect people. It is a menace to the
health of societies and individuals alike. It is associated
with the horrific abuse of women, in particular. Those
who run trafficking operations are ruthless and often
murderous. We must pursue them and thwart them with
the full force of the law and international resolve.

I call on Member States to work with each other
and to support the United Nations in this crucially
important endeavour. Finally, I welcome the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2009/32) that has just
been adopted.

