Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): The
Permanent Representative of Sweden will state the
European Union's position later, and France of course
endorses that position. I will simply make a few
comments in my national capacity on points that we
would like to stress.

As members of the Council all noted during the
mission that you, Sir, led last week to Kosovo and
Belgrade, it is absolutely essential that the political
process currently under way in Kosovo continue. A
continuation of the status quo is neither acceptable
nor sustainable. In this regard, Mr. Haekkerup's
promulgation of the Constitutional Framework for
Provisional Self-Government, and the announcement
that general elections would be held on 17 November,
pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999), have opened up a
political prospect that is essential to stability in
Kosovo.

It is essential to prepare carefully for the elections
so that they assist the democratic process in Kosovo,
and so that all the communities, in particular the
Kosovo Serbs, are able to participate. Everything must
be done to ensure that every community - and, to
begin with, the Serb community - is included. This is
crucial to the future of Kosovo. It is up to the Kosovo
Serbs to shoulder their responsibilities. It is in their
interest and in the interest of other communities to
participate in the elections and in the institutions of
provisional self-government that will be set up. The
provisions in the Constitutional Framework for the
representation of minorities and the defence of their
interests will enable them to exercise their rights and to
play their rightful role in the future of Kosovo. We urge
them to register and to vote.
In addition, I would like to voice our full support
for the vigorous measures taken by Mr. Haekkerup to
ensure law and order in Kosovo. The Special
Representative's promulgation of a regulation on
unauthorized border/boundary crossings and an anti-
terrorism regulation - as urged by the Contact Group
in particular - are steps in the right direction. The
strengthening of border and boundary controls by the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) is part of this effort. The
Special Representative's establishment of the new
police and justice pillar will make more effective the
fight against organized-crime networks and the pursuit
of extremists and will help suppress violence in
Kosovo. This is why we strongly support the request
for a new Assistant Secretary-General post to head this
new pillar. More generally, the new structure must be
urgently given both the financial and human resources
it needs to discharge its mission.

Improving security for everyone, particularly
minorities, is crucial, given the upcoming elections.
Extremists should not expect any indulgence from us.
Isolating them is in the interests of everybody.
Everyone, including the members of the Albanian
community, must strongly condemn violence and
isolate extremists who remain in or around Kosovo.

In Mitrovica, in order to encourage coexistence of
the communities, we must define and implement a
comprehensive and lasting strategy including
economic, political and security measures. I am glad
that following the Security Council's visit to Kosovo,
UNMIK stated that it intended to prepare such a
strategy.

One recommendation in the report of the
Council's mission relates to stepping up the dialogue
between UNMIK and Belgrade. We wholeheartedly
support this. We welcome President Kostunica's call to
the Kosova Serb community to register for the general
elections of 17 November, and we welcome the
increase of contacts between Mr. Haekkerup and the
Yugoslav authorities, as well as the official opening of
the UNMIK office in Belgrade. The Special
Representative has offered the Belgrade authorities
proposals to encourage the organized return of
displaced Serbs to Kosovo. This is a step in the right
direction. We believe strongly that closer cooperation
between the United Nations and the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia on matters of common concern will be
helpful.

