Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I thank
you, Sir, for convening today's meeting. I want to thank
the Bolivian delegation as well for calling the Security
Council's attention to this important issue. Of course
I want to thank Assistant Secretary-General Zouev
for his briefing to us here today. We hope that today's
discussion will highlight the importance of mitigating
the threats posed by mines and other explosive hazards
as well as underline the potential life-saving impact of
addressing this issue effectively.

The United States urges other Member States to
join us in a robust international partnership to reduce
the impact of unexploded ordnance, improvised
explosive devices (IEDs) and mines on the vulnerable
communities around the world. As many have mentioned
here, the clearance of mines, IEDs and unexploded
ordnance plays an essential role in reconstruction
and stabilization in many regions of the world. We
remove explosive hazards in order to protect civilians
to ensure a secure environment for the providers of a
range of follow-on assistance and to clear the lines of
transportation and communication for commerce.

In the international realm, the United States is the
Chair of the Mine Action Support Group for the next
two years. We will strive to increase donor participation
and commitment to this very important work.

Protecting civilians from these weapons is a
prerequisite for achieving lasting peace and stability.
Whether it is children on their way to school, business
men and women conducting trade and commerce,
farmers cultivating their fields or shepherds tending
their flocks, civilians must be protected from the risk
of abandoned landmines and unexploded ordnance.
As long as these types of dangers persist, affected
communities will not fully recover from the remnants
of conflict.

The United States has been the world's largest
single donor and financial supporter of humanitarian
mine action, providing more than $2.9 billion in aid
for conventional-weapons destruction in more than
100 countries since 1993. This includes clearance of
landmines and unexploded ordnance. In fact, the United
States is more committed to conventional-weapons-
destruction assistance now than we ever have been.
Our State Department provided $179.5 million in
conventional weapons destruction assistance in 2016,
and we project the final contribution for 2017 to be
$266.5 million, which is an unprecedented single-year
investment. This assistance is not focused solely on
clearance of explosive hazards, such as landmines,
IEDs and unexploded ordnance; rather, the conventional
weapons destruction programme provides the United
States with a broader framework, with the flexibility to
assist States with munitions management.

Around the world, stockpiles of excess poorly
secured or otherwise at-risk conventional weapons
remain a serious challenge to peace and prosperity.
Poorly secured munitions are illicitly diverted to
terrorists, armed groups and other destabilizing actors,
threatening the lives of our citizens and those of our
partners. Deteriorating or mishandled stockpiles
could threaten to devastate nearby population centres.
They can also prevent the safe use of land, which can
suppress economic development and prevent displaced
persons from returning home.

These programmes do not merely seek to protect
civilians from the threat of unexploded ordnance; they
also provide a vehicle to prevent the spread of disease,
stave off starvation and provide a sense of hope and
confidence for populations afflicted by these threats, so
that they might more actively engage their communities
and participate in their economies. Rapid stabilization
assistance, critical to promoting security and securing
peace dividends in a post-conflict environment, cannot
take place until IEDs, unexploded ordnance and other

conventional munitions are removed safely and securely.

In conclusion, in the light of the unfortunately high
number of armedconf licts today, conventional-weapons-
destruction assistance will continue to play a critical
role in our efforts to build a more peaceful, secure and
prosperous world.

