Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I should like to join earlier speakers in congratulating
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I am confident that,
with your skills and sagacity, you will steer the
deliberations of the Council to the desired results.

I should like to thank you and the members of the
Council for your speedy response in convening this
meeting to discuss the grave situation in occupied
Palestine. It testifies to your determination to discharge
your responsibilities seriously and firmly.

I also extend my thanks to your predecessor,
Ambassador Moctar Ouane of Mali, who guided the
Security Council last month with his well-known
wisdom, knowledge and expertise.

The international community has followed with
great pain and anger the abhorrent massacre committed
by the Israeli occupation forces in the forecourt of the
Al-Aqsa Mosque, in Al-Quds Al-Sharif and in other
parts of occupied Palestine. In this massacre, dozens of
martyrs were killed and hundreds of defenceless,
innocent Palestinian civilians - young people, the
elderly, children, men and women - were wounded.
Their feelings were provoked and their anger was
fanned by the visit to the Al-Haram Al-Sharif forecourt
by the extremist leader of the Likud Party, Ariel
Sharon, whose bloody past is well known from the
Sabra and Shatila massacres.

We were all moved watching the heartbreaking
scene of an innocent Palestinian child being killed in
the arms of his father, killed by the bullets of the
occupation forces. His father was seriously injured
while trying to protect his son. This scene is a most
eloquent expression of the tragedy that the Palestinian
people are living through in their occupied land. The
scene stirs the hearts and awakens the consciences of
those who have been ignoring the need forjustice. May
it also serve as a reminder to the international
community, as represented by this Council, of the need
to find a comprehensive and just solution to the ordeal
of the Palestinian people, of the need to enable the
Palestinian people to regain their legitimate rights and
to choose their own destiny.

Instead of fulfilling its obligations and duties,
instead of assuming its responsibility for the
maintenance of security, and instead of preventing
Ariel Sharon from violating the sanctity of the Islamic
Holy sites and provoking the believers, the Israeli
Government - while fully cognizant of the aims and
goals of Sharon's visit and of the extent of his defiance
of the feelings of Muslims, and while also cognizant of
the ramifications of his visits for the situation in
occupied Palestine and for the peace process - instead
of responding appropriately took to killing defenceless
civilians and bombarding Palestinians with rockets and
laying siege to their towns with tanks, guns and
helicopters. Perhaps - with a view to imposing a fait
accompli and establishing Al-Quds Al-Sharif as
Jewish- the Israeli Government's inhumane action
was intended to continue the process that Sharon had
started by desecrating the Islamic holy site and
intimidating the Palestinians who defended their sacred
sites and defended their dignity.

The Government of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
condemns Israel's brutal aggression against Palestinian
citizens in Al-Quds Al-Sharif and in the occupied
Palestinian territory. It believes that during the recent
events, Israel, by persisting in its policy of using all
kinds of weapons against unarmed citizens, has
breached the most basic principles and international
norms; it has defied the feelings of the Palestinians and
of the Arab nation and the Islamic world; and it has
breached the inviolability of the Islamic holy sites. The
Israeli actions are a departure from the principles of
peace and the agreements in international law that aim
at restoring peace to the region. The barbaric Israeli
practices witnessed by the world call attention to
Israel's unwillingness to restore just peace and to
Israel's persistence in the creation of obstacles and in
resorting to violence against an unarmed people,
defying all international instruments and conventions.

The Arabs have stressed on more than one
occasion that peace is their strategic choice. The Arabs
have demonstrated that they are willing to establish a
just and comprehensive peace on the basis of
international law, of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and of the principle of land for peace. It is
obvious that any desired just peace would require Israel
to withdraw from all the occupied Arab territories -
including Palestine and, above all, Al-Quds Al-Sharif,
as well as from the Syrian Golan and the remaining
parts of southern Lebanon and the western Bekaa
valley.

No proof or evidence is needed to establish the
Arab character of Al-Quds. Al-Quds Al-Sharif is part
and parcel of the occupied Palestinian territories
covered under international law, as are all the occupied
territories. Al-Quds is also covered by Security Council
resolution 242 (1967), since it is a Palestinian area that
was occupied in June 1967.

We call on the Security Council to fulfil its
obligations and shoulder its responsibilities for the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
call on it to take all necessary measures to guarantee
the protection of the Palestinian people against being
killed or uprooted and the protection of the Islamic
holy sites against further Israeli violations. We call on
the Security Council to reiterate the importance of the
implementation of its resolutions and of the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949 relative to the protection
of civilians in occupied territories. In many of its
relevant resolutions the Security Council has stressed
that this Convention does indeed apply to all the
Palestinian territories, including Al-Quds.

We welcome the Paris and Cairo meetings. We
express the hope they will rectify the situation and put
an end to the bloodshed and the acts of violence and
encourage the parties to return to the peace
negotiations with a genuine desire and serious
determination to achieve a comprehensive and just
peace.
However, those responsible for the despicable
events must be held accountable and investigated. The
provocative visit by the Israeli opposition leader must
be publicly condemned. We have to work seriously to
avoid the recurrence of such an action. And we must
also compensate both those Palestinians who have been
harmed by the Israeli acts of suppression and terrorism
and their families.

