The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more speakers inscribed on my list.

After consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the Charter of the United Nations
and international law, and to an international
order based on the rule of law and international
law, which is essential for peaceful coexistence
and cooperation among States in addressing
common challenges, thus contributing to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

"The Security Council is committed to and
actively supports the peaceful settlement of
disputes and reiterates its call upon Member
States to settle their disputes by peaceful means
as set forth in Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations. The Council emphasizes the key
role of the International Court of Justice, the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations, in
adjudicating disputes among States and the value
of its work and calls upon States that have not yet
done so to consider accepting the jurisdiction of
the Court in accordance with its Statute.

"The Security Council calls upon States to
resort also to other dispute settlement
mechanisms, including international and regional
courts and tribunals which offer States the
possibility of settling their disputes peacefully,
contributing thus to the prevention or settlement
of conflict.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of the activities of the United Nations

10-4285]
Secretary-General in promoting mediation and in
the pacific settlement of disputes between States,
recalls in this regard the Secretary-General's
report on enhancing mediation and its support
activities of 8 April 2009 (S/2009/189), and
encourages the Secretary-General to increasingly
and effectively use all the modalities and
diplomatic tools at his disposal under the Charter
for this purpose.

"The Security Council recognizes that
respect for international humanitarian law is an
essential component of the rule of law in conflict
situations, reaffirms its conviction that the
protection of the civilian population in armed
conflict should be an important aspect of any
comprehensive strategy to resolve conflict, and
recalls in this regard resolution 1894 (2009).

"The Security Council further reiterates its
call on all parties to armed conflict to respect
international law applicable to the rights and
protection of women and children, as well as
displaced persons and humanitarian workers and
other civilians who may have specific
vulnerabilities, such as persons with disabilities
and older persons.

"The Security Council reaffirms its strong
opposition to impunity for serious violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights
law. The Security Council further emphasizes the
responsibility of States to comply with their
relevant obligations to end impunity and to
thoroughly investigate and prosecute persons
responsible for war crimes, genocide, crimes
against humanity or other serious violations of
international humanitarian law in order to prevent
violations, avoid their recurrence and seek
sustainable peace, justice, truth and
reconciliation.

"The Security Council notes that the fight
against impunity for the most serious crimes of
international concern has been strengthened
through the work of the International Criminal
Court, ad hoc and mixed tribunals, as well as
specialized chambers in national tribunals, and
takes note of the stocktaking of international
criminal justice undertaken by the first Review
Conference of the Rome Statute held in Kampala,
Uganda, from 31 May to 11 June 2010. The
26

Council intends to continue forcefully to fight
impunity and uphold accountability with
appropriate means and draws attention to the full
range of justice and reconciliation mechanisms to
be considered, including national, international
and mixed criminal courts and tribunals, truth and
reconciliation commissions, as well as national
reparation programmes for victims, institutional
reforms and traditional dispute resolution
mechanisms.

"The Security Council expresses its
commitment to ensure that all United Nations
efforts to restore peace and security themselves
respect and promote the rule of law. The Council
recognizes that sustainable peacebuilding
requires an integrated approach, which
strengthens coherence between political, security,
development, human rights and rule of law
activities. In this regard, the Council reiterates
the urgency of improving United Nations
peacebuilding efforts and achieving a coordinated
United Nations approach in the field among all
parts of the United Nations system, including in
ensuring capacity-building support to assist
national authorities to uphold the rule of law
especially after the end of United Nations
peacekeeping and other relevant missions.

"The Security Council considers sanctions
an important tool in the maintenance and
restoration of international peace and security.
The Council reiterates the need to ensure that
sanctions are carefully targeted in support of
clear objectives and designed carefully so as to
minimize possible adverse consequences and are
implemented by Member States. The Council
the

remains committed to ensure that fair and clear
procedures exist for placing individuals and
entities on sanctions lists and for removing them,
as well as for granting humanitarian exemptions.
In this context, the Council recalls the adoption
of resolutions 1822 (2008) and 1904 (2009),
including the appointment of an Ombudsperson
and other procedural improvements in the
Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions regime.

"The Security Council welcomes the
establishment of the Rule of Law Coordination
and Resource Group, chaired by the Deputy
Secretary-General and supported by the Rule of
Law Unit, and urges greater efforts by the Group
to ensure a coordinated and coherent response by
the United Nations system to issues on the
Council's agenda related to the rule of law.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to provide a follow-up report
within 12 months to take stock of the progress
made in respect of the implementation of the
recommendations contained in the 2004 report of
the Secretary-General (S/2004/616), and to
consider in this context further steps with regard
to the promotion of the rule of law in conflict and
post-conflict situations."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2010/l 1.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.35 pm.
