Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We thank the delegation
of the Russian Federation for initiating this open
briefing on the very critical humanitarian issue in
Syria, and thank Mark Lowcock for his update.

Like others, we express our serious concern about
the continued severity of the devastating humanitarian
situation in Syria, including in eastern Ghouta, Idlib
and northern Hama governorates, Rukban and Raqqa.
Kazakhstan urges all parties within and outside
the country to prevent further violence and enable
humanitarian organizations to access and assist
people in need. Since early February, with the military
offensive against eastern Ghouta, there have been more
than 1,200 civilian casualties.

We truly need a cessation of hostilities and all
military operations throughout Syria to enable the
delivery of humanitarian aid and services and the
medical evacuation of the critically sick and wounded,

in accordance with international law. Kazakhstan
considers it critical for the Security Council to adopt
a workable and effective resolution on a cessation
of hostilities in Syria, a draft of which is now being
considered by Council members. Kazakhstan calls on
all parties to find consensus and unite in their efforts to
undertake an immediate suspension of all war activities
in eastern Ghouta and other parts of Syria, allowing
humanitarian aid to reach all those in need, as well as
the evacuation of all patients requiring urgent treatment
that cannot be provided there.
My delegation supports the five requests identified
by the Emergency Relief Coordinator on 11 January
during his mission to Syria, and calls upon all parties
to facilitate the implementation of these five requests
and others, as specified in relevant Security Council
resolutions, so as to ensure principled, sustained and
improved humanitarian assistance to Syria in 2018. In
this context, we look forward to a meeting ofthe Foreign
Ministers of the guarantor countries of the Astana
process - namely, the Russian Federation, Turkey
and Iran - who intend to gather in Astana in March
to discuss all issues related to recent developments on
the ground. The timing and the specific agenda are
currently being specified. In this regard, the next round
of the Astana process itself is scheduled to be held after
the aforementioned meeting of the Foreign Ministers.

Lastly, in May 2017 Kazakhstan welcomed the
adoption of the memorandum on the creation of
de-escalation areas in the Syrian Arab Republic.
They have lessened hostilities between the conflicting
parties. However, the ceasefire agreements in these
zones are currently being violated. We attach the utmost
importance to compliance by all conflicting parties
with ceasefire agreements and their enforcement by
the guarantor States. Likewise, each of the agreements
reached in Astana should not remain on paper, but must
be strictly complied with.

