Ms. Power (United States of America): We
would like to thank Jordan for convening this
emergency session. We are grateful to Assistant
Secretary-General Zerihoun for briefing the Council
today and for his and the United Nations ongoing
efforts in the region.

The United States shares the deep concern of
everyone in the Council today about the current
situation and condemns in the strongest terms the
ongoing violence in Jerusalem, the West Bank, Israel
and the Gaza Strip. We have repeatedly condemned the
violence and made clear that there is no justification
for any terrorist attack. We continue to stress the
importance of preventing inflammatory rhetoric,
accusations or any actions that can fuel the violence.

The human consequences of the violence have been
grave and continue to mount. Since 1 October, Israelis
have faced 38 attacks in which at least seven Israelis
have been killed and more than 40 injured, some
gravely. During the same period, 18 Palestinians have
been killed and hundreds injured in the West Bank,
Jerusalem and Gaza by live fire or rubber bullets from
Israeli security forces in the course of demonstrations or
clashes. According to Israeli authorities, an additional
14 Palestinians have been killed while carrying out
attacks or while suspected of attempting to carry them
out.

The cycle of violence and mistrust has been
exacerbated by viral images and videos shared on
social media, which further polarize narratives and
foster suspicion and even hatred on both sides. Among
Israelis and Palestinians, there is a growing frustration
as the prospects of reaching a two-State solution appear
to be declining. There is absolutely no justification
for reprehensible acts of violence, including terrorist
attacks against innocent civilians. We understand that
every Government needs to take the necessary steps
to protect its people. We continue to support Israel's
right to defend its citizens. As always, it is critical that
every possible effort be taken to protect innocents, to
de-escalate tensions and to guard against unnecessary
loss of life. We also reiterate our deep concern about
increased Israeli settler violence against Palestinians
and their property in the West Bank.

We mourn the loss ofall life, Israeli and Palestinian,
and continue to stress the importance of both parties
condemning the violence and avoiding provocative
statements that can further inflame tensions. In the face
of this violence, we remain committed to advancing a
two-State solution. Indeed, events right now underscore
just how critical it is to achieve two States living side
by side in peace and security. To that end, the United
States continues to urge all sides publicly and privately
to take affirmative steps to restore calm.

We welcome Israel and Jordan's commitment to
maintaining the status quo at the Temple Mount and
Haram Al-Sharif, and strongly support efforts to
ensure that the status quo is maintained. We know
Prime Minister Netanyahu's public commitment on that
point. United States Secretary Kerry has spoken with
Prime Minister Netanyahu, President Abbas and King
Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein in recent days. He will travel
to the region at the appropriate moment. As the Middle
East Quartet principals meeting on 30 September made
clear in their statement, we are concerned that

"current trends on the ground - including
continued acts of violence against Palestinians and
Israelis, ongoing settlement activity, and the high
rate of demolitions of Palestinian structures - are
dangerously imperilling the viability ofa two-State
solution".

The status quo is not sustainable. The Quartet has
stressed the importance of both sides demonstrating a
genuine commitment to a two-State solution in order to
rebuild trust and avoid a cycle of escalations. As we and
our partners emphasize in the statement of the Quartet,
we strongly support

"concrete and significant steps that will help
stabilize the situation, reverse current trends by
showing meaningful progress towards creating a
two-State reality on the ground and restore hope
among Palestinians and Israelis that a negotiated
peace is possible".

It is important to emphasize that those steps can
be taken without impacting Israel's legitimate security
concerns. In fact, they can enhance security for Israelis
and Palestinians alike. We continue to believe that the
best way to ensure the safety of all is to work towards
a political solution - again, two States living side by
side in peace and security. Only through a solution
negotiated by the two sides will true peace and security
be achieved. The harrowing accounts of innocent
civilians injured and killed in the past two weeks on
both sides underscore why we all must redouble our
efforts to diffuse the crisis and find a pathway back
towards a two-State solution.

