Mr. Ybaflez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Spain
co-sponsored resolution 2310 (2016) because we
believe that it is an important step on the path to the
universalization of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-
Ban Treaty (CTBT). Although the Treaty has not yet
entered into force, it is already a fundamental element
of the international disarmament and non-proliferation
regime. I welcome the presence at the Security Council
talbe of Mr. Lassina Zerbo, Executive Secretary of
the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO),
and, of course, that of Under-Secretary-General Kim
Won-soo. We are conveying an excellent message
together as the Council, the Secretariat of the United
Nations and the Preparatory Commission on the
occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the opening
for signature of the CTBT to encourage its entry into
force without further delay.

The Treaty has been signed by 183 States and
ratified by 166 States. Spain ratified the Treaty in 1998.
I would like to implore the States that have not already
done so, in particular the States listed in annex 2, to
ratify or sign the Treaty. This resolution is another step
towards the full de-legitimization by the international
community of nuclear tests, and it contributes to
strengthening the prohibition on nuclear tests as a de
facto international rule. However, the moratorium is
not a replacement for the entry into force of the CTBT,
which is our main aim.

In addition, I would like firmly to condemn the
nuclear tests carried out by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea on 6 January and 9 September, which
were in violation ofvarious Security Council resolutions.
Such tests are a serious threat to international peace
and security and to regional stability.

Lastly, the resolution that we have just adopted must
serve to strengthen the Preparatory Commission of the
CTBTO. With this resolution, the Security Council
acknowledges the maturity of the verification system
set up by the Preparatory Commission and the work of
the Provisional Technical Secretariat in that regard. I
trust that the resolution will give the impetus needed to
complete the International Monitoring System.

