Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland): Allow me, Sir, to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month and to wish you
every success. I also wish to thank the members of the
Security Council for agreeing to hold an open debate.

The International Criminal Court (ICC) was
established by a treaty, not by a Security Council
resolution. The Rome Statute is a major achievement in
the codification of international law today. It is very
worrying to see the Security Council adopt a resolution
that limits the scope of a treaty that is in force, when
that treaty is in full conformity with the Charter.
Switzerland disagrees both with the principle and the
modalities of resolution 1422 (2002).

Resolution 1422 (2002) opposes, repeatedly,
international criminal jurisdiction with respect to
peacekeeping operations. That approach is mistaken.
Far from contradicting each other, the Court and
peacekeeping operations complement each other.
Article 16 of the Rome Statute enables the Security
Council, if necessary, to allow for a peace process by
deferring criminal prosecution. However, it is
conceived to be applied on a case-by-case basis.
Article 16 cannot be used as a basis for granting
blanket immunity to all participants in peacekeeping
operations. Such a step presupposes that the
International Criminal Court is in itself an obstacle to
peace. We do not agree with that reasoning.

In any case, the preamble to the resolution notes
that "States not Party to the Rome Statute will continue
to fulfil their responsibilities in their national
jurisdictions in relation to international crimes"
(resolution 1422 (2002), fifth preambular paragraph).
Whenever States actually fulfil their responsibilities,
the International Criminal Court does not have
jurisdiction.

Resolution 1422 (2002) clearly undermines a
historic development. The fight against impunity must
become more universal, with the support of everyone.
The more it is pursued in a cooperative spirit, the more
effective it will be. That is why Switzerland deplores
the adoption and, even more, the prospect of renewing
resolution 1422 (2002). Incidentally, any kind of
automaticity would be contrary to the Statute.

In conclusion Switzerland reaffirms its full
support for the International Criminal Court.

