Ms. Thompson (United States of America): I
thank Foreign Minister Maas for having convened this
crucial meeting today on supporting the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). I would
also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu
and Director General Amano for their briefings today.

The Security Council tackles some of the greatest
challenges to international peace and security. But
perhaps no challenge is more potent or more relevant
to all of us than the further proliferation of nuclear
weapons. We are approaching the fiftieth anniversary
of the entry into force of the NPT. Over nearly five
decades, the NPT has grown even more critical to the
maintenance of international peace and security. It has
made us all more secure by constraining the spread
of nuclear weapons and has also thereby enabled the
global peaceful use of nuclear energy and helped create
conditions for progress on nuclear disarmament.

Fifty years ago, few would have dared to predict
that we would be here today celebrating the success of
the NPT. Before the NPT, United States Government
national intelligence estimates had expressed dire
concern about a possible snowball effect of cascading
proliferation, which would increase the world's nuclear
stockpile and undermine confidence in the ability of
non-proliferation policies to prevent such an action.
Yet, in a demonstration of remarkable diplomatic
resolve, the international community joined together
against that collective threat, reflecting rare consensus
during a time of Cold War polarization. Diplomatic
efforts culminated in the negotiation and entry into
force of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. There has been unwavering international
consensus about the indispensable role of the Treaty
in maintaining collective peace and security. The NPT
has succeeded for half a century because it serves the
fundamental and widely recognized common interest
of preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons.

We have also seen enormous progress on
disarmament, in part because the NPT helped curtail
the emergence of new nuclear Powers. With the easing
of Cold War tensions and the success of the NPT-based
non-proliferation regime in impeding proliferation, it
has been possible to reduce the nuclear arsenals of both
the United States and Russia to levels not seen since
the 19505. The stockpile of the United States today has
been reduced to approximately 12 per cent of its Cold
War peak.

We must also recognize that advancing towards the
ultimate goal of a world without nuclear weapons must
take into account the global security environment. We
cannot overlook the fact that the actions of those States
that are expanding and modernizing their nuclear
stockpiles, threatening their neighbours and violating
their arms-control obligations have contributed to a
deterioration in global security conditions.

The United States is in the process of developing
implementation plans for a path-breaking new
initiative, entitled "Creating an environment for nuclear
disarmament". It is an initiative aimed at bringing
countries together in a constructive dialogue, exploring
ways in which it might be possible to ameliorate
conditions in the global security environment so as to
make further progress towards and ultimately achieve
nuclear disarmament. In that regard, in addition to its
emphasis on dialogue and diplomatic engagement with
all relevant parties, the initiative stands in stark contrast
to the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons,
or the Ban Treaty, which fails to address the security
challenges that continue to make nuclear deterrence
necessary and seeks to stigmatize, rather than engage
with, countries that rely upon nuclear deterrence for
their national security.

As we turn towards the 2020 Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, the United States seeks a positive
outcome of that meeting that reflects consensus on
the broadest possible basis. We believe consensus
is possible if the parties to the NPT focus on the big
picture, while emphasizing their common interests and
avoiding using divisive issues, such as the Ban Treaty
and a zone free of weapons of mass destruction in the
Middle East, to hold the Review Conference hostage.

In addition, to strengthen the NPT and the
non-proliferation regime, States must support the
universalization of the International Atomic Energy
Agency additional protocol, which has become the
de facto nuclear safeguard standard and makes the
protocol a condition for nuclear supply.

States must also be united in demanding the final
fully verified denuclearization of North Korea and must
continue to hold that a secure, peaceful and bright future
is possible for North Korea ifit fulfils its commitments.
We must remain united in our determination that Iran
must never acquire a pathway to nuclear weapons.

The 2020 NPT Review Conference will also be an
opportunity to highlight how the NPT, in the broader
nuclear non-proliferation regime, has made possible
thriving international cooperation on the peaceful uses
of nuclear energy, science and technology. We aim to
build on that success. We are optimistic that the NPT
will endure. Yet that outcome is far from guaranteed.
We must now continue to preserve and strengthen the
NPT so that 50 years from now our successors may
mark the one hundredth anniversary of the Treaty in
an enduring accomplishment that continues to promote
international security and prosperity.

