Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to express my country's thanks and
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for having
organized this open debate on children and armed
conflict, a subject that is undoubtedly of major
significance to my country and other Members of the
United Nations. We express our appreciation to the
Foreign Minister of the friendly State of Germany for
presiding over the debate, and thank the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative, as well as the
Executive Director of UNICEF, for their efforts and
briefings.

The economic and political circumstances of
Yemen, currently and for the past few years, are well
known. My country believes, however, that children
are the future on whom we are relying to build a
modern State. The Republic of Yemen was therefore
among the first countries to accede to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child, in May 1991, as well as its
two Optional Protocols. We provide periodic reports on
the implementation of those instruments. We have
taken steps to enact legislation to promote and protect
the rights of children - for example, law 45 of 2002,
on the rights of the child, and law 24 of 1992, on the
care of minors.

The Republic of Yemen has not only signed
international instruments and enacted domestic
legislation to protect the rights of children, we have
also set up institutional mechanisms to translate them
into concrete actions. We have also established a
Ministry of Human Rights and a Supreme Council for
Motherhood and Childhood, as well as several national
committees and networks on the protection and
promotion of the rights of children. In particular, we
have put in place the High National Committee, which
is chaired by the Vice-President, similar other national
technical committees to protect human rights under the
auspices of the Ministry of Human Rights, as well as a
technical committee to fight child trafficking. We have
also forged a valuable partnership with UNICEF.

We have taken note of the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2011/250), with regard to which we wish to
state the following.

First, we reaffirm our absolute commitment to the
promotion and protection of the rights of children in
every respect.

Second, with regard to our commitment to
prohibiting the conscription of children in armed
conflict, all our national military legislation sets the
minimum age for mandatory conscription into the
armed forces at 18 years of age. Law 67 of 1991,
concerning military and security forces, law 23 of
1990, on public reserves, and law 22 of 1990 are all in
line with the Optional Protocol.

Third, we have cooperated with all international
and civil society organizations to prohibit the
conscription and involvement of children in armed
conflict. We have also established numerous guidelines
and published many manuals with regard to this issue.

Fourth, the Government has been compelled to
shoulder its responsibility to combat the recent armed
rebellion in Sa'ada province. The State of Yemen
declared a ceasefire in February 2010, to which it has
been committed ever since.

Fifth, an amnesty has been declared in order to
pardon all detainees, including children who were
conscripted by the rebels and Al-Houthi groups.

Sixth, the Government has undertaken many
measures to provide assistance to all internally
displaced persons and refugees, especially children.

Seventh, we would like to stress that, in spite of
our country's special circumstances, great progress has
been made since the listing of Yemen in last year's
report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/181). We
therefore do not see any reason to include additional
categories in the report's list.

Eighth, we would like to highlight the importance
of the need to gather precise information with regard to
the implementation of relevant Security Council
resolutions.

We would like to state that, in spite our country's
special circumstances, we will make every effort to
implement our international obligations and promote
the rights of children. We hope that the international
community will support us in our endeavours.

