The President (spoke in Chinese): As this is the
first meeting of the Council for the month of November
2013, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Mr. Agshin Mehdiyev, Permanent Representative of
Azerbaijan, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of October 2013. I am sure I
speak for all members of the Council in expressing
our deep appreciation to Ambassador Mehdiyev and
his delegation for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Letter dated 5 November 2013 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2013/646)

The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Germany and Italy to participate in this
meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2013/652, which contains the text ofa draft
resolution submitted by Azerbaijan, France, Germany,
Italy, Luxembourg, the Russian Federation, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/646, which contains a letter dated
5 November 2013 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council, transmitting
the forty-fourth report of the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Azerbaijan, China, France,
Guatemala, Luxembourg, Morocco, Pakistan,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Togo, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America


The President (spoke in Chinese): There were
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2123 (2013).

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 10.10 am.

