Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): The hour is late. I
will not read out the text of my remarks, but I hope that
members of the Council will refer to the text when they
reflect on the situation in Timor-Leste. What I propose
to do instead is to summarize my remarks in four
points.

The first point that I would like to make is to, of
course, thank the Council for addressing the subject of
Timor-Leste. We realize that there are much more
prominent issues that are preoccupying the minds of
Council members. Certainly what is going to happen in
a few hours will be a major focus of attention. But,
despite all that, we hope that the Council will remain
focused on the challenges faced by Timor-Leste. We
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report and my good friend and comrade Kamalesh
Sharma for his briefing and the good work that he has
done in Timor-Leste.

The second point we would like to make is that,
as usual, there is the mixture of good news and bad
news coming out in any assessment of the situation in
Timor-Leste. That assessment that is given is in the
text of my statement, but I thought that Ambassador
John Dauth captured it very well when he said:
"Progress achieved to date in Timor-Leste is real, but it
is fragile" (supra).

The third point that I would like to make is that,
given this mix of good news and bad news in Timor-
Leste, I think it is all the more important that the
Security Council think very seriously about the exit
strategy that it is going to adopt in leaving Timor-
Leste. In that regard, we hope that the Council will
heed some very important points that have been made.

The first is the point that the Secretary-General
made in his report, where he said that the Council
should begin considering the best means through which
the country's needs can be met after the United Nations
withdrawal. That assessment should be based on the
thorough evaluation of the country's key requirements
and should be guided by recognition, based on
experience in Timor-Leste and elsewhere, of the
importance of finding reliable means to meet urgent
requirements and to secure the considerable investment
that had been made in the country to date.

We hope that equal attention will be paid to the
views of the leadership of Timor-Leste. Ambassador
Kamalesh Sharma said earlier today that the Timorese
leadership and the representatives of civil society, both
national and international, have clearly indicated to
him the centrality of the requirement of continued
United Nations presence to provide both psychological
assurance and substantive support in the immediate
post-UNMISET period. We think this View should be
taken seriously, along with some of the specific points
that were made, in particular by Ambassador John
Dauth. We would like to support some of the specific
suggestions that have been made for a continued
United Nations presence.

As indicated in my text, there are four points that
we would like to emphasize in any post-UNMISET
presence. But before saying that, let me also emphasize
that we believe that the post-UNMISET presence
should come from assessed contributions, with the
emphasis on the word assessed.

The four items that we would like to support are
the following. The first is military liaison officers to
liaise between Timor-Leste and Indonesian security
forces and to monitor security-related developments.
The second is police observers to monitor operations of
the National Police of East Timor and internal security
developments. The third is an armed back-up policing
capability to respond to emergency situations. The
fourth is international civilian advisers in security-
related areas to be established for a limited period,
such as one year.

We think that these are not excessive requests.
Indeed, as Ambassador John Dauth said, the cost will
be much less than that of the current situation.
Therefore, we hope that these requests will receive
attention.
My fourth and final point is that at a time when
the United Nations has to deal with one crisis after
another, and, indeed, when questions have been raised
about the relevance and effectiveness of the United
Nations, it is all the more important for the United
Nations to protect all the success stories that it has.
Certainly, we should do what is right for Timor-Leste.
It will benefit the people of Timor-Leste. It will also
benefit the United Nations at this point in time.

In this regard, we also support the invitation that
has just been made by the Ambassador of Timor-Leste
to the Security Council to visit the country. We believe
that such a visit would be very helpful to enable the
Council to decide how it should manage the post-
UNMISET strategy for Timor-Leste.

