Mr. Skoog (Sweden): We align ourselves with
the statement to be delivered later on behalf of the
European Union, and particularly with its emphasis on
the need for electoral reform in Afghanistan, which is
fundamental for safeguarding the country's growing
political participation and stronger civil society. In
addition, I would like to make a few remarks.

First of all, of course, we firmly condemn the
attack on the Parliament in Kabul, which is an attack on
democracy. Our support for those building a democratic
and peaceful Afghanistan must be unwavering.
I would like to thank Nicholas Haysom, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and his staff
for his briefing and for the work they are doing on the
ground; I also thank Ambassador Tanin for his remarks.
Sweden takes particular note of the horrific effects
of the conflict on the civilian population that their
statements highlight. The continuing rise in civilian
casualties is deplorable and worrying.

It has been said many times before, particularly in
this Chamber, that this is a critical year for Afghanistan
and the Afghan people. It is also a critical year for the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). The reduced presence of international
security forces in the country and the upcoming review
of the UNAMA mandate give us a unique chance to
strengthen it in the areas where it can have the greatest
effect in the years ahead, including ensuring broad
geographical outreach to Afghanistan and a meaningful
and successful peace process.

Our support for UNAMA remains strong. We
would like to express our gratitude to the women and
men employed by UNAMA in Kabul as well as in
Afghanistan's more remote provinces. The importance
of an ambitious presence on the part of the international
community, particularly in remote areas of the country,
cannot be stressed enough. The situation demands that
the international community speak and act as one.
Effective multilateral cooperation and coordination
within the framework of the United Nations remain
Vital.

The recent and reprehensible spiral of attacks on
aid workers operating in Afghanistan is appalling.
We are currently witnessing a shrinking of the
humanitarian space on a large and devastating scale,
where aid workers are being prevented from providing
basic humanitarian aid or seeking sustainable solutions
for the Afghan people. In order to stop that trend from
having severe and long-term effects and to end the
brutal and pointless violence, humanitarian access must
be regained and the safety of aid workers guaranteed.

The conflict can be solved only through peaceful
and meaningful dialogue. A peace process must
be carefully planned and implemented. There is no
room for compromise on the principles, rights and
freedoms that have already been agreed on and that
are enshrined in the Afghan Constitution. A successful
peace process should be inclusive and representative.
Excluding segments of the Afghan population, such as
women, from taking part would compromise the very
foundation of a peaceful society. We therefore call for
the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
for the Afghan Government to continue to pursue and
safeguard women's full enjoyment of human rights.
An inclusive and meaningful peace process has the
potential to be transformative in enabling Afghans
to believe in an Afghanistan that can fully meet their
legitimate aspirations for a more prosperous and secure
life.

In 2001, we, the world, were uniquely united around
the idea of building a stable future for Afghanistan. In
the 14 years since, the world has become more unruly
in many ways. There are more conflicts demanding
the attention of the international community than ever.
Although a lot has been achieved in Afghanistan, much
remains to be done. It is therefore important that we
reaffirm our support for Afghanistan and honour our
commitments. At the same time, there must also be
tangible reforms and progress within the country. The
road map for the way ahead has already been agreed
on, most notably in the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework and in the Afghan Government's reform
paper "Realizing self-reliance".

Sweden's support for Afghanistan has been
substantial and long-term. It began several decades ago,
and it will continue with our commitment of$1.2 billion
throughout the Transformation Decade. The Afghan
Government and people can count on our continued
support in this critical time, a time for reforms, for
keeping commitments made and realizing self-reliance.

