Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2166 (2014). I would like to warmly thank
Australia for its leadership in steering the resolution to
adoption. I would also like to acknowledge the presence
here today of the Foreign Ministers of Australia,
Luxembourg and the Netherlands.

Allow me to take this opportunity to reiterate our
deepest and most heartfelt condolences to the citizens
and Governments of all those countries that lost
nationals in the tragedy and are now in mourning. In
the United Kingdom, we, too, are in mourning for the
10 Britons who were killed.

We have all seen the images of the blackened earth
and the twisted metal. We have all seen those countless
wooden stakes, each tied with a piece of white cloth
fluttering in the cornfields of eastern Ukraine, marking
the place of a family member or loved one. We owe
it to the memory of those 298 victims to ensure that
their remains are treated with dignity and respect. We
owe it to them to find out exactly what happened on the
afternoon of 17 July. That is the purpose of resolution
2166 (2014). It is a united demand by the whole
international community for the dignified, respectful
and professional treatment and recovery of the bodies
of the victims.

What we have witessed over the past days has
been sickening and appalling beyond belief. We have
seen separatist thugs trampling over the site of the
crash, showing no respect for the bodies of the victims,
rifling through their belongings and even looting their
personal effects. They have shown complete disregard
for human dignity and have violated the established
procedures for dealing with an incident of that nature.

First, the resolution requires the pro-Russian
separatists in control of the crash site and the
surrounding area to allow the bodies of the victims to
be returned to their families as soon as possible. It is
inexcusable that that process has been obstructed for
the past four days.

Secondly, the resolution is about the investigation
into what happened. It supports a full, thorough and
independent international investigation and recognizes
the steps already taken by the Ukrainian authorities
and other international stakeholders, notably the
International Civil Aviation Organization, to set that in
motion. It demands that the separatists do not further
compromise the integrity of the crash site.

We have all seen the images of cranes and other
heavy machinery disturbing the wreckage, and the
footage released yesterday that appears to show one of
the flight recorders being removed from the site. That
is completely unacceptable. The site must be preserved
and investigators must immeditely be granted safe,
secure, full and unrestricted access.

Finally, the Council is sending a strong message with
regard to accountability. Those who were responsible
and those who were complicit in the shooting down of
Flight MH-l7 must be held accountable for their actions.
The resolution demands that all States cooperate fully
with those efforts.

The context of the tragedy is Russia's attempt to
destabilize a sovereign State and to violate its territorial
integrity. The events of the past four days should serve
as a wake-up call in Moscow and prompt a profound
re-examination of Russia's policy of supporting,
training and arming violent separatists in eastern
Ukraine.

