Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Security Council has just unanimously
adopted an important resolution on extending the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for a further l2-month period.
This decision of the Security Council addresses a range
of Afghan problems and enhances the central role
played by the United Nations in coordinating
international efforts to achieve a post-conflict
settlement and social and economic rehabilitation in
Afghanistan.

During the discussions on the resolution, the
Russian delegation was able to ensure that it reflected
the difficult realities in the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan and the challenges arising therefrom, both
for the Afghan Government and for UNAMA and the
international community as a whole. The resolution
reflects the concern of the Security Council regarding
the deteriorating security situation in Afghanistan due
to the growing terrorist activities of the Taliban and
Al-Qaida. We note, in that regard, that there is a
growing link between the terrorists in that country and
drug traffickers.

Particular attention is given in the resolution to
the challenge facing the international community in
10-28239
terms of achieving national reconciliation in
Afghanistan. We support the ongoing political and
reconciliation processes there, but it must be
understood that these must not hinder the process of
establishing lasting stability in the country or
contravene Security Council resolutions, including on
the effective implementation of the sanctions regime
against the Taliban and Al-Qaida.

We reiterate that dialogue is possible only with
those who have laid down their arms, recognized the
Government and Constitution of Afghanistan, and
broken their links with Al-Qaida and other terrorist
groups. In particular, concerns persist with regard to
the production and illegal traffic of drugs in the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan. There is no doubt today that
the Afghan drug trade represents a direct and serious
threat to international peace and security. Therefore,
we must neutralize collectively, and use all available
means to do so.

In this regard, we note with concern the
information in the media about the intention of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in
Afghanistan to cease destroying poppy fields,
including in those territories that have been liberated
from the Taliban.
10-28239

How can we overcome the Taliban's military
potential when it continues to obtain financial
resources from the illegal drug trade? We are
absolutely convinced that ISAF and the anti-terrorist
coalition must, on the contrary, continue actively and
decisively to address the drug threat emanating from
Afghanistan and to cooperate with the Afghan
Government on the issue. That is the only way to build
upon what has been achieved militarily. Such an
approach will make a real contribution to the long-term
stabilization of the situation in Afghanistan and the
region. Any attempt to bring the Taliban onboard
would be a grave mistake.

We believe that the resolution and, more
important, an enhanced coordinating role for UNAMA
in Afghanistan, will make a practical contribution to
meeting the current challenges in that country,
including in the anti-drug area.

