Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Today's debate clearly shows that interest in
the issue of the rule of law has not diminished. Russia
is resolutely committed to an international order based
on the rule of law. Respect for international norms is
one of the main prerequisites for a fair, stable and
predictable system of international relations.

Given its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security
pursuant to the Charter of the United Nations, the
Security Council has a particular role in strengthening
the standing of international law. In that respect, the
Council has accumulated tremendous experience.
Suffice it to recall its role in restoring the rule of law in
peacekeeping operations, governing territories in times
of crisis, establishing ad hoc international criminal
courts and joint tribunals, referring issues to the
International Criminal Court (ICC), and protecting
civilians from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity.

The Council's activity in the area of the rule of
law has had a clear impact on the establishment and
interpretation of international legal norms. Its decisions
have important legal consequences. I refer not only to
the Council's setting of legal obligations in individual
cases, but also to the emergence of general norms and
standards as a result of its work. That is true, for
example, for the Council's decisions in the areas of
counter-terrorism and the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction.

The Council's promotion of the rule of law is a
holistic and organic process. On the one hand, in
addressing conflict and crisis situations, the Council
dictates respect for the law; on the other, in adhering to
standards of international law in its activity, it sets an
example by complying with the law.

We are grateful to you, Mr. President, for again
drawing our attention to the importance of ensuring the
primacy of the rule of law in conflict and post-conflict
societies. Many conclusions contained in the Secretary-
General's 2004 report on this topic (S/2004/616) are
still relevant. We believe it important to pursue efforts
to resuscitate those valuable ideas and to monitor
progress on those matters. The mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping operations need to be further
improved. It is necessary to better understand the
causes of conflicts and to incorporate international
standards of justice, taking due account of local
conditions and customs. Resources are needed to
support national dialogue on legal reform. It is
important to seek a prudent relationship between legal
bodies and truth and reconciliation commissions.

We are not the first to say that a robust peace is
impossible without punishing the guilty, just as justice
is not possible without robust peace. We are convinced
that the actions of international structures should
complement and stimulate national efforts, rather than
replace them.

Russia has consistently supported the fight
against impunity. However, it believes that matters of
justice cannot be an end in themselves. In many
situations, excessive and untimely action in that regard
becomes an obstacle to peace, complicating the
reaching or implementation of peace agreements.

We share your View, Mr. President, regarding the
key role of the International Court of Justice in
resolving disputes between States. That body sets the
high standard for legal proceedings, which is the
starting point for ensuring the rule of law at the
international level. We believe that the trust placed in
its political neutrality in its adherence to the principles
of international law makes it possible to encourage an
increasing number of States to recognize the Court's
jurisdiction and to lift reservations on the Court's
jurisdiction over a broad range of international
agreements, in particular in the areas of human rights
and counter terrorism.

The great variety and broad range of cases on its
docket speaks for itself. We very much hope that, in
today's complex political reality, the Court will not
lose its standing as the standard-bearer of international
justice. The Court is a unique organ that has the final
say on the most ambiguous international legal issues.

The Russian Federation notes the importance of
the ICC as the first genuine standing body of
international criminal justice. We believe that the Court
has found its place and has every chance of becoming
an effective instrument in the fight against impunity.
The universalization of the Rome Statute is a vitally
important factor for the ICC. In that regard, we believe
that a great deal will depend on the Court's level of
professionalism and impartiality in discharging the
lofty mission entrusted to it.

Sanctions are another key element of the
international order. With skilful use, targeted
application and careful analysis of negative side
effects, sanctions can serve as an effective instrument
to strengthen international peace and security and
restore respect for the law. It is of fundamental
importance that sanctions be imposed on a strictly legal
basis - that is, in strict compliance with the Charter of
the United Nations and with clear objectives and an
understanding of the conditions for lifting or easing
them.

Over the past two years, the Council has done
much to uphold individual rights and freedoms during
the application of targeted sanctions, first and foremost
by significantly improving listing and de-listing
procedures. We believe that those procedures should be
implemented based on criteria that are clearly
enshrined in the relevant Security Council resolutions.
We also believe that there is a need at this stage to
focus on the implementation of what has already been
achieved, rather than on creating additional
mechanisms that might have a negative impact on the
effectiveness of coercive Council measures.

It should be noted that not only the Security
Council but the General Assembly, too, have devoted
attention to the task of enhancing the effectiveness of
sanctions and their application in accordance with
international law. In that connection, in 2009 the
General Assembly adopted a Russian-sponsored
document on criteria and conditions for imposing
United Nations sanctions that contained leading work
on this issue and was mindful of established practices
in the Security Council.

The sovereign equality of States, the rejection of
the use of force in violation of the Charter of the
United Nations, the peaceful settlement of disputes and
other fundamental principles of contemporary
international law have been robustly enshrined as the
undisputed and universally accepted canons for
conduct on the international stage. That is one of the
great achievements of civilization and serves as the
guarantee of a peaceful and prosperous future.

