Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I would like to join other
Council members in welcoming Foreign Minister
Dastis Quecedo to the Council and thanking him for
presiding over this important debate, which testifies to
Spain's strong commitment in championing the cause
of the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs). I would also like to take this opportunity
to pay tribute to Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson
and to thank him and all of today's briefers for their
participation. We value the insights they give us into
their areas of expertise.

Today's meeting is all the more significant because
it is the culmination of the comprehensive review of
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), which
is itself an important contribution to the global WMD
non-proliferation agenda. The importance of resolution
1540 (2004), particularly its role in preventing non-State
actors from acquiring, developing, trafficking in or
using nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and
their means of delivery, needs no further elaboration.

Nonetheless, it is widely recognized that
developments over the past few years, especially in
science and technology, have opened up new fronts and
challenges to the effective implementation of the 1540
regime. We should recall that during the open debate on
the same subject in August (see S/PV.7758), there were
urgent calls for the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) to review the scientific,
technological and international commercial advances
relating to relevant controls under the resolution.
We are pleased that resolution 2325 (2016), adopted
today, has taken that into account, in addition to its
emphasis on cooperation with international, regional
and subregional organizations and on transparency
and outreach approaches to relevant actors from civil
society, industry and academia.

Against that background, Malaysia sponsored and
voted in favour of today's resolution in a demonstration
of our resolve and support for reinforcing a preventive
system that seeks to ensure that WMDs - nuclear,
chemical or biological - do not fall into the hands of
non-State actors. We firmly believe that it makes an
important contribution to strengthening our collective
efforts to counter the grave threat to international
peace and security posed by non-State actors' potential
acquisition of chemical, biological, radiological or
nuclear materials.

In responding to the call in the concept note (see S/2016/1013, annex) for sharing practical measures
and best practices, I would like to share some of
Malaysia's experiences at the national level with
implementing resolution 1540 (2004). At that level,
our implementation comes within the framework of
our 2004 Strategic Trade Act, which institutionalizes
efforts to control the export, transshipment, transit and
brokering of strategic items and other activities that
could facilitate the design, development and production
of WMDs and their delivery systems. So far the law
has proved resilient and effective, as it has allowed
the Government to act preventively in dealing with
suspected proliferation activities within our jurisdiction
and territory that contravene resolution 1540 (2004).

In cooperation and coordination with relevant
partners and stakeholders, the Government of Malaysia
takes the lead in developing and strengthening measures,
including at the facility level, aimed at ensuring
the effective management of information related to
procedures and protocols for protecting radioactive and
nuclear materials and facilities. We share the view that
enhancing coordination and engagement, including with
parliamentarians, industry, academia and civil society,
is of crucial importance. In this regard, we believe that
the industry-focused Wiesbaden Conference is a good
model, which could be adopted to better engage and
involve other stakeholders.

The Government of Malaysia continues to build
mutually supportive relationships with our national
industry in an effort to strengthen strategic trade
management. This is done throughvarious collaborations
that allow for exchange of good regulatory practices.
Mindful of the fast pace of developments in the various
relevant fields, a review of the Strategic Trade Act
is currently under way to revisit and update certain
provisions relating to brokering, penalties, and the
financing of weapons proliferation and terrorism, inter
alia. Industry feedback is also taken very seriously and
is a key element in the ongoing review.
Our debate today is a reflection of the realistic,
balanced and practical commitment to collectively
addressing the threat of WMD acquisition by non-State
actors. Where there is collective determination,
obstacles can be overcome. We remain encouraged
by the strong, positive and enduring interest by the
international community in the initiatives, approaches
and contributions of Member States that reflect
thinking outside the box with a view to formulating
possible non-traditional responses to new challenges in
non-proliferation.

I wish to conclude by reaffirming Malaysia's
commitment to working together with Member States
and the international community in strengthening
global non-proliferation efforts and in contributing to
our collective obligation to bring forth enduring peace
and security.

