Mr. Pressman (United States of America): Let me
begin by thanking the Deputy Secretary-General and
Ambassador Patriota for their leadership on this issue
and for their briefings this morning. I also thank you,
Mr. President - Foreign Minister Munoz - for your
presence here today, I also thank Chile for convening
this important discussion.

Preventing a relapse into conflict was the primary
objective for the establishment of the peacebuilding
architecture in 2005. A decade later, it remains an
urgent undertaking. Others have said this: we know that
war is not like the weather. It does not just happen and
it is not inevitable. It can be stopped. But we also know
that countries that have experienced conflict once have
a heightened risk for relapsing into conflict again and
again. We have seen the devastating consequences of
that deadly cycle of conflict, from South Sudan to the
Central African Republic.

But while war and conflict should never be deemed
inevitable, too often, too many adopt a cynical passivity
in the face of signs of emerging tension or indicators
of potential conflict - a passivity that assumes the
futility of efforts to prevent potential conflict from
metastasizing into actual conflict, and a cynicism
that assumes, essentially, that certain places are just
destined to fight it out. The peacebuilding architecture
is a living challenge to that dangerous cynicism
and deadly passivity. It is a challenge to us to turn
expressions of concern into coordinated actions that
ensure that countries recovering from conflict do not
relapse back into it, and it is a commitment to the belief
that our past can indeed be put behind us and our shared
future built together and in peace. We know that when
the international community mobilizes in concert with
national authorities, together we can change behaviour
and assumptions and put a stop to things that some may
have written off as inevitable.

Peace is built through hard work, As the Secretary-
General notes in his report (S/2014/694), we have made
significant gains in places and countries as diverse
as Cote d'Ivoire, Guinea and Tunisia in our efforts to
consolidate peace. In Sierra Leone, the integrated work
of successive United Nations missions and a country
team, as well as the engagement of the Peacebuilding
Commission, has been critical to breaking the cycle of
violence, providing space for a country and a people
hungry for peace to turn their focus from war to
prosperity, from conflict to electoral contests, from
isolation to sustainable development. Sierra Leone has
held three peaceful, credible elections since the end of
the civil war in 2002, and new institutions, supported
by the international community, are finding their place
in society and contributing to the important work of
building a Government that is responsive to its citizens.

Support from the United Nations has been critical
to that transition. For instance, United Nations support
for institutions such as the All Political Parties Women's
Association, with a target of 30 per cent female
participation in all political parties, has increased
women's participation in Sierra Leone's elections,
thereby building public trust in the election process.
And we know that women's full and equal participation,
whether in forging peace agreements, electing leaders
or leading post-conflict reconstruction, is absolutely
critical to sustainable peace and stability. We cannot
build peace for half ofa society and expect that peace to
be meaningful or lasting. That is why the work ofentities
such as the United Nations Peace Fund for Nepal, which
has designated 30 per cent of its funding for projects
that address the needs of women and girls - including
in the areas of land reform, conflict prevention, the rule
of law and the reintegration of child soldiers - is so
important. A project on land issues ensured extensive
participation by women in consultations on land-
use planning, a domain from which women had
traditionally been excluded. Developments in Nepal
demonstrate that appreciable progress can be made
with targeted funding, leadership and capacities for
gender-responsive programming.

In Guinea, as the Deputy Secretary-General noted,
the creation of a women's situation room for support to a
network of local women's organizations during the 2013
parliamentary elections not only increased women's
participation in the elections, it enabled them to take
an active part as election monitors and helped build
confidence in the entire electoral system. The creation
of community-led early-childhood development centres
in Cote d'Ivoire enhanced social cohesion by bringing
together women of diverse backgrounds focused on the
well-being of children. Kyrgyz women, with training
from UN-Women and the United Nations Development
Programme, have formed women's peace committees
and become important actors in monitoring tensions
and Government response within their communities,
again building social cohesion, as well as trust, between
local populations and authorities in regions affected by
conflict.

The full and equal inclusion of women and girls
is not merely just; it is essential to building the peace
of which we speak. Yet the participation of women in
peacebuilding still receives too little attention and is
too often underfunded and thought of as an effort to
be inclusive rather than a recognition that women's full
participation is a precondition for lasting peace. We
must change that mindset and, in the process, change
minds. We must build our peacebuilding efforts to
ensure that they are inclusive, because in doing so we
will make them more effective.

The recent outbreak of Ebola presented a new
kind of threat to international peace and security that
has indeed demanded an unprecedented response. We
commend the critical efforts of the United Nations to
mobilize human, financial and technical resources
to deliver an integrated response in the post-conflict
countries of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The
Peacebuilding Commission can play an important
role in bringing together key partners to coordinate
assistance efforts and maximize the impact of the
international community on the ground.

Unfortunately, international efforts have been
less successful in producing results aimed at ending
the enduring and daily threats to international peace
and security in places like South Sudan. Despite a
hard-won independence, South Sudan has erupted
into deadly and devastating conflict, exacerbating
ethnic tensions, eroding hope and provoking a dire
and man-made humanitarian crisis. Despite one of
the most comprehensive United Nations peacekeeping
mandates ever adopted by the Council, historic levels
of international support and almost infinite goodwill
on the part of international partners, political leaders
in South Sudan have prioritized political power and
conflict over peace and stability. Their actions have
exacerbated tensions, brought about tens of thousands
of deaths and displaced nearly 2 million innocent
people, and are bringing that young nation, the newest
Member State of the United Nations, to the threshold of
State failure. We cannot give up and we cannot allow
the parties in South Sudan to abandon their people's
aspirations and right to live in peace and prosperity. In
standing with the people of South Sudan, we must be
unified in our demand that the violence end and those
responsible for the carnage be held to account.

Until recently, successive conflicts in the Central
African Republic received too little attention from
the international community. A lack of vision on
national reform, limited political will on the part of
the international community and successive weak
United Nations presences with little capacity to help
develop State institutions further destabilized the
country's weak governance structure and undermined
social cohesion. Our action last year in authorizing an
integrated peacekeeping mission to protect civilians,
facilitate humanitarian access and support the State as it
seeks to re-establish governance was necessary to stop
the ensuing bloodshed. Bolstered by the contribution
of troops from Member States from several regional
organizations, and by humanitarian donations from
around the globe, those collective actions represent the
most comprehensive level of international engagement
in the Central African Republic to date.

We must reflect on those lessons as we undertake
the five-year review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. We have learned that peacebuilding
requires sustained - not sporadic - and coordinated
commitment on the part of national, regional and
international actors. It requires inclusivity, meaning
that women and girls are at the forefront and at the
table, not an afterthought or excluded. It means that
the international community holds political actors
accountable to the agreements they undertake and
the agreed frameworks to which they subscribe. And
it means that addressing human rights abusers, hate
and discrimination head-on is the path to sustainable
peace, not a diversion or an obstacle. We hope that the
peacebuilding architecture review's advisory group of
experts will heed those lessons and develop concrete
recommendations to enhance the Peacebuilding
Commission's relevance and real-world impact
by focusing on achieving results through its core
competencies of coordination, resource mobilization
and advocacy.

As others have noted, 2015 will also see the
Secretary-General's high-level review of United
Nations peace operations, as well as the global Ten-
year Impact Study on Implementation of Security
Council Resolution 1325 (2000) on Women, Peace and
Security in Peacekeeping. We must challenge ourselves
not to hive off our thinking about these issues in
silos. Peacekeepers are essential to establishing stable
foundations for peace and development, and they are
increasingly and appropriately being called on to
protect civilians in dire need. Protecting civilians is not
only an essential element in creating space for peace,
it is vital to the credibility of the United Nations in
the eyes of local populations and around the world. As
such, it is essential for United Nations peacekeepers to
carry out their protection of civilian mandates robustly
and in a way that gives people confidence that we mean
what we say. In that vein, let us mean what we say when
we sit at this table and recommit ourselves to the work
of the peacebuilding architecture. Let us translate our
commitment to the inclusion of women into the actual
inclusion of women, and let us translate our hope for
peace into the hard work of building it.

