Mr. Lamamra (Algeria) (interpretation from French):
It is a great pleasure for me to congratulate you, Sir, on the
way in which you have been presiding over the Security
Council during the month of December. I am convinced
that under your skilled guidance, the Council, which has
been engaged in intense activity during this month, will
find, as a result of its present deliberations, new ways of
functioning and interacting with the Member States of the
United Nations.

I should like also, Sir, to thank your predecessor,
Ambassador Al-Khussaiby, for the efficiency with which he
discharged the duties of the presidency during the month of
November.

Finally, I must express here, to those members of the
Council whose mandate is coming to a close, our deep
appreciation for their availability and for the dialogue that
they have maintained with us. This commendable attitude
accords precisely with the objective of today's debate,
which, on the initiative of a large number of countries -
including Algeria - is raising the issue of improving
procedures and arrangements for the exchange of
information and consultations among the Security
Council, the Secretariat and the countries participating, in
one form or another, in peace-keeping operations. In this
context, I should like to hail in particular the role of
Ambassador Cerdenas of Argentina and to associate
myself with the views and suggestions contained in his
statement.

The important question under consideration is not a
new one. But it has become far more pressing in the light
of the lessons learned from the unfortunate experiences
and the limits of existing consultation mechanisms. At the
core of the political problems raised are those inherent in
the decision-making process within the Security Council,
the encouragement of contributions of Member States to
missions in the field, and the mandates entrusted to the
Secretary-General to plan, guide and evaluate peace-
keeping operations in conformity with the political
environment in which they are deployed, as well as with
all other factors which impact on their conduct.

While it is true that the Security Council is often
required to react rapidly, and that the establishment of an
operation sometimes in itself is a clear political signal of
the will to take purposeful action, the effectiveness of
such intervention by the Council is often, in the last
analysis, subject to the overall adherence of Member
States to the objectives and terms of reference of a given
operation.

A rapid and effective reaction by the United Nations
ultimately depends on the will of Member States fully to
support peace-keeping operations, including by providing
personnel and by granting other facilities. Member States
would be all the more willing to do so if they were
allowed to play a more important role in the outline of
these operations - that is, to participate in the definition
of general objectives, the follow-up of various activities
and the assessment of performance in carrying out clear
mandates which have the backing of the international
community as a whole.

New Zealand and the Argentine Republic made
efforts last year to obtain from the Security Council an
enhancement of the role of Member States participating
in peace-keeping operations through the establishment of
a Committee of the Council for purposes of consultations
on the basis of Article 29 of the Charter, which provides
for the creation of subsidiary organs. The combination of
resistance to change in the functioning of the Security
Council and some inexplicable apprehensions led to the
adoption of the presidential statement of 4 November

 

1994. Its implementation was reflected by the organization
of a modest series of meetings, often held in a purely
technical format, to improve information flows, without,
however, allowing the troop-contributing countries and
other interested countries to be effectively involved in
actions taken by the Council and the Secretariat in the
political and operational management of peace-keeping
operations.

It is an established fact that the success of operations
depends on the organizational capabilities of the United
Nations Secretariat, but it is also - and above all -
subject to the political will of Member States to shoulder
their peace-keeping responsibilities. That will can only be
encouraged by improving arrangements allowing for
significant consultations and exchanges of broad
information with the troop-contributing countries.

If it is indeed desirable that the countries contributing
personnel to peace-keeping operations, or assuming other
responsibilities in regard to such operations, should remain
convinced of the need for and usefulness of their support,
there should be a way to organize more systematically and
formally the taking into account of their views and
suggestions. It would be appropriate to form a special
committee of countries contributing to any United Nations
peace-keeping operation, charged with officially making
known to the Secretary-General and the Security Council
national sensitivities affecting primarily operational
issues - indeed, political ones - regarding the mission.
Such committees could be established at the time of the
definition of mandates and the identification of potential
participants, but before the taking of a decision by the
Security Council, to ensure that the plan and proposals
formulated by the Secretary-General - in particular,
regarding the conduct of the operation and the rules of
engagement - receive broad backing. The consideration of
these issues in advance would allow the Security Council
to take decisions regarding mandates with the certainty that
potential troop-contributing countries are in favour of the
planned operation and commit themselves to it in full
agreement with the guidelines and conditions for its
conduct.

In the same spirit, the establishment of a framework
in which the troop-contributing countries could exchange
their views and experiences regarding operational aspects
common to various peace-keeping operations would be
useful and beneficial and would positively supplement the
work of the General Assembly's Committee of 34.

Under Article 24 of the Charter, the Security Council
acts on behalf of all the Member States of the United
Nations. Therefore, acts of the Council acquire additional
legitimacy when they flow from expanded consultations
carried out in a spirit of partnership and aimed at optimal
efficiency. From that point of view, the informal practice
of "groups of friends" - some of which, I must
emphasize, have done more useful work than others in the
recent experience of the Security Council - would stand
to gain in terms of both usefulness and credibility if the
objective of such groups were rigorous and in-depth
follow-up of situations concerning which the Security
Council is shouldering responsibilities, and also if the
membership of those groups formed a genuinely
representative and receptive framework for the
contributions most likely to fully assist in the formal
decisions of the Council.

In that context, it is clear that, along with a core of
members of the Council and troop-contributing countries,
the countries of the region concerned and competent
regional organizations have an irreplaceable role to play
in the interest of collective action by the United Nations.
Similarly, Secretariat reports whose information and
guidelines impact on the deliberations of the Council, and
serve as a reference point for the troop-contributing
countries, have a key function. In so far as these reports
deal with situations exhaustively, lucidly and impartially,
the contributing States can feel encouraged to accept
complex solutions, when the problems are also complex,
and therefore can make the necessary efforts.

The presidential statement of 4 November 1994
opened up the prospect of concerted action by Member
States of the United Nations in peace-keeping operations
through arrangements for the exchange of information and
opinions between the Security Council, the Secretariat and
the troop-contributing countries. The time has now come
to take this to a qualitatively new stage. In so doing, the
Council would be meeting the need for transparency and
democratization in its decision-making process, which are
essential in the search for efficiency. The Council would
also thus enhance the authority of its decisions and would
give peace-keeping operations in the field the best
possible chance of success.

