Mr. Mackay (New Zealand): Before I begin, I
should like to join others in expressing condolences to
India and Pakistan on the earthquake which has struck
them so tragically.

In opening, may I express my appreciation to Mr.
Sergio Vieira de Mello for his excellent briefing this
morning. We are extremely fortunate to have an
international civil servant of his calibre at the head of
the United Nations operation in East Timor. May I also
record our great pleasure at the fact that Mr. Jose
Ramos-Horta is also taking part in the Council's
proceedings today. This is highly symbolic of the
process we are embarked upon in assisting East Timor
to come to independence, which was the choice of the
overwhelming majority of the people of the territory in
the United Nations-sponsored consultation in
September 1999. Finally, I would like to thank the
President of the General Assembly for his perceptive
observations on his recent visit to East Timor and the
representatives of the development agencies for their
statements this morning and their commitment to East
Timor.

New Zealand fully supports the proposed
extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
until 31 December this year, as recommended by the
Secretary-General in his report. We do so as one of the
major troop contributors to the operation, providing a
battalion group and a helicopter squadron for service in
the sensitive western border region. I am pleased to
note that we were able to advise the Secretary-General
shortly before Christmas that New Zealand will
maintain its present level of military contribution until
May 2002.

Today's debate to consider the extension of
UNTAET marks an important milestone in the period
since the operation's mandate was originally adopted
by the Council in October 1999. A great deal has been
achieved since then, particularly in the security and
humanitarian fields. This is a credit to the efforts of the
people of East Timor, to Mr. Vieira de Mello and his
team as well as hardworking officials of the Secretariat
here in New York, and to the contributions of Member
States.

It is critical that UNTAET now build upon these
achievements. The Secretary-General and Mr. Vieira de
Mello have identified areas where further progress is
essential. Chief among these, in our View, is the
accelerated transfer of authority to the Timorese. This
is perhaps the most difficult challenge, but, despite
serious skill shortages among the Timorese people,
UNTAET must make every effort to put them in the
driving seat. The day must come, sooner rather than
later, when East Timorese are the ones making
decisions, with United Nations staff acting as mentors
and providing guidance.

While gains have been made in guaranteeing East
Timor's security, the threat posed by the militia groups
in West Timor remains and will continue to do so as
long as they are not disbanded. Moreover, the
maintenance of security will be crucial for the conduct
of pre-independence political events, including
elections. New Zealand therefore strongly believes that
UNTAET operations, including the military
component, should continue at present levels through
the period of the extended mandate. The day when an
East Timor defence force might take over some of
these responsibilities is still some way off. Future
reductions in United Nations troop numbers will have
to be based on a careful, objective military assessment
of the situation by those in the field. Such a decision
should not be driven by extraneous issues such as
budgetary concerns.

Looking ahead to the post-independence period,
we believe it is equally important for the international
community to continue to remain engaged if
UNTAET's achievements are to be secured. We fully
endorse the Secretary-General's tasking of UNTAET to
draw up plans for an integrated operation, in close
consultation with the Timorese and partner
organizations, which might be considered by the
Security Council closer to the time. Such an operation
will need to include a blue-helmeted security
component.

Finally, I would like to record my Government's
appreciation for the actions by the Government of
Indonesia and the Indonesian armed forces which led to
the detention recently of Jacobus Bere, a leading
suspect in the murder of Private Manning, who was
killed last July while serving with the New Zealand
contingent to UNTAET. Those responsible for this
crime must be brought to justice. New Zealand and, I
am sure, many other countries represented in this
Chamber will be following this case very closely.

