Mr. Djinnit (spoke in French): I thank the Angolan
presidency for its initiative to hold this open debate on
peace and security in the Great Lakes region of Africa.
Along with the Sahel and the Horn of Africa, the Great
Lakes region is among the areas of the African continent
that has been most affected by conflict and instability.
Yet lasting peace in Africa seems to hinge on stabilizing
this vast, pivotal region of the continent. And it must be
said that the region does not lack assets to become a
zone of prosperity and stability on the continent.

Since the conflicts and political upheavals of the
1990s, the region has made significant progress in
terms of political stability and development. Some
countries have recorded impressive economic growth
rates, with obvious repercussions on the living
conditions of the population - even if it is regrettable
that all segments of society do not benefit equally.
Ambitious and promising integration and economic and
social development cooperation initiatives have been
launched, such as the various development corridors
linking landlocked countries to countries with
coastlines. Furthermore, countries in the region are
engaged in economic, democratic and political reform
processes, with varying levels of success.

Following the conflicts of the 1990s, and with the
support ofthe United Nations and the African Union, the
region entered into the Pact on Security, Stability and
Development, which emerged from the International
Conferences on Great Lakes Region held in Dar es
Salaam in 2004 and Nairobi in 2006. The Pact aimed
at sealing the hard-won peace and at consolidating the
gains of the 1993 Arusha Accords on Rwanda and the
2000 agreements on Burundi, as well as the Lusaka
peace process and the outcomes of the inter-Congolese
dialogue held in Sun City in 2002. In February 2013,
the countries of the region came together under the
auspices of the United Nations, the African Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR) and the Southern African Development
Community to make specific commitments in line
with the Addis Ababa framework agreement in order
to halt the wave of instability that threatened the peace
in the region following the capture of Goma by the
Mouvement du 23 Mars (M-23) rebel group, which was
eventually militarily defeated.

Therefore, this meeting of the Security Council is
timely to assess the progress made and the challenges
still to be overcome on the way to the consolidation
of peace, conflict prevention and stabilization of the
region. Council deliberations will certainly touch both
on current issues that are a source of immediate concern
as well as on the root causes of instability in the Great
Lakes region. It must be emphasized that those two
levels of the Council's concerns are at the heart of the
mandate and the road map of my Office.

(Spoke in English)

Over the past few years, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the countries of the region as a whole
have made encouraging progress towards implementing
the commitments under the Pact and the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework. However, there is still
a long way to go to achieve long-term stability and
development in the area. Despite the efforts deployed
thus far to eradicate negative force in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, those armed
groups - including the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda (FDLR), the Allied Democratic
Forces and other Mai Mai groups - continue to
kill innocent people, commit serious human rights
violations, engage in illegal exploitation of natural
resources and contribute to perpetuating mistrust in
the area. In that regard, I would like to commend the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for recent decision to authorize the resumption of
cooperation between its armed forces and the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo with a view to neutralizing
the FDLR and other negative forces operating in the
eastern part of the country. We look forward to the
early operationalization of that decision.

Little progress has been achieved so far in the
repatriation of the former M-23 combatants from Uganda
and Rwanda and in the implementation of the Nairobi
Declarations. Delays in implementing the latter and in
the repatriation process are sources of serious concern.
Disturbing reports in recent weeks have alluded to the
return of several former M-23 combatants to Masisi,
outside the framework of the Nairobi Declarations.
As a follow up to a decision of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism and the Addis Ababa ministerial meeting
of 28 January, the guarantors of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework are expected to visit Uganda,
Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo soon
to engage the relevant stakeholders on the best ways
and means to address obstacles that impede the full and
effective implementation of the Nairobi Declarations
and the repatriation process.

While significant progress has been achieved in
consolidating democracy in the region, as seen in the
holding ofpeaceful elections in several countries, those
achievements remain fragile. Issues relating to respect
for the Constitution and electoral processes remain
very divisive and generate tensions, as is the case in
Burundi, where the crisis reached unacceptable levels
of violence, with attendant human rights abuses and
implications for regional cohesion and cooperation. I
wish to commend the renewed efforts of the leaders of
the region to strengthen the East African Community
mediation under President Museveni, through the
appointment of former Tanzanian President Benjamin
Mkapa as the new facilitator. I reiterate our collective
call for the speedy resumption of an inclusive dialogue
process. I also take this opportunity to call for genuine
dialogue to prevail among national stakeholders in
the region and for the strengthening of elections
governance and democratic institutions as effective
tools for conflict prevention and peacebuilding.

Durable solutions for the maintenance of
international peace and for conflict prevention and
resolution in the Great Lakes region must include social
and economic strategies that tackle poverty, create jobs,
especially for youth, and foster economic integration
and shared prosperity within and among countries of
the region. I am pleased to report that, as part of the
implementation of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda,
adopted by the leaders of the signatory countries of the
Addis Ababa Agreement, my Office organized, jointly
with the ICGLR secretariat, the Great Lakes Private
Sector Investment Conference in Kinshasa on 24 and
25 February. More than 500 participants, including
representatives of the private sector, Governments,
development partners and experts from all over the
world, attended the Conference, which generated
passionate and constructive discussions on the need to
improve the business climate in the region and promote
responsible investments. I thank the Secretary-General,
who attended the opening ceremony together with
President Kabila and other leaders from the region, for
his support for that initiative.

The Conference generated a lot of expectations
and hope. We intend to build on the momentum that
the Conference has created in order to ensure that the
great economic potentials of the region for durable
development and peace are fully realized. My Office
will work closely with ICGLR to support the Great
Lakes Region Private Sector Forum, which was
established in the course of the preparation process for
the Conference to serve as a permanent mechanism to
promote investments in the region.

The illegal exploitation of natural resources
remains a critical driver of conflicts and a key factor in
the proliferation of criminal networks that undermine
peace and security in the region. That is an issue that
requires collective and decisive actions. As a follow-up
to the Kinshasa Conference, where the issue of natural
resources featured prominently, and as I suggested

during the Development Partners Ministerial Forum
in Addis Ababa on 12 July last year, my Office will
continue to consult on the idea of convening a forum
to review the progress in initiatives taken by various
national, regional and international stakeholders
with regard to the responsible exploitation of natural
resources in the Great Lakes region. The proposed
forum will seek to offer a fresh and comprehensive look
at the issues involved. The debate should also include
urgent measures that need to be taken with the support
of the Security Council to improve natural resources
governance and cut off the economic lifelines of armed
groups in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
as those groups continue to benefit from the illegal
exploitation of resources, such as gold and charcoal,
while taking advantage ofvulnerable persons, including
women and children.

The region will not enjoy long-term peace and
stability if the culture of impunity prevails and
individuals are not held accountable for the crimes
they have committed. My Office has been working
with the ICGLR Executive Secretariat and other
partners to support initiatives aimed at promoting
judicial cooperation among the countries of the region,
particularly in relation to gender and sexual-based
violence. I wish to take this opportunity to commend the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for its recent decision to transfer Ladislas Ntaganzwa,
a suspect in the 1994 Rwanda genocide, to the Residual
Mechanism for International Criminal Tribunals, in
compliance with an order issued by the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda calling for his transfer
to Rwanda.

The refugee and humanitarian situation resulting
from the influx ofmore 250,000 refugees from Burundi
to neighbouring States remains a matter of the utmost
concern. Recognizing that durable solutions will
require efforts on the part of political, humanitarian and
development partners, my Office is working with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the World Bank and other partners to bring
together key national counterparts and international
partners to look into creating new models that can
promote dignity and better opportunities for displaced
persons and increase the benefits for host communities.

In an effort to promote the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
we have also continued to engage with civil society,
including through supporting a series of national civil-
society consultations in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda, Burundi and Uganda and assisting in
the convening of the second General Assembly meeting
of the ICGLR Regional Civil Society Forum in Dar
es Salaam.
The Women's Platform for the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework, which was established by my
predecessor, continues to remain a catalytic instrument
for women's empowerment in the region. Over the
past two years, my Office has supported a number of
grass-roots women's organizations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda.
I wish to thank the Governments of the Netherlands,
Norway, Ireland, the United Kingdom and Belgium,
as well as the Oak Foundation, for their contribution
to the Trust Fund in Support of the Activities of the
Secretary-General's Special Representative to the Great
Lakes Region of Central Africa, which supported both
the Women's Platform and other activities, including
the Private Sector Conference. Equally, my Office has
supported various activities to engage and empower
youth in the region in line with regional initiatives,
especially the ICGLR Special Summit on the fight
against youth unemployment in Nairobi in 2014. We
will continue to work with civil society in general, and
with women's and youth networks, as well as with the
recently established Great Lakes Private Sector Forum,
and support their active contribution to the ongoing
efforts for economic and political development in
the region.

Finally, I would like to invite the Council to give
its blessing to the United Nations Great Lakes Region
Strategic Framework, which was developed jointly
by my Office and the United Nations country teams
in the region in support of the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and the
development of the region. The Strategic Framework
represents the culmination of a process launched by
the Secretary-General during his joint mission with
the World Bank President to the Great Lakes region in
May 2013. The Framework is not only a key tool fir
addressing the root causes of conflicts in the region, but
also represents a collective and coordinated platform for
partnership between United Nations entities working
in the Great Lakes region, international partners and
Member States for effective solutions for conflict
prevention and resolution, and for the attainment of
durable peace, as envisaged in the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework. I thank the Council for
accepting that the United Nations Great Lakes Region
Strategic Framework be formally launched on the
occasion of this open debate.

(spoke in French)

Like other parts of the African continent, the Great
Lakes region is at a crossroads. Praiseworthy efforts are
being made by its leaders and peoples to leave behind
the instability that it has faced for a long time now
and to lay the foundation for sustainable development
and peace. As with any transition period, it is still
vulnerable to relapses, and it is therefore imperative
that the gains of peace and democracy in the region be
consolidated. In that regard, I can only encourage the
Council to continue to pay attention to the region and
to invite the international community to continue to do
the same.

