Mr. Jenca: In resolution 2202 (2015), which
was unanimously adopted on 17 February 2015, the
Security Council endorsed the package of measures
for the implementation of the Minsk agreements and
called on all parties to fully implement the measures,
including a much-needed comprehensive and lasting
ceasefire. In presidential statement S/PRST/2018/12, of
6 June 2018, the Council again unanimously reaffirmed
the centrality of the Minsk agreements.

Four years after their adoption, the Minsk
agreements remain the only agreed framework for a
negotiated peace in eastern Ukraine. While diplomatic
efforts within the Minsk framework continue, the Minsk
provisions, regrettably, remain largely unimplemented,
including its key security and political aspects.
Negotiations appear to have lost momentum, with the
main stakeholders either unable and/or unwilling to
reach an agreement on the key steps forward, or being
distracted from focusing on the implementation of
agreed steps.

I would like to recall that detailed discussions
on the implementation of the provisions of the Minsk
agreements have been taking place in separate forums,
in which the United Nations is not a participant. The
Secretary-General has been consistent in stressing
the United Nations strong support for the lead role
of the Normandy Four, the Trilateral Contact Group,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and other key actors in seeking a
peaceful settlement of the conflict in eastern Ukraine.
The Secretary-General has also repeatedly called for
revitalizing efforts in these negotiation formats and
bilateral channels.

As consistently highlighted by incidents over
the past five years, the conflict in eastern Ukraine
is neither dormant nor frozen. It is a conflict in the
heart of Europe that continues to claim victims. With
the five recommitments to the ceasefire by the main
stakeholders in the Trilateral Contact Group format
last year, there has been a total of over a dozen such
ceasefire recommitments since the start of the conflict.
Each one was, regrettably, short-lived.

As reported by the OSCE, military advance
positions on both sides of the contact line are coming
closer to each other in the so called grey areas, while
the use of heavy weapons and their deployment in the
proximity of the contact line are a reality. This week,
another round of discussions within the Trilateral
Contact Group will be taking place in Minsk. It is the
United Nations sincere hope and expectation that the
relevant parties will reach tangible outcomes at these
meetings and implement decisions in good faith and
without delay.

While there has been an overall reduction in
violence since 2014, including in the number of civilian
deaths, casualties and destruction continue on an
almost weekly basis. At the same time, an estimated
1.5 million people remain internally displaced. The
periodic escalations remind us of the unstable reality
along the contact line, which continues to adversely
impact the already dire socioeconomic situation and
the crumbling infrastructure in the conflict-affected
area. There is an urgent need to agree on additional
measures that would make the ceasefire sustainable
and irreversible. The priority of the parties should
be, Without delay, to Withdraw heavy weapons from
populated areas, disengage forces and protect critical
civilian infrastructure.

The United Nations remains fully committed to
playing its role in continuing to provide humanitarian
assistance, human rights monitoring and development
support. The scale and urgency ofneeds arising from the
conflict remain immense. Over halfa million people live
within five kilometres of the contact line and they are the
most exposed to periodic shelling, gunfire, landmines
and unexploded ordnance. The area around the contact
line remains among the most mine-contaminated
areas in the world. As called for by the Council in its
presidential statement S/PRST/2018/12, of 6 June 2018,
it is essential that the international community step
up efforts to help meet the humanitarian needs on the
ground as part of the humanitarian response plan for
Ukraine. The United Nations will continue to spare
no effort to fulfil its responsibilities in the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and the monitoring of human
rights. However, I wish to underline that it is also
essential that the United Nations humanitarian efforts
on the ground not be politicized or instrumentalized by
any side.

This year, the conflict in eastern Ukraine will enter
its sixth year There should be no illusions - While
negotiations may have become protracted, this conflict
remains today an active threat to international peace
and security. It would be misleading to think that time
by itself will bring about solutions. On this occasion,
and echoing the Security Council's expectations, the
United Nations once again calls for swift progress in the
implementation of the Minsk agreements. The United
Nations also urges all parties to avoid any unilateral
steps that could deepen the divide or depart from the
spirit and letter of the Minsk agreements.

The conflict in Ukraine is first and foremost
tragically affecting the Ukrainian people, but it is also
taking place in a context of increasing challenges to
the international peace and security framework. The
conflict continues to test the credibility of international
and regional organizations. In his address to the
Council two years ago on conflicts in Europe (see S/PV.7886), the Secretary-General stressed the need
to prevent the emergence of new crises and to resolve
existing conflicts in the region. Last month, in his New
Year message to the General Assembly, the Secretary-
General again singled out the conflict in Ukraine as
one of the key challenges that continues to confront the
international community. Member States need to work
together in the interest of regional stability.

The United Nations underlines the need to fully
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine, within its internationally recognized borders,
in accordance with relevant General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions. Once again, we urge all
parties to demonstrate the necessary political will to
ensure the earliest possible end to the conflict and help
bring about peace and stability in all of Ukraine.

