Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to welcome Mr. Valentin
Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and thank him for his briefing, to which
we listened carefully.

We are committed to the Dayton Agreement and
to defending and maintaining the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
believe that it is vitally important for political leaders
and the international presence to remain focused on the
balance afforded by the Dayton Agreement and the
subsequent political structures. We are sure that all of
the parties to those agreements will continue to realize
the importance of the achievements of the past 15 years
and defend the General Framework Agreement for
Peace. The Agreement is a living document whose
meaning has evolved together with Bosnia and
Herzegovina over time.

We would just like to make four comments on
Mr. Inzko's report. First, we are pleased that the
formation of the Government has been completed,
albeit 15 months late. It is obvious that the resumption
of a political dialogue is essential if tangible progress
is to be achieved. During the stalemate, Bosnia and
Herzegovina did not only suffer from political
instability, but also from economic instability. In that
regard, we trust that the important step of forming a
Government will provide a basis for institutional
progress and the groundwork for Bosnia and
Herzegovina to become a stable, economically
prosperous and democratic country. A clear example is
the recent adoption, on a first reading, of the budget for
2012, particularly since it allocates resources for
holding local elections this year and for the first census
to be conducted since 1991 for the following the year.
We welcome the enactment of the country's Law on
Population Census, Households and Apartments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina in 2013. We believe it is
important given the large number of people displaced
since the war.

Secondly, we also have a positive View of the
agreement adopted on 9 March on the principles to be
used to resolve the issues related to the ownership and
use of defence and State property. It should
undoubtedly facilitate the achievement of the five
objectives and two conditions necessary for the
transition from the Office of the High Representative.
We should take advantage of current political
circumstances and encourage all parties to redouble
their efforts to that end. We believe that at this stage of
the settlement of the Bosnian conflict the time is ripe
for transferring responsibility for the future of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to Bosnians themselves.

That brings me to our third point, on Brcko
district. We realize that it is vital to the stability of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We await with interest the
forthcoming meeting of the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board next week. There are various
issues to consider, in particular the possible adoption of
a decision on terminating the supervision of Brcko.
That requires an assurance that the local institutions
are functioning effectively and reliably. Similarly, it
also requires that the Arbitral Tribunal established
under annex 2 of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace be maintained as a mechanism for
guaranteeing all the important and binding obligations
imposed by the Final Award.

Fourthly, we should recall the fact that the
Dayton Peace Agreement is supposed to be replaced by
a permanent Bosnian constitution. We urge all the
parties involved to focus once again on constitutional
reform. Its goal is to establish strong and representative
State structures. We note the establishment of the
Parliamentary Interim Joint Committee for
Implementation of the European Court of Human
Rights ruling. We will follow with interest the results
of that important undertaking.

As we can see, peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina depend on various factors. The report (see S/2012/307) treats the twentieth anniversary of Bosnia
and Herzegovina's independence and its unanimous
admission to the United Nations as an opportunity for
reflecting on lessons learned and on the road still to be
travelled. There is no doubt that the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the region is better today than it
was 20 years ago. The success of our mission will
depend on whether all the parties, including the
international community, respect the rule of law and
the legal instruments that support the country's
political structures.

