Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I thank Under-
Secretary-General Feltman and Mr. Hug for their
briefings today. It is important to note the positive
elements in those briefings, in particular that the
ceasefire had generally been holding - if imperfectly
and with frequent violations.

But as they have also told the Council, there are
serious problems on the ground. Every day Ukrainian
citizens are being killed and Ukrainian towns besieged,
and the Ukrainian economy continues to suffer, all as
a consequence of continued aggression by separatist
forces supported by Russia and in violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine.

As Mr. Feltman and Mr. Hug have also reminded
us, the conflict is taking a huge toll on the Ukrainian
people. Ukraine now has the dubious honour of being
among the top 10 countries for the number of internally
displaced persons and, worse, humanitarian relief
supplies are not getting through. We strongly support
Mr. Feltman's call on both the Government of Ukraine
and the separatist forces to lift the restraints on access
to humanitarian relief.

In February, the Council adopted resolution 2202
(2015), endorsing the Minsk package of measures and
calling on the parties to implement them fully, including
an immediate and comprehensive ceasefire and the
withdrawal of heavy weapons. As we have been told,
the fulfilment of these commitments remains imperfect
at best, but, at worst, those commitments have been
disregarded. We deem the Council's ongoing scrutiny
to be crucial.

The package of measures mandated that the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) would support the process of restoring peace,
including by monitoring and verifying compliance. Yet
the OSCE faces a major obstacle in carrying out this
role due to its inability to access conflict areas. The
monitors are obstructed from doing their job due to the
security risks associated with ceasefire violations, or
because of restrictions imposed on them.

It is imperative that all sides ensure that the OSCE
be granted the access necessary for it to fulfil its role as
envisaged in the Minsk measures. We call on Russia to
use its influence over the separatists to ensure that what
was agreed in Minsk is implemented and that the OSCE
monitors are able to perform their jobs in areas under
separatist control. The important work that OSCE
monitors are doing on the ground is often difficult and
dangerous. We commend them, but their security and
safety must continue to be protected.

New Zealand remains very concerned about the
situation in eastern Ukraine. We condemn the violence
seen this week in Marinka, and reiterate the call for
restraint made by the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office.
Heavy weapons must be withdrawn from the contact
line and a true ceasefire must be respected. The costs
of the conflict continue to mount. A lasting solution
is needed. Genuine engagement in the political process
laid out in the Minsk agreements, in particular the
Trilateral Contact Group and its working groups, will
be critical to restoring peace and ending suffering.

As detailed in the latest report of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the Ukrainian people continue to be subject to serious
human rights abuses. Until the package of measures is
implemented, including a comprehensive ceasefire, the
biggest losers, as always, will be the people of Ukraine.
But the other loss will be the long history of close
friendship between Russia and Ukraine. That cannot be
good for either country.

