Mr. Ochoa Martinez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the convening of this open debate,
which is particularly relevant in the light of the
five-year review of the peacebuilding architecture that
will take place next year. That process will allow us to
review the functioning of the peacebuilding structure
and other components, such as the special political
missions. National reconciliation is fundamental to
conflict prevention and sustainable peace. Creating
favourable conditions for achieving peace, establishing
and consolidating democratic institutions, ensuring
that an independent and impartial judicial system
can flourish, respecting human rights and ensuring
the minimum guarantees for social coexistence all
constitute conditions that are crucial to national
reconciliation processes.

National reconciliation represents a complex phase
of mourning aimed at healing the wounds of societies
and give way to a new stage in the development of a
common and collective plan for the future. This process,
like any healing process, requires not only dialogue, but
also historical truth. That is where transitional justice
plays a fundamental role in reconciliation. Access to
truth and accountability are key to rebuilding the social
fabric, especially in post-conf lict situations. Transitional
justice dictates that the respect for the rule of law
must be at the centre of the conversation, given that it
constitutes a fundamental element of sustainable peace.
In that regard, we recall the presidential statement on
the rule of law, adopted under the Mexican presidency
of the Security Council in June 2010 (S/PRST/ZOlO/l l),
in which this organ expressed its determination to fight
impunity and uphold accountability with all appropriate
means and drew attention to the full range of justice
and reconciliation mechanisms to be considered,
including national and international criminal courts
and tribunals, truth and reconciliation commissions,
national reparation programmes for victims and
traditional dispute resolution mechanisms.
Mexico reiterates the provisions of the Declaration
of the High-Level Meeting of the General Assembly on
the Rule of Law at the National and International levels,
adopted in 2012 (General Assembly resolution 67/1), on
the importance of having a comprehensive approach
to transitional justice that covers the full range of
judicial and non-judicial measures, aimed at ensuring
accountability, rendering justice, providing recourse
to victims, promoting reconciliation, establishing
independent entities to monitor security systems,
restoring confidence in State institutions and promoting
the rule of law. Accountability for those responsible
for violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law in conflict and post-conflict
situations is essential for preventing the repetition
of such violations and for seeking peace, justice and
reconciliation. Access to justice and support for victims
are central, interlinked elements that underpin genuine
national reconciliation.

Mexico acknowledges the contribution made by
criminal courts, in particular the International Criminal
Court, not only in fighting impunity for the most serious
crimes but also for their work to establish the truth for
posterity and restore victims' rights and dignity. More
than courts of law, those institutions play a vital role in
cementing national reconciliation through justice.

There can be no national reconciliation without
development, and no development without national
reconciliation. Both elements are crucial for
transforming conflict into conditions for stability and
lasting peace. We acknowledge the intrinsic links
between the Sustainable Development Goals of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and peace.
We hope that the review process of the peacebuilding
architecture scheduled for next year will produce
recommendations on ways to strengthen the role of
the United Nations, the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission in reconciliation processes.

