Mr. Ali (Malaysia): Mr. President, let me, at the
outset, congratulate you on your leadership of this
Council and express how pleased we are to see you
presiding over this meeting today.

My delegation aligns itself with the statements
made by the representatives of Egypt and Syria on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, respectively.

Since the most recent debate on this item, held in
October 2009 (see S/PV.6201), and despite the so-
called lO-month moratorium, Israeli authorities continue
to announce plans to build hundreds upon hundreds of
settlement units in the West Bank, particularly in East
Jerusalem. The construction of the separation wall in
and around occupied East Jerusalem has continued
unabated despite the Advisory Opinion of the
International Court of Justice of 9 July 2004.
Concomitantly, illegal land confiscations and countless
other unlawful measures continue, including home
demolitions and the eviction of Palestinian families.

Furthermore, the ongoing revocation of the
residency rights of Palestinian inhabitants of East
Jerusalem has further worsened the situation. In 2008
alone, Israel revoked the residency rights of nearly
5,000 Palestinians, forbidding them from living in the
very city of their birth. This figure represents the
highest number of residency revocations in a one-year
period since the occupation began in 1967. Tens of
thousands more Palestinian J erusalemites are under the
threat of having their residency rights revoked.

All these illegal policies and the affirmation by
the Israeli Prime Minister that Israel will retain parts of
the occupied West Bank will definitely change the
demographic composition, character and status of the
occupied Palestinian territory and seriously undermine
the two-State solution. Such actions are in grave
violation of international law, the Fourth Geneva
Convention and relevant United Nations resolutions. In
this regard, Israel must be held accountable.
With regard to Gaza, the humanitarian situation
there remains dire. The blockade effectively imprisons
the people of Gaza, deprives them of essential needs,
including the construction materials that are necessary
to rebuild their homes and other vital infrastructure
destroyed during the Israeli military aggression of
more than a year ago. This illegal blockade, which is a
form of collective punishment forbidden by international
law, must be brought to an end. In this regard, we again
urge the Security Council to take action to end the
siege, in accordance with resolution 1860 (2009).

Resolving these issues requires us to focus our
energies and efforts on restoring to the Palestinians
their inalienable rights, including their right to an
independent State of their very own. This in turn
requires all parties to act sincerely to achieve the
objective of a just and lasting solution and action to be
taken by the Security Council to restore peace and
stability in the Middle East. Needless to say, this
requires the political will of this Council to implement
its very own resolutions on this issue.

