Mr. Nyamulinda (Rwanda) (spoke in French):
On behalf of my delegation and my Government, Sir, I
should like to commend your Government, yourself
and your delegation for the competence with which you
are guiding the work of the Council this month. At the
same time, I should like to pay a tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Munir Akram of Pakistan,
and his delegation for the energy they brought to the
work of the Council in May.

My delegation also wishes to thank you, Sir, for
having organized this important meeting to consider
the report of the Security Council mission to Central
Africa. It is taking place at a very difficult moment for
the Great Lakes region of Africa, and as the region of
Ituri in particular is in thrall to the struggles of rival
armed groups, sowing death, which we all deplore, and
misery among the civilian population of the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

My delegation also wishes to take this
opportunity, on behalf of the Government of Rwanda,
to commend Ambassador Jean-Marc de La Sabliere and
the mission of Security Council ambassadors that he
led to Central Africa for the effectiveness with which
they performed an excellent job in that region. We hope
that the recommendations of the Council, with all of its
acknowledged experience and vision, will in future be
a source of inspiration in the search for a solution to
unresolved issues from the Lusaka and Pretoria
Agreements, including the complete disarmament of
the former Rwandan Army forces (ex-FAR) and
Interahamwe militias, which continue to pose a real
threat to the security of Rwanda.

Nevertheless, my delegation would draw the
Council's attention to the following observations on
developments in the political and military situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in general and
in Ituri in particular.

In recent days, my Government has been
subjected to various persistent accusations from certain
elements of the press and from so-called civil society,
represented by the Bishop of Butembo. These sources
have described the presence of the Rwanda Defence
Forces in the regions of Ituri and Kanyabayonga. The
same sources also describe the dispatch of Rwandan
army helicopters to support the forces of the Union des
patriotes congolais and the Rassemblement congolais
pour la democratic (RCD)-Goma. These allegations are
false, bereft of all truth, totally baseless and the utter
fabrication of those who, under the cover of civil
society, wish to sully the image of Rwanda and to serve
the interests of divisive groups defending ideological
causes based on ethnic hatred and the exclusion of
Rwandophone Congolese or of Congolese who bear
some physical resemblance to the Rwandese. The
Government of Rwanda is involved neither from anear
nor from afar with the events taking place in Ituri, as
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and its patrons would have us believe. The
question of Ituri is an internal political issue of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Thus, answers to
the question must be sought primarily within that
country. The Government of Rwanda has neither sent
soldier to the Democratic Republic of the Congo since
the total withdrawal of the Rwandan Defence Forces of
5 October 2002, nor offers military support to any rebel
group in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
When the Government of Rwanda decided in late
1996 to combat the regime of the late Field Marshal
Mobutu and subsequently to send troops into the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
August 1998, its decision was in fact a solution of last
resort, following its repeated disappointment at seeing
the international community fail to answer its many
appeals to respond to my country's security concerns.

The presence of the Rwandan army in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo up until November
2002 certainly managed to contain the attacks of the
ex-FAR and Interahamwe militias of sorry memory and
to stop them from crossing the borders. That presence
was beneficial to the populations of the border
provinces of Gisenyi, Kibuye and Cyangugu, who were
living under the threat of those forces, whose avowed
objective was to recapture power in Kigali and
complete the 1994 genocide. In such circumstances, the
Government of Rwanda was committed to honouring
its primary legitimate responsibility of protecting its
population and territory and to avert the threat of
renewed genocide.

At the request of the international community,
and following the signing of the Pretoria Agreement on
30 July 2002 between the Governments of Rwanda and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Government of Rwanda withdrew all its forces. I
would recall that the withdrawal operations began on
17 September and were complete by 5 October 2002.
This total withdrawal was recognized in a statement
issued by the Third Party Verification Mechanism, as
contained in document S/2002/1206 of 28 October
2002.

Ever since the signing of the Pretoria Agreement
and the ensuing withdrawal of the Rwanda Defence
Forces, the Government of Rwanda has tirelessly
extended its hand to the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in order to seek solutions that
would be satisfactory to our countries and in the
interests of all.

However, we must note that the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has made no
gesture on the ground towards re-establishing a climate
of trust between our respective Governments. Indeed,
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has maintained its support for the former
Rwandan Army forces and the Interahamwe militias. In
order to establish an alibi, that Government and its
patrons quickly spread the rumour that the Rwanda
Defence Forces had never fully withdrawn, thus
justifying their attitude and the reoccupation of the
territories of South and North Kivu, with the support of
the Interahamwe, the ex-FAR, the Mai Mai rebels and
Mbusa Nyamwisi's RCD-Kisangani/Mouvement de
liberation.

Given the prevailing political situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, my delegation
would ask the Council to pressure the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to behave like
responsible politicians who honour their commitments
towards their neighbours and the international
community; to persuade the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to respect the
Lusaka and Pretoria Agreements in all their provisions,
in particular those relative to Rwanda's security
concerns; to pressure the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to stop supplying
weapons and ammunition to the ex-FAR and the
Interahamwe militias; to remind the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo that it must comply
with the various resolutions of the Security Council
calling on it to cut off all moral, political, logistic and
financial support for the ex-FAR and the Interahamwe
militias and to sunder its solidarity with the
genocidaires; to persuade the Government not to shirk
its governmental responsibilities and not to seek
scapegoats to explain its inability to unite the
Congolese and its political and military failures vis-a-
vis the RCD-Goma; sufficiently to pressure the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to accept the establishment of a truly inclusive
Government and a power-sharing arrangement in
accordance with the Sun City Agreement; to ask the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to pull its forces back from the eastern part of the
country to the positions they held before the
withdrawal of the foreign armies, in compliance with
the various agreements; and to strengthen the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and provide it with a clear
mandate so as to prepare it to step in once the Interim
Emergency Multinational Force has completed its task.

With respect to political developments in
Burundi, my Government commends the initiative of
the African Union, which decided to send an African
force to assist in restoring trust among the belligerents
and to help Burundi implement the disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration (DDRR)
process. However, the Government of Rwanda
continues to be concerned at the persistent refusal of
the leaders of certain rebel factions of the Front pour la
defense de la democratie (FDD) and the Parti pour la
liberation du peuple hutu/Forces nationales pour la
liberation (PALIPEHUTU/FNL) to join the Arusha
peace process. We earnestly ask the Security Council to
put the necessary pressure on those groups to bring
them to see reason and to respect the agreements and
protocols signed in Arusha.

To conclude, my delegation, on behalf of my
Government, would like to reiterate its keen gratitude
to the mission of the Security Council and the Council
as a whole for its resolve to find solutions to the
complex questions that our region faces.

We hope that the Council, in its wisdom,
combined with the resolve of the international
community and the countries concerned by the crisis in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, will arrive at a
response to the various parties' concerns, taking into
account the previously signed agreements of Lusaka,
Pretoria and Sun City.

The Government of Rwanda remains committed
to supporting the multinational force charged with
restoring peace in Ituri. To that end, the Government of
Rwanda will spare no effort in associating itself with
all countries of the region that desire peace, and with
the international community, in order to find peaceful
solutions for the crises haunting Central Africa, in
particular the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Burundi.

