The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, in which she requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President,
Mrs. Kalajdzisalihovic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina) took
a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/1998/248, which contains the
text of a letter dated 17 March 1998 from the Permanent
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
announcement of the decision on 15 March 1998
relating to Breko by the Arbitral Tribunal pursuant
to Article V, Annex 2 to the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the Annexes thereto (collectively the Peace Agreement, S/1995/999, annex) and to the Award of
14 February 1997 (S/1997/126).

"The Security Council, recalling that the 1997
Award helped to promote the start of a peaceful,
orderly and phased return process in Breko and the
beginnings of the establishment of a multi-ethnic
administration, considers that the decision of 15
March 1998 represents the best interests of the peace
process. The Council commends the efforts of the
Presiding Arbitrator and of the International
Supervisor for Brcko.

"The Security Council calls upon the Parties to
Annex 2 to the Peace Agreement to implement the
decision without delay, as they are obliged to do.
The Council underscores the importance of prompt
and full cooperation by the parties to the Peace
Agreement in carrying out their commitments to
implement the Peace Agreement in its entirety,
including cooperation with the International
Supervisor for Breko and the Office of the High
Representative."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1998/7.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.15 p.rn.

