Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation wishes to thank you, Sir, for convening this
meeting, and Mr. Abou Moussa, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), for his
briefing and his leadership in heading that Office. We
welcome the progress made by UNOCA in fulfilling its
mandate and in strengthening the coordinating role of
the United Nations presence in the region on the issues
covered by its mandate.

In recent months, we have seen improvements in the
democratic systems of the region. The general elections
in Angola and parliamentary elections in Congo took
place in a generally peaceful environment. Differences
were expressed Via the legal and institutional channels
provided for that purpose, thereby demonstrating that
democratic values and institutions are making progress
in becoming the cornerstones of representative and
legitimate power in the region. With a View to further
progress, UNOCA must continue to support national
authorities in strengthening national capacities through
providing requested assistance to improve their
electoral systems and legislation.

The progress made in the region has also materialized
as major economic growth. Despite the complex global
economic environment, the region has managed to
maintain good levels of macroeconomic performance,
and it is foreseen that growth rates will continue along
those lines. Nevertheless, efforts must be pursued in
order to ensure that the benefits of economic growth
lead to improved living conditions of the population.
The formulation of equitable macroeconomic policies
aimed at achieving inclusive socioeconomic growth is a
purpose for which the United Nations must support the
States in the region through assistance with specialized
training.

To facilitate consistent human rights action among
the various United Nations actors in the region, we
must focus on the priority creation and strengthening of
national capacities and institutions in that context. In that
respect and in order to carry out its mandate, UNOCA
must promote closely coordinated, complementary
efforts among the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, UN-Women and
other relevant actors of the system so as to enable the
States of the region to gradually and effectively achieve
and improve the enjoyment of and respect for all the

rights and freedoms of the populations.
We welcome UNOCA's links with regional and
subregional organizations and its efforts to closely
coordinate work with them and to strengthen those
institutions as a priority of its mandate. Activities
aimed at implementing framework cooperation
agreements must continue, and we encourage the
Special Representative to pursue a fluid dialogue
leading to a clear definition of priorities and goals for
action, in which matters such as conflict prevention and
the fight against illicit trafficking, terrorism, piracy and
armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea will be covered in
a comprehensive and coordinated fashion.

The Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) continues
to threaten the peace and stability of the countries of
the region, and the effects of its activities continue
to seriously harm the civilian population. There are
hundreds of thousands of displaced persons and
refugees. Violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights continue to characterize the violent
actions of that armed group. We welcome the progress
made in the implementation of the United Nations
regional strategy to address the threat and impact of
the activities of the LRA, and towards the launching of
the African Union-led Regional Cooperation Initiative
against the Lord's Resistance Army.

The countries of Central Africa must respond to the
many challenges to their security. The political will of
the countries of the region must therefore be maintained
and supported so that they can mount a sustained attack
against the threat posed by the Lord's Resistance Army.
Strategic, ongoing dialogue between the United Nations
and the African Union is crucial if action against the
LRA is to remain a priority and if firm steps are to
be taken towards defining the pending elements of the
African Union Regional Cooperation Initiative.

In order to achieve the implementation of the
five goals established in the strategy, it is essential
that sufficient resources be made available. All of the
components of the strategy are equally important and
mutually reinforcing. We therefore believe that a clear
division of responsibilities, the definition ofparameters
and a timeline for their implementation will require
an appropriate balance that takes into account the
key importance of such aspects as the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, care for the
victims, and the effective improvement of the social and
economic conditions of the populations of the region
affected by the presence of the Lord's Resistance Army.

I note the activities of UNOCA to strengthen
coordination among the various agencies of the
United Nations system, participation in peacekeeping
operations, and support for the special political offices
in the region. We must therefore continue to promote
the coordinating role of UNOCA within the United
Nations in the tasks assigned to it.

Finally, we express our willingness to adopt a draft
presidential statement on this topic.

