Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), under the able chairmanship of Ambassador
Quinlan, as well as the Panel of Experts, for their
continued work in supporting the implementation of the
Security Council's resolutions on Iran.

The United Kingdom, like others in the international
community, remains deeply concerned by Iran's nuclear
programme. Since our last briefing (see S/PV.6930),
the E3+3 and the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) have both met with Iranian officials to discuss
it, but Iran has shown no willingness on either track
to address the international community's legitimate
concerns.

Meanwhile, 10 years after the first IAEA report
on Iran, Iran continues to press ahead with its nuclear
programme. Iran has no plausible civilian purpose for
the amount of enriched material it currently possesses,
never mind the amount it can now produce. Iran has
violated multiple resolutions of the IAEA Board of
Governors and United Nations Security Council. To
quote the May report of the IAEA Director General, "it
is now essential and urgent for Iran to cooperate with
the Agency on all outstanding substantive issues".

The United Kingdom remains committed to finding
a peaceful, negotiated solution to the nuclear issue. If,
following the recent elections, Iran is prepared to engage
seriously in negotiations on its nuclear programme, we
are ready to respond in good faith. Our commitment to
seeking a peaceful diplomatic settlement is sincere. We
believe that the confidence-building measure proposal
submitted by the E3+3 in Almaty is a fair and credible
offer. We urge Iran to engage seriously, but unless it
takes positive steps to address international concerns,
the political and economic pressure will increase.

Turning to the work of the Committee, we note with
regret that Iran continues to breach its international
obligations. The Panel of Experts - which, I remind
colleagues, includes both a Russian and a Chinese
expert - reached the clear and unanimous conclusion
in January that Iran's ballistic missile launches last
year, during military exercises conducted by the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps, constitued a violation of
paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010).

We welcome the Committee's letter to Iran in April,
expressing its concern at this violation. We regret that
Iran yet again has chosen not to respond. We reiterate
our view that the Committee must now take appropriate
actions in response to this serious breach. It should seek
to designate individuals involved in this violation, as
well as prepare an information assistance notice to
assist all Member States with implementing ballistic
missile-related sanctions on Iran.

There is also credible information that Iran is
providing substantial military and financial support to
Hizbullah and the Syrian regime, in contravention of
the United Nations embargo on the export of weapons
by Iran, as set out in resolution 1747 (2007). Iran
continues to illicitly transfer arms within the region, as
the Panel's report on Gaza shows, as well as to African
States. Iran has a responsibility to bring stability and
security to the region. Its continued efforts to promote
sectarian violence and instability across the wider
region and beyond must come to an end.

The United Kingdom also notes with concern the
Panel of Experts' report on the seizure of illicit arms
from Iran reported by the Government of Yemen.
The evidence in the report confirms that that was yet
another violation of sanctions by Iran. That transfer
threatens to undermine Yemen's fragile transition. We
urge the Committee and the Security Council to take
action on it.

We welcome the renewal of the mandate of the Panel
of Experts for another year. The Panel provides a crucial
investigation and reporting role for the Committee. The
Panel's final report (see S/2013/33l, annex) highlights
Iran's increasingly sophisticated sanctions-evasion
techniques. That underlines the importance of the
outreach role of the Committee. It must do more to
encourage vigilance from, and reporting by, Member
States in order to better implement sanctions. We
continue to strongly encourage Member States to
provide reports on possible sanctions violations.

If Iran's leaders want to bring all sanctions to an
end and enable Iran to realize the benefits of a civil
nuclear programme, then they must comply with their
international obligations and engage with concerns over
the nuclear programme. As my Foreign Secretary said
recently, we look to Iran to consider carefully whether
it wants to continue on its current course, and face
increasing pressure and isolation from the international
community, or whether it wants to enter into meaningful
negotiations. We hope that, following the election of
Mr. Rowhani, Iran will take a different course for the
future - addressing international concerns about its
nuclear programme, taking forward a constructive
relationship with the international community and
improving the political and human rights situation for
the people of Iran.

