Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate Ethiopia on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month of September. I would like to thank the
United Kingdom for its initiative and efforts throughout
the past month, which led to resolution 2379 (2017),
which we have just adopted. I wish also to congratulate
Iraq, that brotherly country, for its contribution to this
important step towards holding Da'esh accountable for
the crimes it committed in Iraq.

The crimes committed by Da'esh in Iraq and in
other places where it exists are unprecedented in their
criminality and cruelty. They make no distinction
between children, women and the elderly. Hence
it is imperative to ensure accountability for these
crimes, either to seek justice for innocent victims or
as deterrence. Accountability should not be limited
to the direct perpetrators of these crimes. Those who
incite, finance or provide weapons or safe haven, or
facilitate the commission of such crimes, should also
be held accountable.

In that vein, we stress that holding accountable
those responsible for the crimes committed in the name
of ISIS in Iraq is a crucial aspect in fighting terrorism
in that brotherly country, and is a vital element in the
framework of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy. Resolution 2379 (2017) includes a
number of provisions related to the establishment of the
investigative team, which will collect evidence related
to crimes committed by ISIS. The team will help in the
relevant investigations.

Since Egypt was briefed on this topic a year ago,
as well as throughout consultations on the resolution,
Egypt has insisted on respect for the sovereignty of Iraq
and the independence of its judiciary. It has stressed
that Iraq must approve the provisions and details of the
resolution. Furthermore, Egypt has also emphasized
that the approval of any country other than Iraq should
be obtained before the new team takes any action or
initiate investigations related to nationals of those
other countries.

I would also like to stress that accountability for
ISIS in Iraq is an important step towards achieving
intercommunal reconciliation. That would prevent
the re-emergence of ISIS and any other terrorist
organization. In addition, the international community
should move ahead in its efforts to rebuild areas
liberated from ISIS in order to shore up Iraq's
capacities, in particular in the areas of the judiciary,
security and counter-terrorism in general. In carrying
out those tasks, it should adhere to the principle of
national ownership.

In that context, I stress that Egypt, as Chair of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, has focused on building
the capacities of Iraq to counter terrorism and hold
accountable those responsible for crimes committed
in that country. The Committee held a number of
meetings in Iraq with donors, and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate has visited
Bagdad on numerous occasions to support Iraq's efforts
to combat terrorism.
Today's resolution sends an important message to
terrorists that the international community is united
and determined to eradicate terrorism, and a message
to the international community that it must end any
form of support for terrorism. The Council's adoption
of a resolution holding ISIS accountable for its crimes
is important. More important still, however, is the
political will of States to implement this and other
relevant resolutions concerning counter-terrorism.

The Council should closely follow the implementation
of the resolution and hold accountable those States that
do not fully comply and those that continue to support
terrorism and shelter terrorists. I stress that Egypt will
maintain its commitment to being at the forefront of the
international community's efforts to defeat terrorism.
Egypt will take all possible measures in accordance
with the international law to counter terrorism and deal
with those States supporting it.

