Mr. Bennouna (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I wish you every success in your
endeavours.

Once again, the Council is meeting to consider
the situation in the occupied Palestinian territories. It
does so in the context of the ongoing Israeli escalation
and the persistence of the occupying Power in its
policy of demolition, murder and daily humiliation of
the Palestinian people and their legitimate leadership.

I should like to recall that, immediately after
these events, His Majesty King Mohammed VI, in his
capacity as Chairman of the Al-Quds Committee,
contacted President Yasser Arafat in order to ascertain
the details of the Palestinian situation, in particular in
the headquarters of the Palestinian President. During
that contact, the Morrocan monarch expressed the
complete solidarity of the Moroccan people with the
Palestinian people and their leadership in the new
tragedy imposed upon them by the Israeli occupation.

We have all seen with our own eyes how Israeli
bulldozers demolished the corridor separating President
Arafat's bedroom from the conference wing of the
building. We have all seen how all the buildings
surrounding the presidential compound were destroyed.
Israel's isolation of the Palestinian President and its
demand that he hand over a number of his close
associates can be seen only as a continuation of the
policy to humiliate the Palestinian leadership and to
destroy its legitimacy.

While the international community had thought
that such practices were a thing of the past, we find
ourselves once again facing the endless series of Israeli
provocations, which have naturally led the Palestinians
to demonstrate in the streets to express their support for
President Arafat. Once again, the response of the
occupying forces was a violent one, leading to the
killing of innocent Palestinian civilians.

It is totally unacceptable that, whenever it finds
itself facing security problems on its territory, Israel
should proceed to attack the Palestinian leadership and
to destroy its infrastructure and the modest facilities
available to the Palestinian Authority. It is high time
that Israel understood that its security is inextricably
linked to more serious cooperation with the Palestinian
Authority and to its complete respect for the
Authority's representatives. It is undeniable that the
Palestinian Authority has made genuine efforts in
recent weeks towards a far-reaching reform of its
structure and the rationalization of its work. A
scorched-earth policy has never led to the
establishment of lasting peace and security in any part
of the world.

The Kingdom of Morocco believes that it is
indeed high time for the Security Council to discharge
its responsibilities at this very delicate juncture in
international relations. It will thereby avert a further
deterioration of the situation in the Palestinian
territories and its repercussions in the rest of the
region. The Kingdom of Morocco takes this
opportunity to reaffirm its repudiation of all acts of
violence that target innocent civilians, by whomsoever
committed. It is our hope that the Security Council will
condemn such acts and adopt the necessary measures to
put an end to them.

The Council is called upon to adopt a resolution
to rectify the situation and breathe a breath of hope for
peace into the spirits of the peoples of the region,
foremost among which are the Palestinian people. We
sincerely hope that the Council will crown its
deliberations today with the adoption of a resolution
that will contribute positively to ending the violence in
the region and to the creation of conditions conducive
to addressing the deteriorating humanitarian situation
of the Palestinian people under the occupation. We
further hope that the resolution will restore the
negotiations to their proper path.

The Kingdom of Morocco will remain faithful to
its commitment to contribute to all serious initiatives
aimed at the establishment of a just, comprehensive
and lasting peace in the Middle East that will ensure
the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people,
including the right to the establishment of their
independent State, with its capital in Al-Quds Al-
Sharif, as well as Israel's withdrawal from the other
Arab territories it has occupied since 1967. Such a
peace must ensure security for all States and peoples of
the region.

