The President (spoke in French): At the outset of the
meeting, I should like, on behalf of the Council, to express
sincere condolences to the bereaved families of all those
who have lost their lives since the beginning of the crisis in
and around Kosovo, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. On
behalf of the Council, I also wish to convey our deepest
sympathy to all the victims of that tragedy. I now invite the
members of the Council to stand and observe a minute of
silence.

The members of the Council observed a minute of
silence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998)
and 1203 (1998)

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Belarus, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Cuba, Egypt, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Jordan, Kuwait, Morocco, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates and
Yemen, in which they request to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nesho
(Albania), Mr. Sychov (Belarus), Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina), Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba),
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt), Mr. NejadHosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Abu-Nimah (Jordan),
Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait), Mr. Zahid (Morocco),
Mr. Kamal (Pakistan), Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar),
Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Ka (Senegal),
Mr. Vural (Turkey), Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine),
Mr. El-Ethary (Yemen) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council table.


The President (spoke in French): I have received a
request dated 13 May 1999 from Mr. Vladislav J ovanovie
to be allowed to address the Council in the course of its
discussion of the item on its agenda. With the consent of
the Council, I would propose to invite him to take a seat
at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jovanovic'
took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter dated 13
May 1999 from the Permanent Representative of Qatar to
the United Nations, which reads as follows:

"I have the honour in my capacity as Chairman
of the Islamic Group at the United Nations to
request that the Security Council extend an invitation
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Ahmad Haji Hosseini, Deputy
Permanent Observer of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference to the United Nations, during the
Council's discussion on the draft resolution on the
humanitarian situation in and around Kosovo."

That letter will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/1999/522. If I hear
no objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules
of procedure to Mr. Hosseini,

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in
its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/1999/517, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Argentina, Bahrain, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Egypt, Gabon, the Gambia, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Jordan, Kuwait, Malaysia,
Morocco, Namibia, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Slovenia, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates and
Yemen. I should like to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to document S/1999/542, which
contains the text of a letter dated 6 May 1999 from the
Permanent Representative of Turkey to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

 

It is my understanding the Council is ready to proceed
to the vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless I hear
any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

I shall first give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.


