Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would first like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
good wishes that you have expressed to me just now.

With regard to this month's work, the month has
been a very fruitful one. The President made a very
comprehensive plan for the month's work. While
promoting transparency, he also tried his best to
guarantee the efficiency of our work.

The Security Council successfully carried out its
work for this month, thanks to the efficient efforts of
the President and the work of the Mauritius delegation.
In particular, the programme of work of the last week
fully demonstrates the capacity of the President for
coordination and leadership.

The Security Council held a public meeting on
the situation in Africa, which demonstrates the
importance the Security Council attaches to the
problem of Africa, and which also strengthens the
communication between regional organizations such as
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the
United Nations. We hope that the broad consensus
reached on how to resolve the issues of peace and
development in Africa can be quickly translated into
concrete actions. The issue of Africa should be a
priority matter on the agenda of the Security Council.
In the future, we hope that we can further strengthen
the communication between the OAU, other regional
organizations and the United Nations.

The President also arranged a timely open
meeting to hear the report of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee on its work and future work plan. At the
same time, it was an opportunity to get a sense from
the broader membership of what it expects from the
Committee. This is no doubt very beneficial for the
next stage of work of the Committee.

The question of Afghanistan was also a focus of
the this month's work. The Chairman of the Afghan
Interim Authority, Mr. Karzai, spent only a short time
in the Security Council, but his presence was very
significant. We fully support the statement made by the
President on behalf of the full membership, and we
hope that the next President will continue to be seized
of the situation in Afghanistan.

Of course, there is still the regrettably unresolved
issue of the conflict between Palestine and Israel.
Yesterday's discussion of it was far from sufficient. We
hope that the Security Council will expand its
involvement in and give greater attention to this issue
so that it can play a greater role. It would be a pity if
the Security Council could not play a greater role on
that question, which affects the security of the region
and the world.

This is the last time that I will be taking the floor
here as the Deputy Permanent Representative of the
Chinese delegation to the United Nations. I have
worked here for the past four years, during which time
my collaboration with colleagues here in the Council
has left me with good memories. I would like to take
this opportunity to express my heartfelt thanks to all
my colleagues for having extended to me and to my
delegation their support and cooperation.

Finally, again I would like to thank you, Sir, for
the good wishes expressed to me just now.

