Mr. Adorn (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
too would like to welcome this briefing on the latest
developments in the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. I congratulate
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, for his enlightening
briefing, which once again reminds Council members
of the need to coordinate their efforts to restore lasting
peace and stability in the region.

Many decades after the partition plan for
Palestine proposed by the United Nations in 1947,
the international community is still struggling to
find definitive solutions to a crisis that is becoming
increasingly intense and complex. The political and
security situation is continuing to deteriorate and to
have a negative impact on the humanitarian situation
in a worrisome way, in particular in the Gaza Strip and
the West Bank, as Mr. Mladenov just reminded us in
great detail and as my colleague from South Africa,
Ambassador Jerry Matjila, has explained. My delegation
therefore urges Israeli and Palestinian leaders to rise
above the circumstances by resuming negotiations
based on relevant United Nations resolutions.

To that end, my delegation reiterates its commitment
to Israel's security and the inalienable right of
Palestinians to self-determination. Furthermore, the
solution of two States coexisting peacefully within the
pre-1967 borders, with Jerusalem as their capital, is the
one we support.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict has reached an
impasse despite numerous mediation efforts by the
United Nations and other international actors. In
addition to the political and security challenges that
are taking on increasingly alarming proportions every
day in the Palestinian territories, particularly in the
Gaza Strip, the West Bank and East Jerusalem, there
is a humanitarian crisis that undermines the hope
for lasting peace that the 1993 Oslo Accord and its
subsequent Protocol had raised. The virtual absence
of an appropriate framework for political compromise
between the warring parties and the inflammatory
ideology and rhetoric displayed on both sides
exacerbate tensions and expose civilian populations
to armed violence. In view of the prevailing delicate
situation, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its call for restraint
to all stakeholders and calls on them to strictly comply
with the relevant United Nations resolutions under
international law, in particular resolution 2334 (2016).

My country's strong propensity for dialogue as the
preferred means of settling disputes between peoples,
as well as its consistent position in favour ofthe security
of the State of Israel and the inalienable right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination, form the basis
ofits call for peace between Israelis and Palestinians. In
the face of the current impasse, and also of the violence
observed in the Middle East, my delegation reiterates
its support for the international consensus on the need
to relaunch peace talks between the parties concerned,
and from this point of view, we look forward to the
outcome of the conference convened in Bahrain by the
United States.

My country also remains deeply concerned
about the humanitarian situation in Gaza, which is
characterized by increasingly difficult access to health
care, as well as the ongoing water shortages and power
outages. This humanitarian crisis, aggravated by a
difficult socioeconomic situation, with the consequence
of irregular payment of civil servants' salaries and a
high unemployment rate, particularly among young
people, seems absolutely unacceptable to us. Cote
d'Ivoire therefore welcomes the material and financial
support of the United Nations specialized agencies and
international partners for the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) and reiterates its call on them to confirm
their vital actions for the benefit of populations in
distress at the support conference on 25 June 2019.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire wishes to express
its support for all initiatives aimed at creating the
conditions for a resumption of Israeli-Palestinian
dialogue and calls for reconciliation between Fatah
and Hamas to enable the Palestinian Authority to fully
exercise its functions in both Gaza and the West Bank.
It reiterates its support for Mr. Nickolay Mladenov in
his commitment to promoting constructive dialogue
with a view to a lasting settlement of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, which will restore peace and
stability throughout the region.

