Mr. Bhattarai (Nepal): I would first like to
compliment the Spanish presidency of the Security
Council this month for having convened this debate on
improving the Council's working methods.

Nepal joined the United Nations, together with
Spain and many other countries, on 14 December 1955,
and has twice served in the Council as a non-permanent
member. Throughout this period, Nepal has closely
engaged in the Council's work to maintain international
peace and security, especially through United Nations
peacekeeping. We long to see genuine reform in all
aspects of the Council's working methods as well as in
its structure.

In this connection, I align my statement with that of
the Non-Aligned Movement and wish briefly to make
some points in my national capacity.

First, reform of the Council's working methods
should not be a half-hearted measure but should reflect
the conviction that only through reform can trust in it
be built, its efficiency and effectiveness increased and
its acceptability cemented.

Such reforms should be complemented by
steps to ensure greater coordination with the troop-
and police-contributing countries and a balanced
revitalization of the Organization as a whole, so as to
make it fit for the purpose for which it was created and
the challenges it has to confront.

Bringing forward the election of non-permanent
members of the Security Council by several months
beginning next year is a positive step. We feel that the
election of non-permanent members should be further
brought forward to allow the elected members at least
one full year to prepare for their responsibilities,
with a view to helping ensure that their membership
substantially enriches the work of the Council.

The Council should not in any way allow the
feeling to be perpetuated that it hijacks other bodies'
agendas, trumpets them as its own, takes little action
and tends to shift the burden of action to others. It must
conduct these debates with a truly open mind, proving
that important ideas are taken on board and sharing full
information for decision-making, without gatekeeping.

In these open debates, the practice of adopting
outcomes at the beginning, thus undermining the utility
of such debates, must stop. Council members should set
an honourable precedent for non-members by making
concise and meaningful speeches, rather than asking
them to abbreviate their statements on important issues.

The practice of the same countries voting for
candidates twice, once in the Council and again in the
General Assembly, such as in the case of International
Court of Justice judges, should change. Similarly,
the term of the Secretary-General should be fixed
and closed to extension to ensure that it is strong and
effective, and to prevent the first term from being spent
ensuring a second.

Finally, I wish to add that it is time that the United
Nations take a leaf out ofNepal's Constitution, adopted
last month, to ensure gender balance in top positions.
It provides that either the Speaker or Deputy Speaker
of the Lower House of Parliament, and either the Chair
or Vice-Chair of the Upper House of Parliament, must
be a woman. Similarly, no persons of the same gender
or community can simultaneously hold the offices of
President and Vice-President of the country.

To conclude, my delegation is convinced that
the Security Council must rise to the challenge with
courage, determination and accountability, so as to
emerge from opacity into transparency and credibility,
in the cause of global peace, security and prosperity.

