The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of China.

This year marks the seventieth anniversary of
the victory of the World War against fascism and the
founding of the United Nations. It is an important
year for countries all over the world to celebrate, and
represents an historic opportunity to reflect on the
past and look to the future. China, which has holds
the presidency of the Security Council for this month,
has proposed convened this open debate in order to
join hands with all countries to draw lessons from
history and chart the course for the future. Drawing
on lessons from history means reaffirming the solemn
commitment to the Charter of the United Nations and
sparing succeeding generations from the scourge of
war, which twice in our lifetimes has brought untold
sorrow to humankind. Charting a course towards the
future means joining hands and building a new type of
international relations centred on win-win cooperation
in order to achieve the lofty goal of living together in
peace with each other as good neighbours.

Seventy years ago, the great Victory in the world
anti-fascist war was won. As a result of arduous
struggle, justice prevailed over evil and peace was
restored in the world. In that unprecedented calamity
of human history, China was an important force in the
world anti-fascist alliance, as well as the main theatre
in the East. Together with other countries, China
endured great national sacrifice and made a significant
historic contribution to the final victory. Let us pay
tribute here to all the heroic men and women who laid
down their lives to uphold peace, dignity and freedom
for humankind.
The victory won 70 years ago has changed our
world profoundly ever since. In the process of peoples'
reflecting on the past and envisioning the future, the
United Nations came into being and ushered in a new
chapter of solidarity among humankind and progress
in international relations. We will always remember
that, on 25 June 1945, the San Francisco Conference
unanimously adopted the Charter of the United Nations,
which set out an ambitious blueprint for the peoples of
the United Nations to come together to build a better
world.

The Charter affirms the strong determination of the
international community to prevent war and maintain
lasting peace. At the outset, the Charter defined
the purposes of the United Nations as maintaining
international peace and security, which embodies the
world's deep reflection about the two World Wars and
the great yearning of all countries to be free ofwar, free
and want. For 70 years, the Charter has inspired one
generation after another to make unrelenting efforts
towards the lofty cause of world peace.

The Charter defines the basic norms governing
contemporary international relations. It clearly sets forth
the principles of sovereign equality, non-interference in
internal affairs and respect for territorial integrity. It
also advocates that disputes be settled through peaceful
means, that countries should refrain from the use or
threat of force and that threats to security should be
removed through cooperation. Those basic norms serve
the fundamental collective interests of all countries and
peoples. Although enshrined in the Charter 70 years
ago, they still have great relevance today and continue
to play an indispensable role in maintaining world
stability and tranquillity.

The Charter puts in place safeguard mechanisms
to prevent war and preserve peace. It identifies the
rights, responsibilities and duties of United Nations
agencies and Member States. It authorizes the Security
Council to assume the primary responsibility for the
upholding international peace and security. And it
provides that coercive measures must have a mandate
from the Security Council and that collective security
mechanisms shall replace traditional military alliances
and the outdated law of the jungle.

The wheels of history continue to roll forward. Time
flies and 70 years have passed. It is true that humankind
has made significant progress in the cause ofpeace and
development, but the beautiful vision set forth in the
Charter is yet to be fully realized. Although world war
has been averted, local wars and various conflicts have
been incessant and non-traditional security threats such
as terrorism crop up one after another. Although the
world economy has grown markedly, the gap between
the haves and the have-nots remains prominent, and
new global challenges, including climate change,
continue to emerge. Although multilateralism has
become the prevailing trend, inequality and a lack of
democracy continue to exist in international relations,
while the norms that govern international relations are
violated from time to time. In addition, although the
historical facts have long been made clear on the war
against fascism, there are still some who are reluctant
to recognize the truth and even attempt to overturn the
verdict and whitewash past crimes of aggression.

Today, 70 years after its establishment, the Charter
of the United Nations remains as relevant as ever. Not
only should we stay true to the spirit of the Charter,
we also need to act in accordance with the trends of
the time and in line with practical needs, so as to add
new dimensions to the Charter and confer upon it
new dynamism and vitality. Over the past 70 years,
China, a founding Member of the United Nations and
a permanent member of the Security Council, has
always been steadfast in upholding the spirit of the
Charter, supporting the role of the United Nations and
safeguarding world peace and stability. Not long ago,
Chinese President Xi Jinping put forward the vision
for a new type of international relations with win-win
cooperation at its core. The idea is built on the purposes
and principles of the Charter and, more important, it
enriches it with new dimensions. In that regard, I would
like to highlight the following principles for developing
international relations in the twenty-first century.

First, we should maintain peace and prevent
conflict. Some regions in the world today are still
plagued by turbulence and conflict. The sensible way
out of way out of that is to continue to observe the
purposes and principles of the Charter, as well as the
sanctity of the United Nations and the Security Council.
In China's view, any unilateral move that bypasses
the Security Council is illegal and illegitimate. The
Council needs to take more precautionary measures to
forestall conflict and act in a timely manner to stop war
in order to restore peace and promote reconstruction as
early as possible.

Secondly, we should opt for cooperation and not
confrontation. We live in an increasingly globalized
world in which the spread of information technology is
growing with every passing day. Facing the mounting
global challenges, countries are left with no choice but
to join hands and meet challenges together through
cooperation. China calls upon all countries, major
countries in particular, to rally behind the need for
greater international cooperation. The old mindset of
confrontation should be discarded and consultation and
cooperation among parties should be encouraged, if
we are to address the major issues affecting world and
regional peace and development.

Thirdly, we should ensure that justice and not
hegemony prevails throughout the world. The call of
the time is for greater democracy and the rule of law
in international relations. No country in the world is
entitled to impose its will on others or to topple the
legitimate Governments of other countries. China
believes that all countries are equal regardless of their
size or wealth. All countries' sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity should be respected. Their
choice of a development path and social system should
be upheld. International law and norms governing
international relations should be genuinely honoured
and the diversity of the world's civilizations should be
respected.

Fourthly, we should work together with a win-win,
not a zero-sum, approach. In today's world, countries
are more interdependent than ever, with their interests
increasingly intertwined. Antiquated thinking such as
the Cold War mentality and zero-sum games should
long ago have been relegated to the trash bin of history.
China advocates a new thinking of win-win and all-win
cooperation, as well as a new concept of community-
building for shared interests and a common destiny. We
call upon all countries to come together to share rights
and obligations and uphold justice while pursuing
interests. In that way we will usher in a new world in
which the interests of individual countries and those of
others and of the wider international community can all
be properly safeguarded.

Today we are in the midst of the traditional Chinese
spring festival, which is the best time to plan for the
entire new year to come. I hope that today's open debate
will serve as prelude to our joint commemoration of
the seventieth anniversary of the victory in the world
anti-fascist war and the seventieth anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations. May the spirit of the
Charter shine upon the Earth and may the vision of
win-win cooperation flourish across the world.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.

I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation.

