Mr. Guehenno: I am pleased to introduce the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
which was circulated on 18 October, and to provide
members of the Council with an update of events,
particularly on the outcome of the municipal elections
held on 26 October.

Turning first to the main findings of the report, it
was concluded that the Kosovo Government has made
a concerted effort to improve its work and that there
has been substantive progress in the ministries, notably
in the health and education fields. There have,
however, also been negative developments in these
areas, particularly the continued existence of parallel
structures. In this connection, the Assembly's
resistance so far to including the university in northern
Mitrovica in the higher education system is regrettable.

On 1 November, Mr. Steiner sent a draft law on
higher education back to the Assembly for further
deliberation, as he was not satisfied that the interests of
the non-majority communities had been duly taken into
account. In the interim, as reported, UNMIK has
established an ad hoc Regional Education Board
consisting of representatives of all communities, which
is temporarily responsible for discharging the
responsibilities of the Ministry of Education in
northern Kosovo.

The consolidation of sustainable institutions
depends on an effective public administration, the
recruitment of which remains slow, and training
requirements are indeed enormous. The multi-ethnic
character of the civil service is still hampered by
obstacles, such as security concerns, inter-ethnic
tensions in workplace, limitations on freedom of
movement and a limited pool of minority-community
applicants with the requisite qualifications.

Turning now to the security situation, the
demonstrations that followed the arrests over the
summer of former members of the Kosovo Liberation
Army (KLA) have subsided and did not resume with
the start of the trial of two former KLA members
arrested earlier this year, accused of crimes against
Kosovo Serbs in 1999. As the number of arrests of this
nature increase, the extent of intimidation of witnesses
has become apparent. As reported, current legal
provisions and material resources remain insufficient to
deal with this problem, notably through an effective
witness protection programme.

Regrettably, there have been further attacks
against members of the Kosovo Serb community. On
10 October, there was a reprehensible attack against 50
elderly Kosovo Serbs from Osojane who had gone to
Pec to register for their pension. Five suspects have
since been arrested.

This period also saw unrest in Mitrovica as a
result of the attempted arrest by UNMIK Police on 8
August of a Kosovo Serb leader on charges of
attempted murder during the April riots. Si,nce the
Secretary-Generalis report was finalized, there has
been a positive development in connection with this
case. On 9 October, the suspect handed himself in to
UNMIK Police. Based on an examination of the
evidence, including video footage of the riots, the
charges against him were reduced to inciting a violent
demonstration. The suspect was released on bail.

Turning to UNMIK's fight against crime, the
period under review saw an increase in the amount of
contraband seized and a subsequent increase in the
number of arrests on charges of economic crime and
corruption. Efforts were also made to bolster the
operational capacity of the Kosovo Organized Crime
Bureau. Thanks to valuable contributions by Member
States, the Bureau now has the necessary equipment
and technical support, as well as the personnel, to get
up and running. UNMIK's increasing effectiveness on
the judicial front is seen, indeed, in the growing prison
population - currently 1,022 out of a capacity of
1,130.

The Mission marked a milestone in the
development of the Kosovo Police Service (KPS), with
the total number of KPS officers - approximately
5,300 * exceeding for the first time the number of
UNMIK Police officers. An extra police training course
was added to the training programme of the Police
Service School in September, specifically to train
Kosovo Serb recruits from northern Mitrovica. UNMIK
is also getting close to enhancing the multi-ethnic
composition of the local judiciary. After intensive
efforts to integrate minority communities into the
judicial system, the Kosovo Judicial and Prosecutorial
Council-has sent to the Assembly for endorsement a
list of recommended candidates for appointment to 42
posts in the local judiciary. Of these, 19 are Kosovo
Albanians, 21 are Kosovo Serbs, one is Bosniac and
one is Gorani. Half of the candidates are women. Those
posts are to be distributed in courts throughout Kosovo,
including four courts that have reopened in Leposavic
and Zubin Potok.

(spoke in French)

I would now like to say a few words about the
returns situation. As the Secretary-General's report
highlighted, the state of inter-ethnic relations, and thus
the climate for return, varies from one area to another.
While in some municipalities there has been an
improvement in freedom of movement, improved
security for minority communities and increased
integration into administrative structures and social
services - without problems, in others municipalities
there has been a deterioration in inter-communal
relations, often sparked by the spontaneous return of
internally displaced persons, property disputes and
security incidents. There has, unfortunately, been a rise
in security incidents against the Kosovo Serb
community in areas where they have returned or in
places where return is planned. The deteriorating
climate in some areas of Kosovo is partly attributable
to the period of impending municipal elections, as a
result of which many Kosovo Albanian municipal
leaders were unwilling to engage in the sensitive issue
of returns.

On 1 November, a Task Force on Returns was
formed, comprising representatives of UNMIK, the
Kosovo Force (KFOR), the Provisional Institutions and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, in order to coordinate and invigorate the
return process by providing the process with the
necessary political backing and logistical support. As
noted by Prime Minister Rexhepi at the launch of the
Task Force, integrating non-majority communities now
living in Kosovo into the broader Kosovar society is
crucial for the future return of those not yet living in
Kosovo.

Funding those efforts remains another crucial
aspect for the success of future returns. UNMIK
presented its 2003 Returns Strategy to the donors'
conference in Brussels, held on 5 November. The total
funding requests for the strategy amount to 37 million
euro, which includes funding for the Housing and
Property Directorate as well as unmet needs for 2002.

(spoke in English)
UNMIK continued to foster mutually beneficial
relations, both with the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and with the wider region. The
conclusion of technical agreements with the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Albania and
Slovenia and, most recently, discussions on police
cooperation with the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina are all part of UNMIK's regional
approach. It is within that context that two additional
border crossings with Albania were opened in October.
As members of the Council are aware, UNMIK has
been conducting Kosovo's external relations from the
outset, and the Council has been kept informed of that
through successive reports of the Secretary-General.

The third election in three years was held on
26 October, to renew the mandate of Municipal
Assemblies first elected in 2000, this time for a period
of four years. The election campaign was largely free
of violence and election day itself passed peacefully.
The Council of Europe Election Observation Mission
confirmed that the election was "... in line with Council
of Europe principles and international standards for
democratic elections."

The day after the elections, on 27 October, the
Kosovo Albanian Municipal Assembly President of
Suva Reka, who belonged to President Rugova's
Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK), was killed
alongside two others. Two Kosovo Albanians suspects
have been arrested; there is no evidence of a politically
motivated crime, but the suspects may have personal
connections with a rival political group.

This year's preparations saw an increased hand-
over of electoral responsibilities to local institutions.
Municipal Election Commissions played a lead
organizational role, and some 12,000 domestic
observers were accredited for the vote. Reductions
were made in international supervisory involvement,
with the blanket election supervision of the last two
years replaced by a ratio of one international polling
station supervisor to three polling stations.

As with Kosovo's last two elections, participation
was key. The overall turnout of 54 per cent - 58 per
cent in Kosovo and 14 per cent for voters voting in
Serbia and Montenegro - coincided with a trend of
voter fatigue seen across the board in this year's
Balkans elections. The overall figure was further
depressed by the low participation of the Kosovo Serb
community - around 20 per cent - who voted
predominantly in the five municipalities where they
constitute a majority, that is, the three northern
municipalities, plus Strpce and Novo Brdo. There was
minimal participation in areas where Kosovo Serbs are
a minority and what amounts to a boycott in northern
Mitrovica city.

The low turnout of Serbs has in part been
attributed to confusing signals from the authorities of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and of Serbia
regarding participation. It is also attributable to the
difficulties UNMIK has experienced in demonstrating
that the Kosovo Serb community can derive tangible
benefits from being part of the political process; but it
inevitably takes time to show such benefits.

As the report of the Secretary-General noted,
however, the participation of Kosovo Serbs as
appointed members of the Municipal Assemblies did,
in some places, yield results for that community in
areas such as employment in the municipal civil
service, the distribution of municipal revenue, the joint
use of municipal facilities, the determination of street
names and municipal returns plans. Progress was
admittedly slow and limited to a few places, but it does
show that there are gains to be made through
perseverance and compromise by all sides. The low
participation of the Serb community in that respect is a
disappointment.

Mr. Steiner certified the election results on
3 November. For the third year running, the strongest
party was President Rugova's (LDK), which won the
majority in 11 out of 30 municipalities and gained the
highest number of votes in a further eight. That,
however, represented a slight loss for the LDK, which
previously had an outright majority in 19
municipalities. Kosovo-wide, the LDK gained
approximately 46 per cent of the vote, similar to how it
fared in last year's Assembly election.

Mr. Thaci's Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK)
won a majority in four municipalities. Overall, the
PDK gained 29 per cent of the vote, up two per cent
from last year's Assembly election. The PDK has
signalled its intention to co-govern wherever possible
with the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK), the
third main Kosovo Albanian party, which won no
municipality outright. The AAK gained six per cent of
the overall vote, similar to last year's results.

On the basis of their participation, the Kosovo
Serbs won the majority in Leposavic, Zvecan and
Zubin Potok - the three northern municipalities - and
in Strpce and in Novo Brdo. The results show that
where Kosovo Serbs took part in large numbers, the
Return Coalition lost out to Belgrade-based parties,
mainly President Kostunica's Democratic Party of
Serbia (DSS) and to the Serb National Council
Mitrovica (SNC).

Due to a much lower turnout in those areas where
they do not constitute a majority, Kosovo Serb
representation in those municipal assemblies will be
minimal: the Return Coalition gained one seat each in
11 municipal assemblies, and two in one municipal
assembly, that of Kamenica; the DSS gained one seat
each in five municipal assemblies.

In total, 40 out of the 68 political entities
represented on the ballot won at least one seat,
meaning that nearly all of Kosovo's minority
communities received representation in municipal
assemblies where they live. For example, Kosovo's
Turkish community, which had boycotted the 2000
elections, participated this year and gained a seat in the
Pristina municipal assembly and four seats in Prizren.
The participation of most minority communities means
that the balance of power rests with them in many
municipalities. In Prizren, for example, the Kosovo
Turkish community will be the decisive factor in
coalition-building there. It is hoped that cooperation of
that nature, out of political necessity, will lead to
greater integration efforts.

As a result of gender requirements in the electoral
legislation and the system of closed lists, 28.5 per cent
of the membership of the new municipal assemblies
will be made up of women representatives. That is a
substantial improvement on the 8 per cent achieved at
the 2000 elections. A surprising result was the
performance of newly and locally organized politically
unaffiliated initiatives, which received one or more
seats in approximately half of Kosovo's municipalities.

Since the elections, Mr. Steiner has been actively
consulting with Kosovo's leaders and the authorities of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia regarding the next
steps. These include pushing ahead with the concept of
decentralization to bring Government closer to the
people. There is support for this across both the
Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo Serb political spectrums.

On 1 November, Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo
Serb leaders issued a statement reaffirming that
Kosovo must be a truly multi-ethnic society, and that
all Kosovo's communities would work within the
institutions. To achieve this, the representatives of the
majority community committed themselves to
safeguard the rights of the smaller communities,
including the right to security and freedom of
movement throughout Kosovo. On the basis of that
endorsement, Mr. Steiner has asked the Council of
Europe to send a mission to develop a proposal for
decentralization.

Given the election boycott in northern Mitrovica,
UNMIK has had to adapt the implementation of its
seven-point plan mentioned in the Secretary-General's
report. The most pressing issue is to manage the
situation created by the boycott, which has led to the
election of a Mitrovica municipal assembly devoid of
Kosovo Serb representatives.

In conclusion, let me say that the developments
of the last four months illustrate the difficulties faced
in making consistent progress on all fronts in Kosovo.
It is, inevitably, slow going. Although the Kosovo Serb
community would like to see faster progress in many
areas * as we would all like to see and are striving
for - the low turnout of Kosovo Serbs is to the
detriment of that community, as it diminishes their
ability to participate in decision-making processes
throughout Kosovo.

It is clear from recent events that more emphasis
needs to be placed on reconciliation efforts. Kosovo's
leaders have a responsibility to create conditions
conducive to improving intercommunal relations and
promoting reconciliation. In that regard, I welcome the
statement made by political leaders on 1 November of
which I have already spoken. But more needs to be
done, including turning words into actions and
speaking out more clearly against violence. The brunt
of the effort lies with the majority community.
However, the Kosovo Serb community must also
realize that tangible benefits can be achieved only
through participation.

