Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I thank the Japanese
presidency for convening this open debate, which will
help to strengthen the reform process so as to enable
the Security Council to more effectively address the
unprecedented contemporary threats and challenges
that are making many additional demands on it.

As a member-elect, Kazakhstan is committed to
the reform of the Security Council and agrees to the
steps recommended by the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Matters in order
to promote the greater transparency, inclusiveness,
efficiency, accountability and democratization of the
Council's work. My delegation would like to underscore
the following proposals for further improving the
working methods of the Council, building upon the
recommendations of presidential note S/2010/507 and
other related documents.

It is clear that greater collaboration with the
General Assembly would provide valuable insights
from Members States neighbouring conflict zones or
impacted by conflicts, with a view to plan meaningful
interventions and prevent further spillovers. These and
many other issues also require an ongoing dialogue
between the Presidents of the Security Council and of
the General Assembly as well as with the Economic and
Social Council and the Secretariat.

My delegation believes that the rule of law should
govern not only internal relations within countries
but also international relations among members of the
Council. We are of the view that the work of the Council
would be greatly enhanced if the annual report of the
Council to the General Assembly were more analytical,
reflecting complexities along with an assessment of
Council deliberations and decisions and the mandates of
peacekeeping operations rather than listing summaries
of meetings.

In order to plan rapid and appropriate strategies
for intervention, an astute examination of conflicts and
geopolitical tensions in all of their political, economic
and social dimensions is required, together with an
evaluation of the direct and indirect role of Member
States in facilitating and impeding conflict resolution.

Kazakhstan supports increasing the number of open
meetings, briefings and debates and holding informal
interactive dialogues rather than closed consultations,
which should be structured and focused in such a manner
that they can be productive in laying the foundations
for the next steps to be taken rather than remain only
read-out statements. We fully support the holding of
more ongoing consultations between the Council and
troop- and police-contributing countries throughout all
phases of Council-mandated peacekeeping operations.
Having seen the value of Arria Formula meetings, my
country intends to hold such sessions during its tenure.
We recommend more regular briefings to non-Council
members and more wrap-up sessions.

We welcome the note by the President (S/2016/619)
dated 15 July 2016 concerning newly elected members
during the transitional period between the election and
the beginning of their term. The decision that incoming
non-permanent members should have the opportunity
to observe the work of the Council as of October 2016
will enable them to perform their future role more
effectively. Members-elect, in consultation with all
other members of the Council, should collectively
decide how they will share the chairmanship of
committees and working groups, which are presently
presided over by the non-permanent members who will
be outgoing in 2017.

We concur with other speakers that Council
members should agree on the appointment of the
Chairs of subsidiary organs for the following year no
later than October 2016. Elected members should also
be responsible for drafting resolutions and presidential
statements. Likewise, the Chairs of committees and
working groups should be given the opportunity for
co-penholdership together with existing penholders.

Regarding the selection of the next Secretary-
General, my delegation recommends that the outcomes
of the straw poll and other subsequent procedures be
shared with the General Assembly so as to enable it to
have a greater say in the selection of a candidate for
this high position. There is also a need forjoint ongoing
consultations between the Presidents of the Council
and of the General Assembly.

My delegation also believes that sanctions should
be imposed by the Security Council only following a
proper assessment of their impact, and that they must
not be imposed unilaterally.

Finally, what is most needed is not just reform but
a change in attitudes and a true spirit of solidarity. It
is clear that the national interests of Member States
must be balanced with greater objectivity and global
perspectives.

