Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Iraq, for his briefing. We also welcome the
briefing provided by Ambassador Khalilzad on behalf
of the Multinational Force (MNF).

Thanks to the joint efforts of the Iraqi
Government and the other parties concerned, the level
of violence across the whole of Iraq has continued to
decline as the security situation has steadily improved.
In order to consolidate those hard-earned results, the
Iraqi Government and the various factions in Iraq must
work together and seek progress in areas such as
political dialogue, improving legislation, enhancing
accountability, protecting human rights and ensuring
economic development and speedy reconstruction. The
prospect of a promising future for Iraq hinges on
whether all of Iraq's political leaders will place the
national interest above all else in order to seek a
common understanding and cooperation.

We are pleased to note that the relationship
between Iraq and the other countries of the region is
being further strengthened and that cooperation is
growing on matters pertaining to economic
reconstruction, border control and refugees. The
expanded meeting of neighbouring States of Iraq, held
in Istanbul last November, decided to establish an ad
hoc support mechanism, which has made us very
hopeful about the prospects for future cooperation.
Strengthened cooperation between Iraq and the other
countries of the region is in the interest of Iraq, as well
as in the interest of all the countries of the region. The
international community must therefore fully
acknowledge, encourage and support the efforts and
work of Iraq and all the parties concerned.

The mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), as set out in resolution
1770 (2007), is being implemented gradually and has
produced positive results. We expect UNAMI to play a
unique role and to contribute to the process of stability
and development in Iraq, in order that the Iraqi people
may genuinely enjoy real benefits in that regard.

Confronted with a complex political and security
situation, UNAMI must strengthen its consultations
with the Government of Iraq and explore ways and
means to improve the situation. At the same time, it
should seek to gain wide acceptance and trust among
the Iraqi population at large. At the moment, its focus
is on facilitating in-depth dialogue between various
Iraqi factions with regard to the main issues of the
political process and on finding common
understanding. At the same time, we hope that the
Government of Iraq and the MNF will be able to
provide security safeguards for UNAMI.

Bringing stability to the situation in Iraq and
placing the process of reconstruction and reconciliation
on the right track at an early date are tasks confronting
both Iraq and the international community as a whole.
We call upon the international community to continue
to extend a helping hand to the Iraqi people and to
14
stand ready to provide all useful assistance in that
regard.

