We often use the image of a crossroads to explain how significant a moment in history is. It means that the next decisions and actions to be taken will determine the course of history and the fate of nations. There is no doubt that this is such a moment. For now, the driver is Israel, and it seems it will not stop at the crossroads to assess the implications of its choices because it is drunk on power, propelled by infinite impunity, motivated by one single thought under whose influence it has been operating for decades: grabbing a maximum amount of Palestinian land with a minimum number of Palestinians on it. Israel is under the illusion that that is the destination and that, once it reaches it, it will be able to enjoy the view. It ignores that the road cannot end there and continues downhill towards an escalation of the conflict resulting from an oppressive regime combining colonialism and apartheid. It does not care that humankind has been down this road before, or that former colonial Powers and liberation movements alike have all reached the same conclusion: such a regime cannot prevail and will lead only to more injustice, instability and insecurity. As many times before, Israel seems determined to ignore that big red stop sign the international community erected to save lives. Israel thinks, as has been its experience so far, that it will not be fined or arrested. It believes that Security Council resolutions are binding for others, that international courts have jurisdiction over others and that sanctions are for others. Israel judges, but cannot be judged. The only true bias towards Israel is the one shielding it from accountability and emboldening it by considering its illegal actions as so-called realities that need to be endorsed rather than reversed. Israel is testing the resolve of the international community, thinking its colonial appetite will prevail over the collective international will to advance regional peace and security and preserve the rules-based multilateral order. We must prove it wrong. The international community remains committed to the rule of international law and to the international consensus on a just solution to the Palestine question. It opposes annexation in no uncertain terms, as reaffirmed in recent weeks in statements made from capitals from every corner of the globe. The global position also remains unwavering on the illegality of Israel's policies, including settlements. That wide international front, reflected in the gathering in the Jordan Valley just two days ago, with broad Palestinian and international mobilization, in the ministerial meeting of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees held yesterday and in this high-level Security Council meeting, is strong and remains our best hope. Israel needs to know that annexation will have immediate and tangible repercussions. That is why we have called on the international community to adopt effective measures, including sanctions, to deter annexation and all the other unlawful policies that have prepared the ground for annexation. It must also be made clear that annexation will irreversibly impact Israel's relations with Palestine and the region. The Oslo Accords were supposed to transform us into peace partners, but, regrettably, Israel has continued waging a war against Palestinian lives and rights. It has violated the letter and spirit of the agreements and, with annexation, is taking a decision that will defeat their very purpose. The interim accords were supposed to pave the way for an end to occupation and a final peace agreement. They cannot survive annexation. As we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Charter of the United Nations, let us honour the purposes and principles of the United Nations - respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction, the suppression of acts of aggression and the prohibition of the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State. Annexation, whether partial or total, gradual or immediate, is the ultimate breach of the United Nations Charter and cannot go unchallenged. From a legal perspective, annexation is not only unlawful, it is a crime under the Rome Statute. From a political perspective, it will ruin the chances for Palestinian- Israeli and regional peace. From a security perspective, it is utter nonsense, as it replaces internationally recognized, defendable borders with a system of military control and subjugation that only fuels conflict and violence. It is, as stated in the Secretary General's report (S/2020/555), calamitous for Palestinians, Israelis and the region. The only explanation for it is an extremist ideology rooted in denial of the Palestinian right to this land, disregard for international law and negation of history. It is this ideology that has undermined negotiations time and time again, with Israel using negotiations as cover for its continued colonization. This ideology has fostered a narrative that Palestinians should be grateful that Israel was ready to give them back any part of our own land, fragmented and besieged enclaves, Bantustans, which Palestinians may even be allowed to call a "State". Genuine negotiations must aim at ending occupation to achieve peace, not at perpetuating occupation and calling it peace. We remain committed to peace. We have presented to the Quartet our position in writing on all final-status issues. We have never retracted any proposal we have made to find a compromise, unlike Israel, which says we must renegotiate all over again with each new Government. We have accepted the long-standing terms of reference and international law as the basis for negotiations, while Israel has rejected and violated them. We accepted the pre-1967 borders, thus agreeing to a historic compromise encompassing only 22 per cent of historical Palestine; yet Israel has spared no effort to undermine those borders. The entire world recognizes the significance of the Arab Peace Initiative and the promise it holds for our region. Where is the Israeli peace initiative? Even with the United States plan, Israel said it is ready to grab immediately whatever parts of our land the plan unlawfully grants it, while expressing readiness to negotiate the rest indefinitely. That is why we call for an international peace conference and a multilateral mechanism that will help advance peace by holding the parties accountable and ensuring that negotiations are neither a smoke screen nor a time-wasting exercise while Israel finalizes its colonial plans but, rather, that they are the path to just and lasting peace. While Israel spares no effort to erase the pre-1967 borders, the Green Line, the world must consolidate them, including by recognizing the State of Palestine and by making any unilateral encroachment over the Green Line a red line. Every State has the power to help us change course before it is too late, the power to help end the Israeli occupation and salvage the two-State solution, the power to save lives, the power to preserve our global order. In fact, they have a legal and moral obligation to use that power through non-recognition of, and non-assistance to, illegal actions and through distinction and accountability. Upholding their obligations is the only path to ensure Israel abides by its own obligations. At the end, allow me, Mr. President, to thank you for convening this important meeting. I also wish to express our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report and relentless efforts, and those of his envoy, to advance peace. If Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016), were implemented today, peace would be a reality tomorrow. Allow me also to seize this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the Secretary General of the League of Arab States and the Ministers for their participation today as a clear signal of the urgency and gravity of the matter. I also wish to thank France and the Council members - past, present and incoming - for their consistent, principled stances, including against annexation. Allow me, finally, to thank the countries and groups, including the Group of Arab States, which has been fully mobilized in the lead-up to this meeting, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the European Union, which continue working to advance freedom, justice and peace, conscious of how this could transform our region and the world. The Secretary-General highlighted in his report the urgency of reversing the dangerous trajectory we are on. We are at a crossroads, and to reverse course, before it is too late, the international community must take hold of the steering wheel.
