Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank Mr. Lacroix
for his valuable briefing. The Dominican Republic also
condemns the terrorist attacks in Burkina Faso.

Peacekeeping operations are one of the most
effective United Nations tools for the promotion and
maintenance of international peace and security. We
therefore acknowledge that more action by the Security
Council is required in order to promote the objectives
set out in the Declaration of Shared Commitments of
the Action for Peacekeeping initiative.

Given the challenges facing peacekeeping
operations, there must be an integrated approach by
troop- or police-contributing countries, donors and
host countries, as well as States Members of the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations.
That will make operations more effective and efficient
on the ground; hence the importance of this kind
of debate.

We recognize the valuable role of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. We regret
that it was not able to reach agreement on the annual
report at its most recent session but we welcome the
Committee's decision to work on a document in
support of implementing the pillars of the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative. We would like to take this
opportunity to express the support and commitment of
the Dominican Republic to the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative and the Declaration of Shared Commitments,
and we encourage Member States that have not yet
endorsed the Declaration to do so.

Peacekeepers are routinely threatened by deliberate
attacks against them. The most recent incident was in
Libya a few weeks ago. We must therefore strengthen
their security and protect them from threats. In addition,
it is important that peacekeepers contribute to capacity-
building at the local level to lay the foundations for
sustainable development, alleviate poverty and maintain
peace in the host country. Increasing the presence
of women among deployed troops is an essential
element in increasing the operational effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations.

The Dominican Republic endorsed the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers. We recognize
that it is essential that appropriate child protection
provisions be included in all peacekeeping mandates.
The United Nations still bears responsibility for youth
in conflict. We therefore urge that political missions
and peacekeeping operations include initiatives aimed
at implementing the youth and peace and security
agenda in their respective mandates.

An environmental focus is also required. That is
why we call for peacekeeping missions not to exacerbate
pollution, thereby creating new climate vulnerabilities.

The Dominican Republic's contributions to various
peacekeeping missions, such as observers in the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, have been
supported through training and academic skills-based
programmes in areas such as the prevention of violence
against women, humanitarian law and human rights.
That demonstrates the value that our country attributes
to peacekeeping training.

Finally, we believe it important that there be
greater cooperation and coordination between the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission
during peacekeeping mandates. That would bring about
a better relationship between the Security Council and
host countries. Peacekeeping missions are the best
example of multilateralism. By investing in peace,
we are committed to the sustainable development and
prosperity of conflict-affected areas.

