I thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Peter Maurer and Ms. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf for their contributions to today's meeting. Indeed, the work of the Security Council over the years has helped to strengthen the protection of civilians, thereby saving lives. Unfortunately, despite all our efforts, thousands of civilians, especially women, children, the elderly and persons with disabilities, continue to suffer. To our great regret, the unprecedented politicization of the humanitarian issues in international relations still dominates. Now, the plight of civilians is becoming even harsher, the threats and challenges they are facing are multiplied owing to the unprecedented global health crisis, coronavirus disease (COVID-19), which indeed leaves no one behind. It is high time to unite our efforts to achieve the noble goals of protecting people and minimizing their suffering. In that regard, we find the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire of 23 March highly relevant. But his call would be incomplete without reference to his appeal to waive sanctions, which can undermine countries' capacity to respond to the pandemic. The same appeal was made by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, who stressed that, in the context of a global pandemic, the policy of impeding medical efforts in one country heightens the risk for all of us. We agree that protecting health-care workers and facilitating access for humanitarian assistance are important in the fight against COVID-19. But the fight will not be effective if there is no access to essential health-care services or to good quality, safe, effective and affordable essential medicines, vaccines, personal protective equipment and food. International cooperation and solidarity might not be inclusive or exhaustive while unilateral sanctions remain in effect. Let me refer to the situation in Syria, where suffocating sanctions afflict ordinary Syrians, including by preventing the authorities from purchasing necessary medical equipment and by intimidating international humanitarian non-governmental organizations, which fear penalties. Yes, I refer to civilians - women and children - about whom many of my colleagues like to speak so much in the Council and who suffer the most from the coercive measures imposed by their countries. Coercive measures can be even more shameful when they are used by a Government against its own people. And now I am referring to Ukraine. Kyiv continues to pursue its brutally repressive policy towards Donetsk and Lugansk, which has already negatively affected more than five million civilian residents of the conflict area, has deprived hundreds of thousands of pensioners of access to their pensions and has prevented access to education and health services. Again, our Western colleagues prefer to not pay attention and shift responsibility. Armed conflicts in various parts of the world remain a reality, though their nature has been changed by new threats and potential dangers, such as increased activity by terrorist groups, which use modern communication technologies, and the spreading practice of using combat drones. The answer to the problem is full respect for international law, and first and foremost, international humanitarian law. We concur with the Secretary-General on the importance of safeguarding the authority of international humanitarian law. The norms of international humanitarian law should not be used for political manipulation. There is no need to develop new international legal concepts that allegedly fill so-called gaps in the protection regime. In practice, such ideas can only weaken the protection we give civilians. We are convinced that implementation problems lie not in the weakness of international humanitarian law, but in the disinclination or reluctance to implement its principles and norms in practice. I would like to also touch upon the issue of accountability. Nobody argues the importance of taking measures to bring to justice those responsible for the most heinous crimes. However, we can neither share the positive assessments of the work of the International Criminal Court nor support the call for increased cooperation with it. We have expressed in detail our position on the activities of the Court on many occasions. Since then, unfortunately, nothing has changed. The Court has proven to be the wrong instrument to fight the most severe crimes under international humanitarian law. We have repeatedly said that, for a civilized level of criminal prosecution, reports by non-governmental organizations alone and information from other so- called reliable but never disclosed sources are not enough. Numerous international investigation mechanisms work under the very same principle, sometimes without even entering the country where the crime was committed. It makes a mockery of justice when such information-gathering structures are imposed, against the will of the State concerned. By establishing them through an illegitimate decision, they are themselves illegitimate. I am talking, first and foremost, about the so-called International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and similar initiatives. I would like to end by recalling the words of the Secretary-General whereby the COVID-19 pandemic is the greatest test the world has faced since the formation of the United Nations and severely impacts the protection of civilians. In order to pass that test we all, namely, Security Council members, should put aside fleeting differences, egoism, messianism and the temptation to pursue their interests to the detriment of others and should work together to ensure peace and security for all.
