Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We are pleased to welcome today's
briefers, President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz,

and we thank them for their detailed briefings. We wish
President Agius success in his new and difficult work.

The existence of such bodies as the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals is crucial
to achieving societies that are free of impunity. The
work of the Mechanism reaffirms the commitment
of the United Nations to protecting human rights and
world peace.

We commend the progress that the Mechanism
has made in the cases of Prosecutor v. Maximilien
Turinabo et al, Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanisic" and
Franko Sirnatovic, Prosecutor v. Radovan Karadeic
and Prosecutor v. Ratko Mlaa'ic. We hope to see some
of them concluded by the end of 2020, as indicated by
President Agius in his May 2019 report (S/2019/4l7, annex I). We also welcome the work done by the
Mechanism to protect and support the approximately
3,150 witnesses.

The Dominican Republic considers that the
priorities of the new President of the Mechanism to
be timely and valid. We support these priorities with
their special emphasis on unifying and harmonizing
the criteria, working methods and processes of the
Chambers that make up the Mechanism in order to
increase productivity and consistency, and thereby
achieve the goals of the work for 2020. Similarly, we
support the call by President Agius for the international
community to join efforts, both bilaterally and
multilaterally, to cooperate with the relocation of those
who have been released or who have already served
their sentences. These individuals have the right to
receive their documents and to be able to reintegrate
themselves into society.

Furthermore, the States members of the Security
Council have a special commitment to cooperate with
the bodies and offices created through mandates of the
Council. We therefore consider it imperative to support
the budget of the Mechanism at the United Nations.
Despite the cuts and administrative adjustments
carried out by the President, there is no doubt that
proper allocation of funds is essential to the success of
the Mechanism.

On another note, we congratulate the Office of
the Prosecutor on the progress made in the pursuit
of fugitives, as set forth in his May 2019 report
(S/2019/4l7, annex II). We urge the international
community to demonstrate solidarity and support the
identification, investigation and arrest of individuals
sought by the Mechanism.

Lastly, we would like to make reference to the order
for the early release of convicted persons. We express
our concern that those orders are not yet subject to a
specific regime of conditions, despite the provisions of
paragraph 10 of resolution 2422 (2018). We believe it
is essential to create an early-release regime that takes
into account the need for victims and affected States
and communities to participate.

