Mr. Tileuberdi (Kazakhstan): At the outset, allow
me to start by thanking the delegation of Kuwait for
convening today's timely briefing.

Today's theme has been fundamental to the
United Nations since its establishment. The purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
remain relevant even in the contemporary history
of international relations. More than 70 years ago,
the peoples of the United Nations announced their
determination to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war, reaffirm faith in fundamental human
rights and in the dignity and worth of the human
person, establish conditions under which justice and
respect for the obligations arising from treaties and
other sources of international law can be maintained,
and promote social progress and better standards of life
in larger freedom. However, the world remains at war
today. Around the world, there are approximately 40
armed conflicts of varying intensity. The existence of
more than 65 million displaced people and uncontrolled
migratory flows constitute a favourable environment
for trafficking in human beings and replenishing
the budgets of international organized crime and
terrorist groups.
All these phenomena are an exorbitant price to pay
for States' and Governments' irresponsible behaviour
in international relations or for the sake of their own
peoples. The violations that we witness overlook or
distort our perceptions of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the Organization and international
law, which were formulated after the bloodiest war in
the history of humankind - a conflict that claimed
more than 60 million lives. Today, the world has
come closer than ever to the point at which serious
international conflicts are ready to erupt. The threats
of the use of weapons of mass destruction, the growing
rivalry among regional Powers, the high tension among
military-political blocs, and the crisis of trust among
the key actors in international relations are of very
serious concern to us. They underline the need for an
urgent and dramatic shift in thinking from high-level
dialogue and deliberative platforms to real action.

Kazakhstan's vision ofglobal anti-militarymeasures
is set forth in the manifesto of President Nursultan
Nazarbayev entitled "The World. The Twenty-First
Century". In the manifesto, the idea of a comprehensive
programme for achieving a world without conflict by
the United Nations centennial in 2045 - "The Twenty-
First Century: A World Without War" - was evoked.
Given that two of the main purposes of the Charter of
the United Nations are to save subsequent generations
from the scourge of war and to adopt effective collective
measures to prevent and eliminate threats to peace, we
must make a determined and concerted effort through
the collective and responsible actions of nations to
destroy the disease of war and conflict.

At a briefing held in the Security Council on
18 January on the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (see S/PV.8160), during our country's
presidency of the Council, a broad and useful exchange
of perspectives took place. My delegation highlighted
the significance of confidence-building measures in
achieving peace and security goals, which, in turn,
play a key and ever-increasing role in the prevention of
conflicts and the resolution of pressing global problems.
We know this from our own experience. Indeed,
upon the initiative of my country, the Conference on
Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia,
which brings together 26 countries, was established
20 years ago and continues properly to function today.
Kazakhstan's efforts in its two-year non-permanent
membership in the Security Council are aimed at
practical ways of ensuring international peace and
security, in particular through making Central Asia a
model regional zone of peace and security, sustainable
development and prosperity.

We support a three-part conflict resolution strategy:
reconciling peace and security with sustainable
development in order to achieve lasting progress,
implementing regional responses to such cross-border
problems as terrorism, ecological devastation and
poverty, and coordinating the interaction of United
Nations structures operating as One United Nations so
as to achieve maximum efficiency and effectiveness in
the Organization's activities in the field.

We have at our disposal all the needed and
time-tested strategies and best practices to change
the world for the better. In this way alone, through
responsible and predictable domestic and foreign
policies, can we effectively and collectively address
the challenges and threats of our times, advancing on
the path of creation, progress, economic well-being
and international security for all, without leaving
anyone behind.

