The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Morocco.

I would like to start by expressing my gratitude
to the Secretary-General for his statement and for his
report on peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict
(S/2012/ 746), including the important recommendations
therein. I also wish to thank the Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) for his briefing.

My delegation of course associates itself with the
statement to be delivered later in this meeting by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Non-aligned Movement.

By virtue of its half-century partnership with the
United Nations in peacebuilding and peacekeeping
efforts, my country was keen to devote the last open
meeting of its presidency to the issue of peacebuilding
in the aftermath of conflict. The challenges associated
with post-conflict peacebuilding in connection with
security, development and human rights require
coordination and the rational use of resources and
efforts.
Peacebuilding is often connected to the very delicate
management of the transition from the establishment
of peace to ensuring sustainable peace. That makes
it very important to coordinate national, regional
and international efforts in countries emerging from
conflict in order to achieve stability. That coordination
requires prioritizing peacebuilding strategies in order
to align and harmonize them with national policies
and to involve all stakeholders. The involvement of all
national actors and national ownership are prerequisites
of peacebuilding efforts.

National authorities must maintain the primary
responsibility for peacebuilding in the aftermath of
conflict, and for maintaining and sustaining peace in
their country. However, support for those efforts will
also depend on building clear, balanced, results-based
and sustainable partnerships among all stakeholders
that are based on accountability, because the three main
axes of peacebuilding - the identification of needs,
sustainable support and the allocation of roles to the
stakeholders - constitute an important approach to the
success of peacebuilding. Also important is the use of
the various peacebuilding and peacekeeping tools in a
comprehensive and integrated way to avoid redundancy
and duplication and to adopt a phased approach that
takes into consideration the priorities of each case
individually and within the available resources.

In that context, the Peacebuilding Commission can
play a very important role because its establishment
was the beginning of a new approach by the United
Nations to addressing post-conflict situations based
on linking peacekeeping and security. Now that nearly
seven years have passed since the establishment of the
Commission, we can truly say that it has proven its
effectiveness, given the multiple achievements that have
benefitted the countries on the Commission's agenda.
The Commission is also now in a position to provide
even more experience and advice for the benefit of the
Security Council.

Morocco believes that the success of any
peacebuilding effort will depend on the extent of
its comprehensiveness, inclusiveness, effectiveness,
sustainability and attention to human development
and social and economic matters. That requires the
availability of the necessary resources and predictable
financing on a timely basis. In that context, we must
also reaffirm the need to promote cooperation with
the various financial institutions of the United Nations
and international and regional development banks, as
well as the participation of other international bodies
through triangular and South-South cooperation.

Attention should be paid to regional and subregional
cooperation, South-South cooperation and triangular
cooperation also in order to confront the challenges
that hamper peacebuilding and peace consolidation
efforts. In the critical immediate aftermath of conflicts,
countries have proven the importance of building and
consolidating institutional capacities and the rule of
law, security sector reform and other justice reforms,
which necessitate incorporating civilian expertise in
peacebuilding, including mobilizing the capacities of
developing countries, particularly those of women and
youth.

Based on ithis conviction and the importance of
that aspect, and in order to promote an exchange of
expertise, Morocco, together with Qatar and Norway, on
10 November organized a workshop to promote civilian
capacities in the Arab world. That was an occasion to
highlight the importance of building national capacities
in post-conflict stages. It also laid the cornerstone for
cooperation and the exchange of expertise among Arab
countries, aimed at a promising partnership between the
League of Arab States and the United Nations. Morocco
is committed to maintaining its cooperation with the
United Nations in peacekeeping efforts, especially in
our Arab and African neighbourhoods.

(spoke in English)

Now that five of our colleagues are about to leave
the Security Council, I would like to say that it has been
a real privilege and pleasure for Morocco to serve for
one year with them. I would like to congratulate them
on their outstanding performance in 2011 and 2012.
(spoke in Spanish)

We will miss their ability to manage delicate
matters with determination, elegance, impartiality and
a firm belief in and commitment to the goals of the
United Nations.

(spoke in Arabic)

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf.

"The Security Council recalls its resolutions
and the statements of its President on post-conflict
peacebuilding, in particular S/PRST/2009/23,
S/PRST/2010/20, S/PRST/20ll/2 and S/PRST/2011/4,
and reaffirms the critical importance ofpeacebuilding
as the foundation for sustainable peace and
development in the aftermath of conflict.

"The Security Council takes note with
appreciation of the Secretary-General's report
on peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict
(S/2012/746).

"The Security Council reaffirms that national
ownership and national responsibility are key to
establishing sustainable peace and reaffirms also
the primary responsibility of national authorities in
identifying their priorities and strategies for post-
conflict peacebuilding.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of inclusivity in advancing national
peacebuilding processes and objectives in order to
ensure that the needs of all segments of society are
taken into account. The Council calls on the United
Nations to support national efforts to include
relevant national actors in peacebuilding activities
and processes.

"The Security Council welcomes initiatives
of post-conflict countries to reduce poverty,
deter conflict and provide better conditions to
their populations and underlines that the primary
responsibility for successful peacebuilding lies
with Governments and relevant national actors,
including civil society, in countries emerging from
conflict and that the United Nations can play a
critical role in support of national reconciliation,
security sector reform, demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration, restoring the rule
of law and national institutions, revitalizing the
economy, and providing basic services and other
key peacebuilding efforts in post-conflict countries.

"The Security Council reaffirms that
sustainable peace requires an integrated approach
based on coherence among political, security,
development and human rights, including gender
equality, rule of law and justice activities. In
this regard, the Council stresses the importance
of the rule of law as one of the key elements of
peacebuilding, emphasizing that courts must
provide justice and equal protection under the
law for all citizens and recognizing the need for
enhanced efforts aimed at capacity-building in
justice and security institutions, especially in
the police, prosecutorial, judicial and corrections
sectors.

"The Security Council stresses the need
for more coordinated, coherent and integrated
peacebuilding efforts and emphasizes that better
coordination between United Nations missions,
United Nations country teams and other regional
and development actors, including regional
organizations, is of paramount importance in
ensuring greater efficiency and effectiveness in
the delivery of critical peacebuilding tasks. The
Council further emphasizes the need for greater
clarity on the respective roles and responsibilities of
these actors in the delivery of critical peacebuilding
tasks, based on their comparative advantages.

"The Security Council recalls its resolution
1645 (2005) and recognizes the important role of
the Peacebuilding Commission in advancing and
supporting an integrated and coherent approach
to peacebuilding, including promoting improved
coherence and alignment ofpartner policies around
national peacebuilding strategies and priorities.
The Council reiterates its support for the work
of the Commission and expresses its continued
willingness to make use of its advisory, advocacy
and resource mobilization role, including through
targeted advice on international and national
commitment to long-term peacebuilding objectives
in countries on the Commission's agenda. The
Council further emphasizes the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission in support of seamless
transition of mandated missions in countries on its
agenda, in particular through the mobilization of
sustained international support to critical national
capacity needs.

"The Security Council notes with appreciation
the contribution that peacekeepers and
peacekeeping missions make to early peacebuilding
and emphasizes that mandated peacebuilding tasks
must also contribute to long-term peacebuilding
objectives in order to ensure sustainable progress
towards achieving peacebuilding objectives
and facilitating drawdown and transition of
peacekeeping missions. The Council recognizes the
need to integrate mission expertise and experience
into the development of peacebuilding strategies.

"The Security Council further emphasizes the
importance of focused, well-defined, balanced and
sustained support to partnerships with post-conflict
countries, on the basis of mutual commitments, to
implement national strategies aimed at effective
peacebuilding, including reconstruction and
building of institutions necessary for recovery
from conflict, which are based on the achievement
of results and mutual accountability. The Council
urges Member States and other partners to
increase efforts towards achieving the objective of
ensuring sustained and predictable financing for
peacebuilding, including through the Peacebuilding
Fund and multi-donor trust funds.

"The Security Council underlines the
importance of effective collaboration with
international financial institutions, regional
development banks and the private sector in
ensuring support for job creation and the long-term
socioeconomic development needs of post-conflict
countries.

"The Security Council encourages national
Governments, the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations to broaden and deepen
the pool of civilian expertise for peacebuilding
in the immediate aftermath of conflict, including
from countries with relevant experience in post-
conflict peacebuilding or democratic transition,
giving particular attention to mobilizing capacities
from developing countries and from women as
vital for successful United Nations peacebuilding

endeavours. The Council also encourages national
Governments, the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations to use existing civilian
expertise and further develop it, bearing in mind the
necessity to minimize possible duplication ofefforts
and to ensure its consistency and complementarity.
The Council further underlines the importance
that intergovernmental deliberations take forward
the process in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 66/255 and the imperative of mandating
and deploying civilian expertise in compliance
with relevant United Nations rules and procedures.

"The Security Council underlines the
usefulness of sharing the experience of countries
which have gone through conflict and post-
conflict situations and comparable transitions and
emphasizes the importance of effective regional,
South-South and triangular cooperation.

"The Security Council recognizes the important
role of women in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts and in peacebuilding and underlines the
primary role of national Governments affected by
armed conflict to enhance participation of women
in the prevention and resolution of conflict and
in peacebuilding within the framework of the
women, peace and security agenda, including by
consulting relevant women's organizations from
the earliest stages of planning and priority-setting.
The Council welcomes the call of the Secretary-
General for enhanced participation, representation
and involvement of women in the prevention and
resolution of armed conflict and in peacebuilding,
as well as for a stronger commitment to address
challenges to such engagement of women at all
levels.

"The Security Council reiterates the importance
of addressing crimes committed against women
in armed conflict, including killing and maiming
and sexual violence issues from the outset of peace
processes, mediation efforts, ceasefires and peace
agreements, particularly in provisions for security
arrangements, transitional justice and reparations
as well as in the context of security sector reform.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
importance ofinvesting in the economic capacities
of women and youth for stable post-conflict
recovery and encourages Member States to support
such investment.

"The Security Council reaffirms its decision
in paragraph 14 of its resolution 1998 (2011) to
continue to include specific provisions for the
protection of children in the mandates of relevant
United Nations missions. The Security Council
recognizes that transnational organized crime,
including illegal activities such as drug trafficking
and illicit trade in arms, negatively impact the
consolidation of peace in countries emerging
from conflict, and underlines the importance of
increasing international and regional cooperation
on the basis of common and shared responsibility
to address them effectively and build national
capacities on crime prevention and criminal
justice. The Council underlines, in this regard,
the importance of enhancing cooperation among
peacebuilding actors within the same region, to
address these challenges in a coordinated manner
and in close collaboration with and with the
consent of relevant national authorities, regional
and subregional organizations as well as United
Nations regional offices.

"The Security Council requests the Secretary-
General to brief the Council and the General
Assembly by December 2013 and submit a report
no later than December 2014 on further progress
in the United Nations peacebuilding efforts in
the aftermath of conflict, including the issue
of women's participation in peacebuilding, and
placing particular emphasis on the impact on the
ground, including lessons learned from United
Nations peacebuilding activities in country-
specific contexts, and on progress in taking forward
the elements included in this statement, taking
into consideration the views of the Peacebuilding
Commission."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2012/29.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.

1 now give the floor to the representative of Brazil.

