Mr. Loncar (Serbia and Montenegro) (spoke in Serbian; English text provided by the delegation): In
my capacity as a member of Serbia and Montenegro's
National Council for Cooperation with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), I would like to thank the
Presidents and the Prosecutors of the ICTY and of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for
their detailed briefings. As a member of the National
Council, I would also like to express my appreciation
for the opportunity to present to the Security Council
the positions of Serbia and Montenegro concerning the
issue on today's agenda.

First of all, I would like to reiterate that Serbia
and Montenegro, as a Member State of the United
Nations, fully accepts its obligation to cooperate with
the ICTY. In that connection, the State Union of Serbia
and Montenegro and the Government of the Republic
of Serbia have been undertaking constant efforts to
fully comply with the obligation of Serbia and
Montenegro to cooperate with the Tribunal. In my
statement to the General Assembly on 15 November
2004, I presented concrete examples of that
cooperation.
In the meetings between the Tribunal's Chief
Prosecutor, Carla Del Ponte, and the highest-ranking
officials of the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro
and of the Republic of Serbia during her visit to
Belgrade on 4 October 2004, mutual interest was
expressed in enhanced and even more successful
cooperation between our country and the Tribunal.

Following the early parliamentary and
presidential elections whereby the institution-building
process in Serbia was completed, a newly formed
National Council for Cooperation with the ICTY
became operational in July this year. Since then, 53
persons have been granted waivers with respect to their
obligation to keep State, military or official secrets. All
requests submitted by the Office of the Prosecutor by

15 September 2004 have been duly approved; the new
requests are being processed and addressed in a more
efficient manner.

Moreover, there is another form of ongoing
cooperation with the ICTY, concerning the access of
the Office of the Prosecutor to written evidence and to
archives. A large number of the requested
documents- including those marked as containing
State or military secrets from meetings of the Supreme
Defence Council, the Parliament of the Republic of
Serbia, the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of
Interior, inter alia - have been transmitted to the
Office of the Prosecutor. Since the establishment of the
new National Council, as many as 21 such requests
have been granted.

The competent authorities have been undertaking
a series of concrete measures aimed at tracking down
the indicted persons who are, according to the
information of the Office of the Prosecutor, at large in
our country.

As for the case involving Ratko Mladic, accused
of the crimes in Srebrenica, our authorities are sparing
no effort to detect his whereabouts. Thus far a number
of operations have been carried out, but despite
thorough and credible identity and residence checks, so
far there has been not a single piece of reliable proof
that Ratko Mladic is indeed within the territory of the
State Union of Serbia and Montenegro. We are
determined to continue to take all necessary steps to
credibly investigate whether Mladic is hiding within
our territory.

I would like to take this opportunity as well to
recall that since January 2003 as many as 24 indicted
persons from the territory of Serbia and Montenegro
have been transferred to the custody of the Tribunal. It
should be noted in particular that on 9 October 2004,
following the visit of the Chief Prosecutor Carla Del
Ponte to Belgrade, Colonel Ljubisa Beara of the Army
of Republika Srpska, who was indicted in connection
with Srebrenica, surrendered to the Serbian authorities.
He was immediately transferred to the Tribunal,
accompanied by the Minister of Justice of the Republic
of Serbia. We consider that this act may be viewed as a
step in the right direction in fulfilling our obligation to
cooperate and as an appropriate way to honour the
remaining obligations of Serbia and Montenegro to the
Tribunal.

After the surrender of Colonel Beara, the
consciousness of the general public was raised
regarding the idea that voluntary surrender is the way
to effectively carry out our cooperation with The
Hague Tribunal. That would enable our country to
move forward along the road to European integration
and to intensify its cooperation with the international
community, to which most of the citizens of Serbia and
Montenegro are actually committed. All State officials
reach out to the public on a regular basis in an effort to
explain that the State must not be held hostage to The
Hague indictees and that their surrender would
contribute to the country's stability.

I would like to emphasize in particular the
comprehensive cooperation by the Government and the
State authorities of the Republic of Montenegro and
their full commitment to fulfilling all obligations
arising from that cooperation. Serbia and Montenegro
will discharge all of its financial obligations towards
the Tribunal in the very near future.

The Government of Serbia has also launched an
investigation concerning the disappearance of Goran
Hadzic, who was indicted by the Tribunal. The
investigation should provide an answer as to how a
leak of classified information became possible within
the State authorities, thus enabling Hadzic to flee. My
Government is committed to fully investigating and
resolving this case and to punishing those responsible.

I would like to remind the Council that the trial
for the "Ovcara crime" is currently being conducted in
the Belgrade court. The relevant international actors
have qualified the proceedings as highly professional
and in line with internationally recognized standards.
The Chief Prosecutor of the Tribunal, Carla Del Ponte,
also positively assessed the proceedings conducted by
the Prosecutor's Office and the Belgrade court, as well
as their capability to conduct other trials. That was the
reason that the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) transferred another case to the
jurisdiction of the Belgrade Prosecutor's Office, which
is currently conducting a proper investigation.

Serbia and Montenegro is aware of its
responsibilities concerning the Tribunal's completion
strategy. In that respect, various efforts have been
made to improve the capacity of local courts,
prosecutors' offices and legal professionals in order to
fully comply with international standards. In that
regard, the Government of Serbia last week adopted
draft legislation for a witness protection program and a
law which will allow domestic courts to recognize
evidence and information gathered by international
courts. All of this proves that war crimes trials may be,
and increasingly have to be, conducted before domestic
courts.

I would like to inform you that on 22 November
there was a meeting between the President and Prime
Minister of the Republic of Serbia and their
counterparts from Republika Srpska and most of their
attention was devoted precisely to the issue of
cooperation with the Tribunal. It was concluded that
vigorous and resolute efforts should be undertaken to
resolve the remaining issues in this field.

The government of the Republic of Serbia and all
relevant political actors in Serbia and in the State
Union of Serbia and Montenegro are absolutely aware
of the obligation to fully cooperate with the Tribunal.
There is also full agreement among them on the need to
pursue that cooperation. Consequently, new steps will
be taken to fulfil our obligations to the international
community, and I am convinced that they will bring
concrete results very soon, which will testify to our
cooperation with the Tribunal. Most important, I would
like to emphasize that the Government of Serbia and
Montenegro is determined to take new steps, with a
View to achieving concrete results that will testify to its
cooperation with the Tribunal.

