Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China congratulates Sweden on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
welcome Prime Minister Lofven to New York and thank
him for presiding over this open debate. We would like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Gamba and UNICEF Executive Director Fore for their
respective briefings. We also thank Ms. Londofio for
her statement.

The Council just unanimously adopted resolution
2427 (2018), on children and armed conflict. We
applaud the enormous efforts Sweden undertook in
holding consultations and building consensus.

The issue of children in armed conflict has been
on the Council's agenda for more than 20 years, which
means that children who were born when the Council
adopted its first resolution on this issue - resolution
1261 (1999) - are now adults. We deeply regret that the
continued outbreak of armed conflicts and the spread
of terrorism have rendered children among the most
vulnerable groups. Ruthless wars and heinous terrorist
attacks have devastated the lives of innocent children,
denying them love and care and bringing them untold
suffering instead. Those children need tangible and
effective protection from us, as well as utmost love and
care. It is incumbent upon the international community
to do so. In that regard, I would like to stress the
following points.

First, we must prioritize prevention by teaching
our children to cherish peace and reject war in order to
protect them from the harm of extremist and terrorist
ideologies. All sides should ensure that children are
taught from an early age to embrace the values of peace
and reject violence and conflict. The international
community should take effective measures against
online recruitment by terrorist organizations and the
incitement to violence and extremism through the
Internet. We should also mobilize families, schools and
communities in helping children resist terrorist and
extremist ideologies. We should strengthen international
counter-terrorism coorperation, adopt a zero-tolerance
and non-discriminatory approach and resolutely
combat all forms of crime against children committed
by terrorist organizations, such as recruitment, killing,
abuse and abduction.

Secondly, we must bring an end to hostilities and
violence and jointly maintain international peace and
security. The most effective way to protect children is
to prevent and resolve conflicts. The Security Council,
which is entrusted with the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security, must
promote the use of political means as provided for in
the Charter of the United Nations, including mediation,
conciliation, dialogue and negotiation, and support and
encourage all parties to peaceably settle their disputes
and prevent armed conflicts from happening in the first
place. The international community should promote the
proper resolution of regional hotspot issues and fully
protect the rights of children in that process. That is the
fundamental way to save children from the scourge of
armed conflict.

Thirdly, we must assume a long-term perspective
and provide capacity-building assistance to the countries
concerned. The primary responsibility for protecting
children in conflicts lies with the Governments of the
countries concerned. The efforts and cooperation of
the countries concerned are key in fully implementing
the Council's resolutions and various plans and
programmes for the protection of children. We must
fully respect national ownership, enhance dialogue
and communication with the relevant countries and
support the development of child-protection capacities
in the process of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, as well as security sector reform.

F ourthly, we must strengthen coordination and forge
international synergy for the protection of children.
UNICEF, UNESCO, the World Bank and other relevant
entities should work within their respective mandates
and leverage their comparative advantages for stronger
cooperation. An integrated approach is needed to
support the efforts of the Governments concerned on
poverty eradication, universal access to education and
sustainable development.

Moreover, we should help children affected by
armed conflict to reintegrate smoothly into their
respective societies and provide them with a favourable
security and social environment that facilitates
their healthy growth so that they can become active
contributors and promoters of peace in the future.

In this road that we all share, children are our
common hope. Let us work together for the security and
well-being of children around the world. Let us create a
harmonious world in which they can grow up in health.
Let us join hands to build a community of a shared
future for humankind so that peace can shine down on
small children as they grow and enjoy a better future.

