Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing today.

I want to begin by welcoming the Quartet's report
on the situation in Israel and the occupied Palestinian
territories. I join others in thanking the Quartet Envoys
and principals for all their hard work in producing
that important analysis on the situation facing
ordinary Israelis and Palestinians. The trends that
the report highlights are, sadly, familiar: settlements,
annexations and demolitions, violence, incitement and
suffering - on both sides. If we cannot reverse those
shocking trends, the report is clear what the future
holds. It is "a future of a one-State reality, of perpetual
occupation and conflict" - and thus a future without
security, a future without Statehood. And that is no
future at all. I know there are disagreements about
some aspects ofthe report, what it does and what it does
not cover. But I hope that we can all acknowledge that,
whatever our disagreements, it is absolutely clear that
progress must now be made to stop this possible reality
from coming to pass and that we must advance, indeed
save, the two-State solution. There are three messages
that I hope we can all agree on today.

The first is that the violence must stop. Leaders on
both sides must do more to clamp down on inflammatory
rhetoric and incitement. It is simply not acceptable to
stand by while this continues. Sadlly, the violence that
we have seen over recent months continues. Even as
the report was being published, violence was claiming
more innocent victims. As we have heard, last week
it was 13-year-old Hallel Jaffa-Ariel, last month
Mahmoud Rafad Badran, It is almost unspeakable that
future generations of Israelis and Palestinians are now
victims ofa conflict and occupation that belongs firmly
in the past. Children like Hallel and Mahmoud should
be looking ahead to seven decades of peace and hope,
not falling victim to seven decades of hate and fear.
This violence is only moving us away from peace, not
towards it.

Secondly, we need to send a clear message today
that it is not enough just to stop the Violence. The
shocking trends in the West Bank are unacceptable
and must stop. Systematic settlement expansion deep
into the West Bank, the legalization of outposts,
the re-designation of land as Israeli State land and
the obstruction or outright denial of Palestinian
development in the West Bank - those policies are
steadily eroding the viability of the two-State solution,
something that the report clearly spells out. When a
family in the Old City of Jerusalem is threatened with
eviction from their home of over 60 years, you are not
only eroding their past, you are eroding their future.
You are eroding their faith that they will ever live on
a land of their own and that they will ever coexist
peaceably with Israel. In turn, you are fuelling an anger
that will only threaten the right of ordinary Israelis to
live in safety and security. The village of Khirbat Tana,
a community near Nablus, has faced three waves of
demolitions this year. Houses, barns and a school - the
only school - were demolished. What hope is there for
the two-State solution when communities are simply
removed from the map?

My third message concerns the situation in Gaza.
Two years after the latest conflict, ordinary Gazans
continue to live in the direst conditions. This must be
addressed if we are to prevent a resumption of full-
scale conflict. We therefore call on Hamas and other
militant groups to commit to ending rocket fire and
other attacks against Israel. Israel's citizens deserve to
live in peace. In turn, we need to be clear that Israel
must lift restrictions in order to ease the suffering of
ordinary Palestinians and allow the Gazan economy to
grow. Finally, let us be clear that Palestinian leaders
must work together to overcome their differences and
reunify Gaza and the West Bank.

Those messages have been given too many times
before in the Chamber, and I appreciate that some are
disappointed that the Quartet report is not clear about
the exact steps that need to be taken - steps that go
well beyond words from the Security Council. Sadly,
we are not in a position where there is an obvious path
back to meaningful negotiations. But we can, and we
must, use the report to underline the gravity of the
situation and the urgent need for change. It is now up
to the parties to take action. We stand ready to support
them, but they need to show bold leadership if they are
to make progress towards peace. It is long overdue.

Turning briefly to Syria, we are deeply alarmed by
the credible reports that regime forces have begun an
advance into Daraya, a town that Jan Egeland and the
Office of the Special Envoy for Syria have confirmed
has no significant presence of Da'esh or Al-Nusra front
elements. That is not only a breach of the cessation
of hostilities, it clearly undermines the regime's own
declarations ofa period of calm. As we all know, Daraya
has been besieged by the regime for years, receiving
much-needed aid convoys earlier this year, only then
to be subjected to further bombardment by the regime.
Such punishment attacks following aid deliveries are
utterly sickening. At the same time, the regime has
effectively cut the last supply route into east Aleppo
City. The encirclement of the city threatens the lives
of 300,000 people, potentially increasing the number
of besieged people in Syria to over 800,000. We have
already seen the intensity in the Aleppo countryside,
causing many thousands to flee to the Jordanian border
and increasing the pressure on stretched resources there.
We therefore repeat our call once again for those States
that have influence with the Syrian regime to ensure
an immediate halt to those offensives and to respect
the cessation of hostilities in place. Those attacks are
unconscionable and without justification.

