Mr. Abdallah Baali (Algeria): Thank you, Mr.
President. I wish first to thank Mr. Hedi Annabi for his
detailed briefing on the situation in Timor-Leste. My
delegation welcomes the significant progress achieved
in recent months by the Timorese people and
Government with the support of the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET). Very
encouraging advances have been made in the
preparation for upcoming local elections as well as in
the development of the public administration justice
and law enforcement systems.

The developments achieved in the area of
security, in particular, the adoption of key laws in the
sectors of police and defence are extremely positive.
The local authorities are performing their commitments
properly and the report is extremely positive in that
regard. We are confident that Timor-Leste will
continue to develop its own capacities and will shortly,
with the support of the international community and
UNMISET, be in a position to achieve self-sufficiency
in the area of security.

Financial difficulties have continued in recent
months to impede the rebuilding of infrastructure as
well as the preparation for the elections, in particular,
outside of the capital where the capacity of the regions
in the area of administration and the justicial system is
still low. If social stability and sustainable economic
development are really to be achieved, the Government
and people of Timor-Leste must step up their efforts.
The constant support of the international community
and donors will remain vital in that regard.

Unfortunately, the country's low income level and
poverty continue to jeopardize Timor-Leste's
reconstruction and development efforts. The income
expected from petroleum and gas exploitation in the
Timor Sea unfortunately have not been realized and
progress in this area is absolutely essential if the
country is to exploit fully its economic potential. In
this regard, we hope that an agreement between
Australia and Timor-Leste for the development of
mineral resources in the Timor Sea - which will be in
the interests of the two countries - will be concluded
shortly.

We also welcome the continuing improvement in
relations between the Governments of Timor-Leste and
Indonesia and we are convinced that the two countries
will continue to work together to resolve outstanding
issues such as the delimitation and management of
their common border as well as building further on
their mutual cooperation.

The promotion of Timor-Leste's social and
economic development by bilateral and multilateral
donors will greatly assist in establishing the country's
long-term stability. Therefore, the international
community is duty bound to continue to provide
substantial and consistent assistance to the
development of Timor Leste and to participate in its
economic reconstruction. We are confident that the
Timorese people will continue to achieve success in
their undertaking to build and secure the country's
economic recovery.

