Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I thank Mr. John
Ging, Director of the Coordination and Response
Division of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for his briefing.

Perhaps no other crisis has given rise to as many
meetings this year as the situation in Ukraine. The
number has, ifI am correct, surpassed 20 and counting.
Reports on the situation on the ground provided by the
monitoring mission of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and other institutions have been essential in
understanding the real situation on the ground. Earlier
today, my delegation requested a briefing on the fourth
report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights later this week.

As the fourth report - which, as previous speakers
have mentioned, we will have another occasion to discuss
very soon - makes clear, the rule of law has collapsed
in the areas controlled by the so-called Donetsk People's
Republic and Luhansk People's Republic and has been
replaced by the rule of lawlessness.

Illegal armed groups are increasingly well
equipped, with heavy weaponry, tanks and armoured
vehicles capable of inflicting major damage and losses
to the Ukrainian troops.

Abductions and detentions of civilians, torture
and ill-treatment continue in the parts controlled
by pro-Russian militant separatist groups. Local
administration buildings are still occupied, illegal
parallel institutions are being put into place, and
separatist leaders announce summary executions to
maintain order in their ranks. Fighters take selfies with
the remains ofkilled Ukrainian soldiers. Last Friday, the
self-proclaimed defence minister, Igor Girkin, declared
a state of siege and the introduction of martial law in
Donetsk. Warnings were issued that all troublemakers
would be sent directly to courts martial.

Pro-Russian rebels in eastern Ukraine have
threatened medical staff, stolen and destroyed medical
equipment and hospital furniture, compromised the
ability of civilian patients to receive treatment and
expropriated ambulances and used them to transport
active fighters, as documented by non-governmental
organizations. Attacks on hospitals with explosive
weapons have also been reported. Such acts are strictly
prohibited under international humanitarian law, which
provides for special protections to medical units and
personnel and to the wounded and sick.

In Crimea, in contravention of General Assembly
resolution 68/262, the laws and regulations of the
Russian Federation are being applied, causing
confusion and jeopardizing the rights of all those who
are reluctant to take Russian citizenship. Harassment of
and discrimination against the indigenous population of
the Crimean Tatars and religious and other minorities
continue to take place.

No wonder the humanitarian situation is
deteriorating in areas under the illegal rule of armed
separatist groups. According to figures recently
released by the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, some 117,000 people are displaced inside
Ukraine and, as of 1 August, an estimated 168,000
people had left the country for Russia. In just the past
seven days, more than 6,000 people have been forced
from their homes. Deliberate targeting by armed
groups of critical utilities and illegal seizures of public
and private property continue to take place.

Armed separatist groups do not shy away from
installing themselves among civilian populations,
in the midst of towns, as they retreat under the
pressure of Ukrainian forces. One recent example
involved Ukrainian attempts to recapture the town
of Yasinovataya, north of Donetsk. A few days ago,
Ukrainian forces entered Yasinovataya, but due to
the threat to the lives of civilians, a commander took
the decision to return to their original positions on
the outskirts of the town to avoid harming the local
population. Sources on the ground note that the tendency
over the recent days has been that when Ukrainian
troops deploy sufficient manpower and firepower to
pose a threat to the militants, the illegal armed groups
redeploy to a nearby town, forcing the local population
to flee as they install their armed vehicles, artillery and
Grad rockets in residential areas.

As fighting continues, Ukrainian authorities have
been doing what they can to issue advance warnings
to the civilian populations and establish unilateral
humanitarian corridors in Donetsk, Luhansk and
Horlivka in order to enable the population to leave
combat areas. Ukraine, like any other country, has the
right and duty to restore law and order within its borders
and to protect its unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We reiterate the need for the Ukrainian forces
to take all the necessary measures to prevent damage
to civilian infrastructure and civilian casualties. At the
same time, the efforts of the Ukrainian Government to
continue the overall reform process of addressing the
ills inherited from the previous regime must continue.

On many occasions in the Council, we have called
for de-escalation. De-escalation, however, can never
be interpreted as Ukraine's unilateral surrender and
acceptance of the dismemberment of the State. Russia,
which has from the very beginning stoked the illegal
war carried out by militant separatists against Ukraine,
could have prevented the current humanitarian situation
from developing long ago by disassociating itself
from the militant separatism in eastern Ukraine, by
cutting off all support for the insurgents, by securing
its borders and by stopping the flow of Russian-made
weaponry. As the Ukrainian forces do what they can to
free the terrain from illegal armed groups and to ensure
the unity of the State, we may have to wait a long time
for any of that to happen.

