Mr. Takasu (Japan): We applaud the initiative of
Gabon to convene this debate on the issue of illicit
arms trafficking in the Central African region. We
welcome the presence of Deputy Secretary-General
Migiro, Mr. Costa and Mr. Duarte. We also welcome
the Secretary General of the Economic Community of
Central African States and thank him for his statement.

The countries in the Central African region are
not producers but importers of small arms and light
weapons. Large numbers of small arms are imported
illicitly and frequently traded for revenue from the
natural resources of the region. Due to weak control
systems, some of the illicit arms fall into the hands of
anti-Government forces and non-State actors.
According to the Small Arms Survey, only a small
portion of small arms are in the custody of State
security institutions. The abundant supply of small
arms and light weapons aggravates not only conflicts,
but also acts of violence and criminal activities.

The problems caused by small arms and light
weapons in the Central African region are not limited

to issues of social instability; they undermine human
rights, protection of women and children and socio-
economic development. They pose a central challenge
to human security, as my colleague from Uganda
noted, and may even become a threat to peace and
security in Africa.

Japan therefore strongly supports various efforts
being undertaken at the national, subregional, regional
and global levels to address the problem of illicit small
arms trafficking. At the national level, it is important to
implement the United Nations Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and
the International Instrument to Enable States to
Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner,
Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons. We hope that an
action-oriented outcome document will be adopted at
the forthcoming Fourth Biennial Meeting of States to
Consider the Implementation of the Programme of
Action, which is to take place in June this year.

We urge Member States to make efforts to submit
national reports on the measures taken to implement
the Programme of Action. It is absolutely essential for
the States concerned to take responsibility for
registering, controlling and managing small arms and
light weapons and ammunition and to establish
measurable goals as part of their national development
plans.

At the regional and subregional levels, we
encourage countries in the Central African region to
expedite their efforts to establish a binding instrument
on small arms and light weapons and ammunition,
following the examples of other regions in Africa. It is
particularly important to strengthen the management of
national borders on the Gulf of Guinea as a common
problem of the region. The Economic Community of
Central African States may be a good forum for
exchange of information and best practice with other
regional organizations to extend and mobilize support
for capacity-building.

At the global level, we need to the implement the
13 recommendations made by the Secretary-General in
2008 (see S/2008/258). They are all relevant to the
Central African region. For instance, the Secretary-
General recommended that plans for small arms and
light weapons be integrated into peacebuilding and
poverty reduction strategies, as a matter of priority. We
also support Recommendation 9, on destruction of
surplus ammunition stockpiles, and we are actively
supporting projects in that area.

Arms embargoes are necessary under certain
conditions, and compliance is important to have the
intended impact. Sanction monitoring groups,
peacekeeping operation missions, relevant countries
and regional organizations should cooperate closely.
We look forward to the report by the Secretary-General
to be issued this year.

In order to address the problem of small arms and
light weapons in the Central African region, we need,
first and foremost, priority actions on the part of the
countries themselves. Such efforts should be matched
by partnership and external support. There are various
cooperative frameworks in the region. We wish for
intensified efforts to strengthen collaboration and to
adopt a comprehensive approach.

Japan places high priority on assistance to solve
the problem of small arms and light weapons. In the
last nine years we have provided $500 million in
support of that. In the Central African region, where
the problem of small arms is a major concern, we are
engaged in projects in countries such as the Republic
of the Congo, the Central African Republic and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to assist in the
collection, destruction, stockpile management and
control of small arms; in disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration; and in capacity-building.

Japan is unique in the world in having a very
clear policy not to export arms, particularly to
countries involved in conflict or likely to become
involved. We are committed to play a leading role in
the fight against the illicit trade in small arms and light

weapons. To that end, every year since 1995 - and,
since 2005, joined by Colombia and South Africa as
sponsors - Japan has submitted to the General

Assembly a draft resolution on small arms and light
weapons. We are pleased at the increasing support it
has gained.

I wish to conclude by registering Japan's
continued support for the global fight against illicit
arms trafficking.

