Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): Bangladesh would like
to thank the Spanish presidency of the Council for
organizing today's high-level open debate, and the
briefers for sharing their valuable insights.

We believe that the action-oriented and balanced
approach of resolution 2325 (2016), adopted today,
will help Member States to further consolidate their
frameworks for complying with resolution 1540 (2004).
In that regard, we would like to emphasize four points.

First, today's resolution correctly recognizes that
the task of implementing resolution 1540 (2004) is a
long-term undertaking. It is therefore crucial to support
its implementation in a context-specific and with a
common but differentiated approach. The regular
sharing of best practices, including through the points-
of-contact network, would be particularly useful.

Secondly, the wide differences in implementation
among Member States will continue unless meaningful
financial and technical assistance is provided to
overcome the structural constraints that many States
face. Our delegation would have preferred to see the
review of resolution 1540 (2004) result in a more
institutionalized and predictable approach to such
assistance. Failing that, we expect Member States
and relevant entities that are in a position to do so to
redouble their efforts to provide concrete, needs-based
assistance to interested States that request it. The Group
of Experts of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) should continue to help Member
States to better identify and articulate their needs.

Thirdly, today's resolution makes a strong case for
further enhancing the 1540 Committee's cooperation
and interface with relevant international, regional and
subregional entities. We would like to emphasize the
importance of avoiding duplication and to reaffirm the
suggestion about facilitating assistance and sharing
expertise on a regional basis. The competent regional
entities may be encouraged to support interested States
in further strengthening their national export control
measures pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).

Fourthly, my delegation highlighted some of our
ongoing and future national initiatives at the formal
open consultations organized by the 1540 Committee
in June. While we remain seized of those initiatives,
we would like to note the rapid advances that have been
made in science and technology that are susceptible to
abuse or the risk of proliferation by non-State actors,
including terrorists. We call on the 1540 Committee
to help enhance our information and knowledge base
about the evolving risks, especially those requiring
our pre-emptive action. The threat of weapons of mass
destruction falling into the hands of unauthorized
non-State actors has rightly been called a catastrophe.
As a responsible member of the international
community, Bangladesh remains committed to stepping
up its efforts to help prevent such situations and their
potentially grave consequences.

