Mr. O'Brien: There can be no humanitarian
solution to the conflict in Yemen. There needs to be
a political solution, beginning with an immediate
cessation of hostilities. I echo the Special Envoy's call.
All parties and all with influence over them must work
towards peace. Each day that this war continues, it is
civilians who suffer. Each day that the conflict drags
on, we are inexorably propelled ever closer to an entire
generation of Yemenis whose formative years will have
been spent in the chaos of combat.

This humanitarian catastrophe in Yemen is a man-
made disaster, where conflict has exacerbated and
exponentially increased the suffering of the 50 per cent
of Yemeni population who were already in dire and
extreme poverty. Repeatedly over the past 19 months,
the people of Yemen have been robbed of their lives,
their hope and their right to live in dignity. Thousands
have been killed, tens of thousands have been injured,
more than 3 million have been forced to leave their
homes, and 7 million suffer the daily anxiety of not
knowing where their next meal might come from.

I have recently returned from Sana'a and
Al-Hudaydah, and in my previous visit I reached Aden
as well. I saw the desperation, fear and resignation in
the deep-sunken eyes of people I met who have lost all
hope - moved either to anger or powerless despair.
In short, since my last briefing to the Council, the
humanitarian situation has become worse and 80 per cent
of Yemenis - some 21.2 million people - are in need
of some form of humanitarian assistance. Humanitarian
actors are being asked to fill the void left by the political
power vacuum, but this is not a viable solution.

All the parties are reminded that adherence to
international humanitarian law is an obligation,
not an option. Perpetrators on all sides must be held
responsible for the legions of violations of international
humanitarian law. The Council and its members also
have responsibilities in this regard. I also stress the
need for effective, independent investigations into
allegations of war crimes and to prosecute suspects.

Since the collapse of the cessation of hostilities in
August, Yemenis across the country, in areas controlled
by various warring factions or none, have endured
near-daily attacks on civilians, civilian institutions and
public infrastructure. In August, the Saudi-led coalition
bombed a health facility supported by Medecins Sans
Frontieres and a school in Sa'ada, and the attack on
the Grand Hall funeral gathering in Sana'a earlier this
month - for which the Saudi-led coalition has taken
responsibility - left at least 140 people dead and 550
injured. And although there is no equivalence between
those killing with air power, available only to one side
of the fight, and those on the other side killing with
land-based weaponry, the Houthi/Saleh forces have
indiscriminately shelled Taiz and other locations, as
well as towns and installations inside Saudi Arabia,
reportedly using ballistic missiles.

Humanitarian workers are also prevented from doing
their work. Armed Houthi and Saleh forces routinely
intimidate, delay and harass humanitarians, threatening
the Yemenis' last lifeline with arrests and deportation,
or demanding the diversion of humanitarian assistance
to their fighters. These are all unacceptable breaches of
humanitarian law and humanitarian principles.

The drawn-out nature of Yemen's conflict is having
a devastating effect on public institutions, which are
increasingly unable to provide basic social services. A
quarter of the population depends on those employed
on the public payroll. Yet paychecks are coming
with less regularity and the ability to withdraw cash
is disappearing amidst a liquidity crisis. This is a
foreshadowing of the impeding collapse of Yemen's
economy, which is already desperately poor and
hollowed out by corruption. The Central Bank has been
unilaterally moved to Aden. Humanitarians do not have
the capacity or the resources to provide services to a
population of 26 million Yemenis. Our joint appeal is
less than half funded.

The complete, permanent collapse of public
institutions must be prevented. While the primary duty
lies with the Government of Yemen, the de facto Houthi
authorities and the previous Saleh regime, I call upon
anyone with any influence to heed this call, including
by ensuring that the salaries of doctors and nurses and
other critical civil servants are paid.

Where the failure of public services is felt perhaps
most acutely is the health sector. Fewer than half of the
rudimentary health facilities remain functional. Earlier
this month, as I said, I visited Al-Hudaydah, held by
Houthi/Saleh forces. Al-Hudaydah governorate is the
poorest in Yemen. I met with children and mothers, a
few fathers and the desperately overworked doctors,
nurses and carers at the paediatric centre at Al-Thawra
hospital, where the machines and lights frequently cut
out due to shortages of generator fuel, and the medicine
cabinets were empty. Easily treatable chronic illnesses
are becoming death sentences. Yemenis, old and
young, are dying every day because of the deprivation
of basic goods and services. Since March 2015,10,000
children under the age of five have perished from
preventable diseases as a result of the sharp decline
in the availability of immunizations and remedies for
diarrhoea and pneumonia. Also at risk are migrants
from the Horn of Africa and the more than 3 million
internally displaced, nearly half of whom are children.
They are particularly dependent on assistance, and on
supplies getting in by port or air - neither which is
getting in at the moment - and are vulnerable to the
spread of disease.

Yemen is one step away from famine. I met an
18-year-old woman with her 3-year-old baby, who
was bedridden with severe malnutrition, making it
difficult to eat; she is barely surviving on milk and tea.
I met 8-year-old children who looked like 2-year old
toddlers due to severe malnutrition and the resulting
health complications. We can only imagine how many
more children and teenagers are suffering and dying
of hunger and never make it to a hospital. As I learned
while in Yemen, over 14 million people food insecure;
7 million are severely food insecure and do not know
where their next meal is coming from, as I said earlier.
Over 2 million are malnourished nationwide, including
370,000 children who are severely malnourished.

On top of this already unthinkable suffering, cholera
is rearing its ugly head. There are now 61 confirmed
cases of cholera, with more than 1,700 more suspected
cases in 10 governorates. To date, the Ministry of
Health has confirmed 4 cholera-related deaths and
42 deaths associated with acute watery diarrhoea. But
the caseload is almost certainly much higher owing to a
lack of testing kits. The United Nations and its partners
are establishing 21 cholera treatment centres, but that is
insufficient to stop the escalating spread.

As before the conflict, the vast majority of
the needs of the Yemeni people are met through
commercial deliveries. The United Nations Verification
and Inspection Mechanism (UNVIM) is a unique first
initiative in such arrangements pulled together by
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and now run by the United Nations Office for Project
Services. I take this opportunity to call for the renewal
of its mandate. Let us back something that is working.
UNVIM. has cleared over 190 commercial vessels to
successfully offload over 3 million metric tons of food,
fuel and supplies at ports in Al-Hudaydah port, Ras Isa
and Al-Saleef since May.

However, there are currently approximately 40
vessels waiting to offload approximately 1.4 million
metric tons of cargo, including approximately 600,000
metric tons of food. Offloading cargo can take up
to 30 days on average, because of inefficient port
management, financial disputes between shippers and,
above all, slow offloading owing to limited capacity
at Al-Hudaydah port, which was severely damaged by
air strikes - albeit denied - in August 2015. Those
cranes need to be removed quickly to make way for
emergency mobile cranes.

Profiteering from commercial imports in a
country where 90 per cent of food must be imported
is unacceptable in the face of a humanitarian disaster.
Since February 2016, fuel imports have averaged a
fifth of the pre-air-strikes levels. The coalition and
the local port authorities need to ensure rapid and safe
access for cleared vessels to reach the ports, especially
Al-Hudaydah port. I also call on donors to support the
rehabilitation of the damaged port infrastructure in
Al-Hudaydah, which is the lifeline of the country. The
United Nations is trying to accelerate the procurement
of mobile cranes to dramatically increase the port's
capacity, but that is a short-term solution at best.

In the same vein, I echo the calls for the coalition
and the Government of Yemen to immediately resume
commercial flights to and from Sana'a. Saudi Arabia
controls the airspace over Yemen, generally, and Sana'a,
in particular. It is within its power and is its choice
to permit that. Since Yemenia stopped flying into
Sana'a, thousands of Yemenis have found themselves
stranded, including students who need to pursue their
studies abroad and patients who need medical care not
available in Yemen today. Many lives could be saved if
only people could travel freely to obtain that medical
treatment. For instance, the United Nations worked
tirelessly to organize life-saving evacuations via air
of wounded civilians form the 8 October attack on the
Great Hall. The Iranians and, quickly thereafter, the
Kingdom of Saudia Arabia also offered to assist with
evacuations. Yet politics, bureaucratic impediments
and other obstacles prevented us from doing so.
Clearly, the people of Yemen cannot be asked to depend
upon such improvisations in order to receive essential
medical care. I take this opportunity to commend Oman
which was able to evacuate more than 100 people for
medical treatment, but a second evacuation could not
be arranged in time before the ceasefire ended.

Since I last briefed the Council, humanitarian
partners were reaching 3.5 million every month
between January and July. Now they are reaching
4.6 million per month, despite all challenges. There has
been a steady increase in deliveries to people in need
across the country, and an additional million people
are now being reached with food aid every month, with
more than 4 million Yemenis receiving food aid each
day. Partners have provided essential health services
through fixed and mobile teams, including both trauma
and secondary health care, and provided medicines and
supplies to health facilities that serve millions.

The United Nations, under the strong leadership
of the Humanitarian Coordinator, together with our
humanitarian partners, stands ready to do more, if only
the humanitarian access constraints could be eased
and we had more financial support. But that requires
coordination with the coalition, the myriad of local
actors at the central level in Sana'a and other parties to
the conflict. Bureaucratic impediments in Yemen were
already a problem before the current conflict began
and have since then grown more complex. The United
Nations continues to negotiate access with all relevant
actors, including the authorities in Sana'a.

This man-made brutal humanitarian disaster is now
the catastrophe, which I had said was "looming" in my
first briefing (see S/PV.7494) to the Council 18 months
ago. The conflict has gone on for too long. It is high
time that the parties put the Yemeni people first and
reach a peaceful agreement in order to salvage what is

left of the infrastructure, the economy and the social
services of the country and, most importantly, address
the aspirations ofthe Yemeni people to live in a peaceful
society. If disregarded, the collapse of the country will
have menacing consequences not only for the Yemeni
people, but the entire region. The parties, their proxies
and those with influence over them - namely, the
Yemeni Government, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
the regional Gulf nations in the Gulf Cooperation
Council, the United States of America, the United
Kingdom and other Western partners of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia - all have key roles and influence,
as do the Houthi authorities, former President Saleh
and his supporters and Iran. They can arrest this war
and this suffering. They can get behind the framework
agreement put forward by the Special Envoy and secure
peace in 30 days. It is a political decision which takes
courage and leadership, and we cannot wait.

