Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. De Mistura for his briefing. It
was very interesting to hear his assessment of the results
ofthe Syrian National Dialogue Congress, held in Sochi
on 29 and 30 January. His participation on behalf of the
United Nations lent the event particular significance.
The Congress was a success, and one more important
step was taken towards the restoration of peace and
stability in Syria. A genuine prospect has emerged
for revitalizing a peaceful intra-Syrian dialogue. For
the first time, we were able to bring together in one
hall more than 1,500 representatives of the majority of
domestic forces and from many members of external
opposition forces. While we saw no individual leaders
from the Riyadh opposition negotiation group in
Sochi, a third of its members attended in a personal
capacity. This unprecedented representation attests to
the understanding established by the Security Council
that Syrians themselves must determine their country's
future, with no diktats from outside.

The Congress participants affirmed their
commitment to a settlement under the auspices of the
United Nations on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015)
and took concrete decisions. The final statement
includes 12 principles for the future Government
structuring of a renewed Syria, formulated under
United Nations mediation. The Syrians agreed to
establish a constitutional committee and called on the
Secretary-General to instruct Mr. De Mistura to assist
in organizing the work of preparation for constitutional
reform and on a definitive agreement about the
committee's composition and powers. We hope that
this will be conducted transparently and that the United
Nations mediation will make the most effective use
possible of the understanding reached by the Syrian
participants in Sochi. However, one thing is clear, and is
the premise we proceed from, which is that the decisions
on every issue related to the Government's structure,
including the constitutional basket, will be made by
the Syrians themselves, without any external pressure
or any principles or plans drafted on their behalf or in
their place. The Congress also adopted a request to the
international community from the Syrians for help in
ending the crisis and rebuilding Syria's economy.
Russia will continue to support the intra-Syrian
talks in Geneva. We regret the position taken by some
countries in dissuading some members of the Syrian
opposition from going to Sochi. This small group
is continuing its less than constructive activities by
putting out documents in a narrow platform anticipating
the outcomes of the Geneva discussions on Syria's
future political arrangements, which does not accord
with resolution 2254 (2015). The 12 principles that I
referred to represent the sole basis for discussions
of constitutional reform issues, as agreed on by the
Syrians in Geneva, approved in Sochi and affirmed in
the Congress's final statement, which we are circulating
today as an official Security Council document. The
most fundamental of the principles remain respect for
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Syria, non-interference in its domestic affairs, and
the Syrian people's right to independently determine
their future.

We are frankly disturbed by the disrespectful
attitude of some international and regional stakeholders
to the issue of Syrian sovereignty, of which there have
recently been some extremely worrying manifestations.
It is important to understand that this will not help
to normalize the situation in Syria or the region as a
whole, and that it exacerbates the conflict and makes
the prospects for a political settlement less likely. At the
same time, passions have also become inflamed over the
humanitarian and chemical aspects of the Syrian issue,
as was particularly noticeable against the backdrop of
the success of the Sochi Congress. As usual, there are
powerful disinformation resources behind this. Just
today we heard unfounded new allegations against
Syria and Russia from the United States delegation.

There is always some demand being made ofRussia.
We are not going to demand anything, but we would like
to ask our United States partners and the other Coalition
partners who can influence opposition members to
persuade them to ensure cease hostilities and refrain
from provoking further escalation. By the way, we have
a different view of the incident that occurred in eastern
Syria between Coalition and pro-Government forces.
It was an unprovoked attack. We already said during
consultations that the humanitarian situation in Syria
has different features and causes in different areas. The
reasons for each are different and the approach to each
of them should be differentiated. I am not even going
to bother discussing the unproven allegations accusing
Damascus of using chemical weapons.

I would like not to believe that there are still
forces that want to torpedo the progress towards a
political settlement for the sake of dubious geopolitical
advantage. I think that Mr. De Mistura will agree with
us that what both the Syrian people and the United
Nations mediators need now is concerted support. Any
retreat from that would have unpleasant consequences.

