Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John Holmes, for his visit to
East Africa and for presenting to us today a detailed
report on his mission. His initiative comes at a time
when the humanitarian situation in the region -
especially, I think, in Somalia and Darfur - is not only
of great concern, but also continues to deteriorate.

During the past weeks, and indeed the past few
days, a number of viewpoints have been expressed by
our Council with respect to developments in those two
areas in crisis. It is obvious that the protection of
civilian populations, access to humanitarian assistance
and good cooperation in those two areas, in particular
on the part of the local authorities and all parties to the
conflict, remain a priority. But beyond those
fundamental matters, I would also like to speak on a
few points that merit our special attention.
The information that we have received
concerning the security and humanitarian conditions in
Somalia, in particular in Mogadishu, is very troubling,
and nothing seems to indicate that that trend will be
reversed. More than 200,000 people have fled the
capital since the end of October, that is, since just over
a month ago. Almost 1.5 million people currently
require international assistance in the country, as
Mr. Holmes said. The gravity of the crisis has
prompted dozens of non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) to launch an appeal to the international
community.

Therefore the announcement on the day before
yesterday, by the Transitional Federal Government
concerning the closing of land and sea access points for
humanitarian assistance in the area of Lower Shabelle
and its subsequent retraction yesterday, show the need
for better coordination between the Somalian
authorities, as well as the usefulness of close contacts
between the Government and the United Nations. Even
if that situation is resolved in a positive manner, a
prompt solution needs to be agreed with the Somalian
authorities on the now-disproportionate problem of the
perception of rights of passage through checkpoints.

In such a context, we can only welcome the
efforts of the Secretary-General and his representative,
Mr. Ould Abdallah, to ensure better coordination of
international humanitarian assistance in Somalia and to
support the recommendation of the Secretary-General
to strengthen the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia (UNPOS). In that regard, while we recognize
the scope of the tasks facing UNPOS, we must call for
the issue of human rights in Somalia to be dealt with
actively, particularly in order to promote the fight
against impunity, which itself plays a role in the fight
against violence.

Regarding the situation in Darfur, I note the
statements that special envoys Jan Eliasson and Salim
Ahmed Salim made during their visit to Egypt.
According to those statements, the overall
humanitarian situation remains extremely fragile, while
the situation inside the camps is explosive.

Belgium also notes the resurgence of violence on
the border with Chad, where fighting between the
Government and rebel Chadian movements, which are
operating out of Darfur in particular, has violently
resumed since the end of November. That is one more
element of insecurity in a region where the European-
led peacekeeping force, EUFOR, is to be deployed as
part of the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT). We call on
the Governments of Chad and the Sudan to meet their
obligations under the Tripoli and Sirte agreements and,
in particular, to put an end to the support of armed
movements that destabilize the region. Those hostilities
cannot become a new factor complicating the return of
refugees.

As we know all too well, the deterioration of the
security situation will hinder the distribution of
humanitarian assistance. We would therefore earnestly
request the Sudanese authorities to renew in good faith
the moratorium and the Joint Communique between the
Government of Sudan and the United Nations on
Facilitation of Humanitarian Activities in Darfur,
without which, by January 2008, hundreds of agents
will be deprived of the necessary authorization to
operate. In the same context, Belgium calls on the
Government of the Sudan to put an end to the arbitrary
expulsions of humanitarian workers and numerous
bureaucratic and administrative difficulties concerning
the conduct of those operations in general.

With respect to Ogaden, the commitment of the
Ethiopian authorities should be encouraged. While the
food situation seems to be improving a bit, major local
disparities remain. As emphasized by Mr. Holmes, the
needs of the population are significant and additional
measures are required to facilitate access to aid, reduce
barriers to mobility, increase the number of distribution
points, strengthen humanitarian coordination and
clarify the rules for registration and movement of
NGOs so that they are in a position to work effectively.

