Mr. Begec (Turkey): At the outset, I would like
to thank Ukraine for organizing this open debate, a
follow-up to the very useful Arria Formula meeting
held in November. I also wish to thank the speakers
for their briefings. Turkey welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2341 (2017), which it co-sponsored.

At the forefront of the fight against terrorism, Turkey
is currently fighting several terrorist organizations
simultaneously, We know only too well the deep
suffering, damage and loss oflife caused to individuals,
families and society. More than 500 innocent lives were
lost and many more wounded owing to terrorist attacks

by Da'esh and the Kurdish Workers Party (PKK) during
the past year and a half.

Terrorist organizations are very aware of
the potential damage that the attacks on critical
infrastructure can cause. Terrorist attacks targeting
critical infrastructure, including sectors such as the
energy, transport, telecommunications, defence and
chemical industries, not only cause human and material
loss, but they also carry the potential to disrupt public
safety and the delivery of key public services, thereby
affecting the functioning and well-being of societies, as
pointed out in the President's concept note (S/2017/104, annex).

Turkey is indeed a victim of such attacks. In June
2016, Da'esh targeted the Istanbul Ataturk Airport,
while the PKK has attacked water dams, pipelines,
health services and public and private institutions,
including schools, education facilities and medical
infrastructure. The PKK has also kidnapped civil
servants, including health, education and customs
personnel. Moreover, State institutions, including the
Turkish Parliament, were bombed by the Fethullah
Terrorist Organization during the foiled coup attempt
of 15 July 2016.

Faced with the serious threats posed by multiple
terrorist organizations, Turkey has taken certain
measures to protect the lives of its people, as well as
public and private institutions and investments. Turkey
attaches particular importance to the security of
critical energy infrastructure, owing to the country's
increasing energy demands as a result of its ever-
growing economy as well as its geostrategic position,
which provides a sustainable route between producer
regions and consumers. One measure that we took and
found useful was the establishment of committees for
the security of critical energy infrastructure and for
pipeline security, under the Ministry of Energy and
Natural Resources.

The protection of critical infrastructure from
terrorist attacks is a complex issue, involving both
public and private sectors and requiring the protection
of cross-border infrastructure and international
preparedness. International cooperation and the
sharing of best practices are therefore needed. That is
why many international and regional organizations,
including NATO, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the European Union, have
been focusing on the issue.

As a country that attaches importance to the
centrality of the work of the United Nations in global
counter-terrorism efforts, we note that the protection
of critical infrastructure was also one of the goals
included in the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, adopted in 2006. We thank the Chef
de Cabinet of the Secretary-General for an overview of
the work of the United Nations on that issue. We hope
that the United Nations will pursue further its efforts to
that end in close coordination with other international
and regional organizations dealing with the matter.

In that connection, I would also like to mention
the importance of protecting soft targets, which
include religious centres, tourist sites and public
surface transportation facilities, as well as business
and commercial facilities, such as hotels, restaurants,
stadiums and entertainment venues, where people
come together and which are relatively vulnerable to
terrorist attacks owing to their open access and limited
security. Concerns about protecting soft targets are
not new. However, terrorist groups increasingly target
such venues, as we have seen in the terrorist attacks
perpetrated in Istanbul near a football stadium in
December 2016 and in a night club on 1 January
2017, which claimed the lives of many Turkish and
foreign nationals.

In that regard, the inaugural meeting of the
"Protection of Soft Targets in a Counterterrorism Context
Initiative", co-led by the United States and Turkey
under the auspices of the Global Counterterrorism
Forum, was held in Antalya, Turkey, in December 2016.
We hope that the set of good practices to enhance the
security and resilience of sites that are potential soft
targets, which is to be developed within the framework
of the initiative as a result of region-specific workshops
to be held throughout 2017, can serve as the basis for
international engagement, assistance and training so as
to enhance the security and resilience of sites that are
potential soft targets.

As I emphasized, the protection of critical
infrastructure from terrorist attacks is a challenge that
we need to confront together. International cooperation
is vital. We support the work being done in that area
in international and regional organizations. We believe
that the United Nations and its agencies have a special
role to play in that regard. We stand ready to support
any initiatives that could be taken to that end.

