Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, the initiative that you have taken to
include this debate on our agenda gives us an
opportunity to underscore the need for urgent
international assistance for restoring peace and
normalcy in Afghanistan and for rebuilding that
country, devastated by war and terrorist acts, which we
deeply deplore. My delegation appreciates the high
quality of the report of the Secretary-General that was
issued to this end, and we thank Mr. Tom Koenigs, his
Special Representative, for having verbally presented
it. Thus we have an overall view of developments in
Afghanistan following the completion of the
implementation of the Bonn Agreement, which marks
the end of the political transition in that country.

The international community and the Security
Council in particular have welcomed the positive
developments in the political process under way in
Afghanistan. The legislative elections held in
September 2005, which put in place an Afghan
legislative council, following the election of the
President of the republic, represent meaningful
progress in the building of a democratic, peaceful,
united and prosperous Afghanistan. This process was
bolstered by the holding of the international London
Conference on 31 January 2006, which launched the
Afghanistan Compact, endorsed by the Security
Council in resolution 1659 (2006). Today, the
international community pins great hopes on the
implementation of the outcome of that Conference,
which has provided the country with an Interim
National Development Strategy, a true framework
laying out policies and programmes for rebuilding the
country over the next five years.

Indeed, the Afghanistan Compact, an ambitious
plan directed by the Afghan Government itself, with
the assistance of the international community, looks to
be an appropriate response to the tremendous
challenges facing that country. It gives priority to
issues of security, the rule of law and governance,
development and reconstruction, and to the thorny
issue of drugs. It is encouraging that this plan includes
benchmarks and well-defined time frames and goals to
be achieved in terms of results. Indeed, the
implementation of the Compact greatly depends on the
generosity of Afghanistan's international partners and
on the pledges made by participants in the London
Conference, totalling more than $10.5 billion, which
bodes well for this process.

This is an opportunity for my delegation to
reaffirm, yet again, that the international community
must demonstrate the same spirit of generosity with
respect to countries involved in reconstruction efforts
following armed conflicts. Similarly, my delegation
believes that, from this standpoint, the key and
impartial role of the United Nations must be reaffirmed
in terms of coordinating efforts to implement the
Compact. As such, we welcome the United Nations
presence, through the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), whose mandate
expires on 24 March 2006 and is to be renewed for a
further period of 12 months, in accordance with the
Secretary-General's proposal. We appreciate the
advisory role to be played by UNAMA in the strategic
and political fields, working with the Afghan
authorities and their international partners, in its role as
co-chair of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board. Similarly, it must provide assistance at the local
level for people in Afghanistan, while taking into
account threats to the security and safety of United
Nations personnel. From that standpoint, it is necessary
to give UNAMA additional and sufficient security-
related resources, particularly by guaranteeing it air
support in cases of medical emergency, for instance. As
such, the role of UNAMA, which is already essential,
will become even more pivotal, given the considerable
challenges Afghanistan will face in the area of
reconstruction and in terms of security.

The problem of security is a central issue in
Afghanistan. The prevailing insecurity translates into
near-daily acts of indiscriminate violence perpetrated
by illegal armed groups, such as the Taliban or
supporters of Al-Qaida, drug traffickers, extremists
with sectarian motives, as well as large-scale banditry,
and the list goes on. It is therefore urgent that, together,
the Afghan Government - whose role is essential -
and the international community, under the leadership
of the United Nations, particularly of UNAMA, find
solutions to security-related challenges by training and
increasing the number of the National Army forces;
carrying out disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration operations and disbanding illegal armed
groups; taking over the training of the police;
strengthening the judicial system; reducing poverty;
and fighting resolutely to eradicate poppy cultivation
and the corruption fuelled by money from the drug
trade.

We emphasize, however, that addressing the issue
of security in Afghanistan is a key element of the entire
process. Therefore, any development effort would be
profoundly undermined if the central issue of security
is not appropriately addressed.

In conclusion, my delegation pays tribute to the
courage and self-sacrifice of the international
personnel in Afghanistan, including those of the
International Security Assistance Force, for the
remarkable work accomplished in extremely difficult
and dangerous conditions. We believe that this Security
Council debate amply shows the need for the presence
and solidarity that should be clearly demonstrated by
the international community in Afghanistan and for the
sake of the Afghan people.

