Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): 1 would
like to join other delegations in commending you,
Mr. President, on your initiative in holding today's open
debate and for the concept note (S/2016/306, annex). I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing.

Inevitably, I will be revisiting some issues that
have already been covered by previous speakers, and
I will therefore try to modify my statement somewhat.

Uruguay firmly condemns terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. Terrorism demands no exceptions
to its barbarous brutality. There is no political,
ideological, philosophical, religious, ethnic, racial or
any other justification for it. We are extremely worried
by the disturbing frequency of these devastating acts
around the world. Terrorism today has transcended
national and regional boundaries to become a global
phenomenon, and no State or person can be considered
safe from it. We are horrified by the levels of barbarity
and cruelty we see in the criminal acts perpetrated
by groups such as Da'esh, Al-Qaida, Boko Haram,
the Taliban, Al-Shabaab and others. Terrorists do not
distinguish between combatants and civilians. Their
attacks, whether targeted or indiscriminate, are aimed
at innocent populations and individuals.

The threat is global and our response must be global,
too. More than ever, the international community must
stand united if it is to reject and combat terrorism, and
that requires coordinated action. Terrorism takes many
forms and evolves in time and space, which makes
it difficult to fight, and its enormous capacity for
destruction and grave violations of human rights makes
it a serious threat to international peace and security.
The complexity of this issue, and the frequency and
atrocity of its acts and their terrible consequences
should goad the international community to redouble its
efforts to protect its citizens. We must strengthen and
increase our cooperation at every level, between States
and among international, regional and subregional
organizations, in order to share best practices and to
strengthen States' national capacities for preventing
and suppressing terrorism in all its forms.

We must also consider the participation of
organizations that represent civil society, the private
sector, academia, educational institutions, community
and religious leaders, young people and women. We
would especially like to emphasize the importance of
the role of women in the fight against terrorism and
violent extremism, as the Security Council recognized
in resolution 2242 (2015). We share the belief in the
importance of ensuring women's empowerment as
a central factor in strategies to combat terrorism and
violent extremism. We would also like to highlight
the crucial role that religious leaders should play in
fighting violent extremism, without ignoring the fact
that political and social unrest, economic problems and
cultural decadence create fertile ground for terrorism
to grow.

We appreciate the Organization's efforts and
actions conducted through the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and all the United Nations
entities that go to make it up, as well as those of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive
Directorate and the various sanctions committees. We
support the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and await the results of its review in June. We
are committed to the efforts aimed at strengthening its
implementation and we understand the importance of
acting collectively. We would also like to emphasize
that the fight against terrorism must be conducted with
respect for and in accordance with the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law,
particularly international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law.

Prevention must be a key element in any strategy
for combating terrorism, along with the pursuit and
prosecution of the perpetrators of terrorist acts. Every
State has a responsibility to prevent the emergence
internally of extremist ideologies that can incite
terrorist speech or methods. It is important to formulate
national prevention strategies with the support of the
United Nations and by sharing best practices and
technical assistance where necessary.

We appreciate the Secretary-General's Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism. We join the
General Assembly in urging States to refrain from
financing or encouraging terrorist activities, and from
supporting them in any other way or by providing
training for them. We know that States must also
focus on combating domestic complicity with terrorist
groups, wherever they may be.

The fight against terrorism must be won in the
realm of ideas and with respect for the law. We therefore
emphasize the importance of the role of education and
public debate as a means of combating extremism and
intolerance. We must raise awareness of the value of
human life and banish indifference. We stress how
crucial it is that States have judicial frameworks and
stable, functional institutional structures. It is also vital
to develop and strengthen international cooperative
judicial instruments and effective mechanisms for
border controls and financial oversight regimes.

Uruguay expresses its great readiness to contribute
within its abilities to the fight against this scourge. In
that respect, it is developing a national strategy and
striving to closing the identified gaps in its institutional
capacity. Uruguay recognizes that in combating
terrorism, it is essential to attack its funding sources
and its involvement in organized crime, which threatens
the transparency of the economic and financial system
and undermines public order and security.

Uruguay actively participates in regional and
multilateral entities related to security issues in
general and terrorism in particular, and maintains
bilateral exchanges of information and good practices.
It has also made progress in its accession to various
instruments relating to the international fight against
terrorism, most recently the International Convention
for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism, which
came into force in my country on 3 April.

Uruguay also seeks to increase its deterrent
capacity against terrorism and organized crime, in
which border control is key. Uruguay recently installed
the most up-to-date passenger control systems in its
airports for immigration purposes and used by Interpol
under the rubrics automated border control, passenger
name recorder and advance passenger information.

The task of combating and eliminating
international terrorism is large and complex. The onus
lies with all members of the international community.
Multilateralism is a fundamental principle of Uruguay's
foreign policy and the keystone of its international
relations. In that regard, Uruguay approaches this vital
challenge with commitment, solidarity respect for
international law and human rights.

