Mr. Ben Lagha (Tunisia): I have the pleasure to deliver this statement on behalf of the A3+1, namely, the Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa and Tunisia.Let me first express our appreciation to Mr. Huang Xia, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, for his informative briefing. We commend the work carried out by the Special Envoy and his Office in promoting peace in the region through good offices, mediation and preventive diplomacy, as well as his efforts in supporting election processes and capacity-building activities in several countries. Our statement will focus on issues pertaining to the security, political and humanitarian situations in the Great Lake Region; on the progress made on the implementation of the commitments under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region; and on the implementation of the road map of the Special Envoy. As is the case with the rest of the world, the Great Lakes region is not immune from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. In this regard, we commend the efforts of the countries of the region to curb the spread of the virus and mitigate its socioeconomic impact. We nevertheless regret that the pandemic has exacerbated the plight of vulnerable populations and had a disastrous effect on social and economic activity and on the implementation of some initiatives and projects pertaining to the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. With regard to the security situation in the Great Lakes region, and despite the harsh constraints due mainly to the COVID-19 pandemic, we salute the ongoing efforts of the Special Envoy and his Office and we are encouraged by the positive response of several member States in the region to the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire, which was supported by resolution 2532 (2020). We equally salute the willingness of countries to resort to diplomatic channels and dialogue to resolve their disputes and differences. We encourage leaders of the region to further reinforce their relations for the sake of peace, stability and prosperity in the whole region. We are nevertheless concerned by the ongoing activities of many armed groups that continue to perpetrate attacks against civilians and engage in clashes with the military forces of some of the region's countries. While the remains critical, security situation we note with in the region satisfaction the political development reflected mainly in the regional cooperation and diplomatic initiatives led by the leaders of the region, despite the COVID-19 pandemic. Countries such as Burundi have witnessed peaceful and well-organized legislative and presidential elections, and we are looking forward to the accomplishment of similar processes, mainly in Tanzania and Uganda. We are encouraged by the ongoing efforts of Rwanda and Uganda to normalize their relations, thanks to the facilitation of Angola and the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the framework of the quadripartite process. In this regard, we note with encouragement the holding of the virtual mini-summit of Heads of State of the Great Lakes region, called for by President Tshisekedi, on 7 October, as part of his regional outreach to promote cooperation between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its neighbours and to advance the implementation by all stakeholders of the Addis Ababa Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. We concur with Secretary-General about the critical nature of the humanitarian situation in the region, which has been further exacerbated by the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, natural disasters and the persistent threat posed by the continued guerrilla activities of armed groups. In this respect, we express our deep concern over the displacement of large numbers of people in the region, which has further increased their vulnerability. Despite the fact that the human rights situation in the region has witnessed some positive developments, mainly with the progress made in the fight against impunity, we express our deep concern over the continued reports of human rights violations and offenses, including sexual and gender-based violence, both by armed groups and by State actors. The Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa and Tunisia emphasize the centrality of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework to the Great Lakes region, which remains an essential mechanism to achieve durable peace and stability. We encourage enhanced cooperation among all signatory countries. In that regard, while we reiterate the call for the signatory countries to abide by their commitment to non-interference in the internal affairs of neighbours, we nonetheless welcome the recent engagement of leaders of the region, through their bilateral and multilateral efforts, to strengthen their ties and enhance mutual cooperation. In that respect, we commend the efforts of the African Union, the Southern African Development Community and the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, along with the East African Community and countries of the region, in supporting those endeavours in line with their respective commitments under the Framework. We also commend the work of subregional organizations and mechanisms aimed at sharing best practices in tackling the COVID-19 pandemic and facilitating cross-border coordination measures to contain that plight. We encourage initiatives by leaders of the region aimed at further reinforcing security cooperation and military intelligence-sharing to protect their respective borders and contain activities by armed groups. The role of the international community remains of paramount importance in the Great Lakes region. In that regard, we note with satisfaction the engagement of international partners who focused their attention on questions pertaining to development, electoral processes and ways to support the region in meeting challenges linked to the COVID-19 pandemic. In that respect, we commend the work of the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission aimed at supporting regional efforts to improve economic cooperation, development and peacebuilding in the region. The A3+l welcomes the continued and active engagement of the Secretary General's Special Envoy with key stakeholders in the region, the co-guarantors, international partners and other actors on ways and means to further consolidate the gains achieved in the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. In that regard, we commend the Secretary-General's good offices, as reflected in his Special Envoy's national and regional efforts, aimed at facilitating dialogue, cooperation and confidence-building initiatives among countries of the region. We equally encourage the Special Envoy's efforts to support the fight against impunity and promote the rule of law in the countries of the region. Addressing the issue of the illicit exploitation of, and trade in, natural resources in the region remains a real barrier to sustainable development and a source of instability, insecurity, mistrust and tension among countries of the region. We therefore call on the Special Envoy to continue his efforts and consultations in view of the adoption of a holistic and pragmatic approach to tackle the issue and contain its negative impact on the region. In conclusion, while we look forward to receiving the United Nations strategy for peace consolidation and conflict resolution and prevention in the Great Lakes region, the members of the A3+1 reiterate their full support for the Secretary-General's initiative and commend the efforts of the Special Envoy with national, regional and international stakeholders in leading the development of the strategy, which we hope will help identify and elaborate priorities and streamline the United Nations peace consolidation, conflict prevention and conflict resolution engagements in support of ongoing efforts by Governments and regional organizations in the Great Lakes region. We also emphasize the importance of a coherent whole-of- system approach that synthesizes the efforts of all peace and security, development and humanitarian actors in the region. Inthe same vein, the A3+1 would like to stress the importance of further strengthening partnerships with regional and international organizations and mechanisms, as well as related United Nations entities, and mainly the co-guarantors of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
