Mr. Steiner: The last time I addressed the
Council, it endorsed the benchmarks as the
international community's yardstick for progress in
Kosovo. Since then, Kosovo' provisional institutions
have embraced the benchmarks as internal goals and
ends in themselves. You have seen the extensive report
by the Secretary-General. This report shows that there
are still difficulties, but there is also substantial
progress. Here is where we stand on the benchmarks.

With regard to building functioning democratic
institutions, we finally have in place a multi-ethnic
Government with ten ministries and with Serb
participation. Last Friday, I promulgated the first
law of the Assembly on pensions. Preparations for the
second municipal elections are on track. Kosovo's
institutions are taking shape. Kosovars can be proud.
But the most difficult stage, namely creating a
functioning administration and a political culture suited
to self-government, is just beginning.

We have always said that there would be mistakes
in the beginning. The Assembly overstepped its
competence with its resolution on the border with the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM),
which I had to declare null and void. This has been
dealt with.

I have urged the institutions to focus on the
urgent tasks within their competence, including health,
environment and public services. The pace at which the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) transfers further authority to the
provisional institutions depends on their readiness to
assume real responsibilities. Transfer of power is about
the internationals being able to let go and about the
Kosovars assuming responsibility for day-to-day life.

On fighting crime our policy is zero-tolerance for
crime and corruption. We are cracking down on
organized crime. UNMIK police and the Kosovo Police
Service (KPS) have conducted several successful anti-
smuggling operations, confiscating large quantities of
cigarettes, fuel and alcohol. To expand our efforts to
fight corruption, a financial inspection unit, consisting
of a highly flexible, crack team from Italy's Guardia di
Finanza, will now be created within UNMIK. The
people of Kosovo themselves are tired oflawlessness.

When I first arrived in Kosovo, in February,
thousands of Kosovars were demonstrating against the
arrest of three former members of the Kosovo
Liberation Army (KLA). Windows were smashed and
people were injured. In the last six weeks, UNMIK
police have arrested 14 Kosovar Albanian men for
murder, unlawful detention and torture. Again, those
arrested included ex-KLA members. This time, some of
them were rather prominent. And again, some
Kosovars chose to express their opposition in the
streets. But this demonstration gained only marginal
support, and after an hour the police commissioner sent
me a message: "Demonstration peaceful.
Demonstration over."

With regard to Mitrovica we have been working
hard to establish UNMIK authority in northern
Mitrovica. Belgrade has said it agrees with me that
there can be no petition, no mono-ethnicity and no
parallel structures. But on the ground, we are not there
yet. The core of our strategy is effective policing with
full support from Commander of the Kosovo Force
(KFOR), General Marcel Valentin. UNMIK police are
an established force and carry out regular policing in
northern Mitrovica. Soon, the Kosovo Police Service
will also be there.

In the north, we have received more applications
from Serbs to join the KPS than we have posts.
Progress in Mitrovica depends on replacing parallel
structures with legitimate institutions. Belgrade must
discontinue its financing of the parallel structures,
including the "Bridge Gang". We, UNMIK police and
KFOR, are "watching the bridge".

It is good that Belgrade has called on Kosovo
Serb judges and prosecutors to leave the parallel courts
and to apply to join the regular courts. There are now
sufficient applications, and the applicants will be
screened individually and selected just like all other
candidates. To encourage Kosovo Serbs to participate
in local Government, we will bring the Government
closer to the people. Our approach on decentralization
would delegate competence and budget authority to
local communities. But the condition is political
participation in the municipality itself.
In the economic sphere, we are working on a new
deal for Mitrovica. But business and investments will
not come into the gray zone of illegal parallel
structures. So first, these have to go.

On the economy, as a whole, we have made
significant progress. But we took a serious hit ten days
ago. There was a disastrous fire in one of the two main
power plants in Kosovo, caused by a high intensity bolt
of lightning. The situation was quite dramatic. I quote
from the police report: "The fire forced a number of
workers onto the roof, where they were trapped. The
firemen's ladder was unable at first to reach the
persons on the roof, as their ladders extend only to 30
meters, and the roof was higher." The workers were
saved by the ingenuity of the fire brigade. We have lost
more than half of our power capacity with a single
stroke of lightning. There was no arson, and the alleged
TNT was, as KFOR discovered, simple builders' putty.
But if the police report identifies mismanagement or
serious negligence, I will hold those responsible
accountable.

As a result, there are now and will be power
shortages. Together with the Kosovars we will manage,
through a number of measures. But the real problem
will come this winter. For this, we need to prepare now.

A strong economy is not only powered by energy
but also by a solid set of institutions and rules and
indeed respect for these rules. We have established a
framework for privatization. The Kosovo Trust Agency
is in place, thanks to the support of the United Nations
Secretariat, as well as the European Union and the
World Bank. The Board had its inaugural meeting last
week. Preparatory work is now necessary to enable the
Agency to establish clear property ownership, facilitate
and protect new investments, and put idle assets into
productive use.

But to seize the opportunities presented by
privatization and to regenerate the economy, we need
to find a way to replace declining donor funding.
Kosovo's economy is still far from being self-
sustaining. I will need your help to find a way to gain
access to credit. This will require political support to
develop procedures, to conclude international loan and
guarantee agreements, taking into account Kosovo's
special status.

We cannot have it both ways. If aid is decreasing,
Kosovo must have access to the international financial
institutions. Otherwise, the 57% unemployment rate
will force the young, the future of Kosovo, to emigrate.
With regard to the returns there is no denying that
the returns process has been too slow. And it is a
disgrace that in 2002 we still have enclaves in Europe.

But this year we have reversed the trend on
returns. The number of minority returns now exceeds
outflow. The figures of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
indicate that approximately 1,000 people returned in
the first six months of 2002, while 268 left. The
number of returnees is not large, but it indicates that
the climate is improving.

KFOR has been able to remove fixed
checkpoints. Serbian can be heard in the streets of
Pristina. Political support for returns is also growing,
although in some municipalities it still needs to be
improved. Both the Kosovo Assembly and the
Association of Municipal Assemblies have issued
resolutions demanding freedom of movement and
unconditional return.

Let me quote Prime Minister Bajram Rexhepi:

"My goal is to integrate Serb enclaves that
have been physically isolated until now. We will
try to integrate them, to offer them a role in all
Government institutions, but also on the level of
the economy, in enterprises and employment."

We now have the right structures in place.
Milorad Todorovic has taken up the position of Inter-
Ministerial Coordinator for Returns in the Government.
Another Kosovo Serb, Nenad Radosavljevic, is my
Special Adviser on Returns. Both the UNMIK Office
for Return and the Housing and Property Directorate
will now have new, dynamic directors. Property is key.
With this fresh start, the Housing and Property
Directorate needs proper funding.

Our concept for returns is based on the choice of
individuals to return to their own homes and to stay.
Success on returns is measured not by how many
return, but by making return a genuine option. A
genuine option means safety and the ability to move
freely. It means a place to live, a job and equal access
to basic services and public utilities. It means the
ability to repossess property. It is our job to help create
those preconditions. How many return, then, depends
on the displaced persons themselves. So it is not about
numbers; it is about a real choice.

For example, in partnership with UNHCR, we
have just finalized a comprehensive package for 500
people to return in Peje/Pec. Italy has funded the
project, worth 3.5 million euros. Exploiting other,
similar opportunities requires resources. I will
distribute a map and an organizational chart which
shows where we go on returns. The more successful we
are, the greater the needs will be. Return costs money.
We have 30 other projects that are ready to go, and
many more to come.

Kosovo must look beyond its boundaries and
borders. I have Visited all of the neighbours to establish
pragmatic relations. Kosovans will now be able to
drive to all of them with the Kosovo license plates.
They require visas for none of them. They are getting
driving licenses that fulfil all European standards and
can be used abroad.

Progress on many of the issues that matter to
Kosovans requires intensive dialogue with Belgrade.
Kosovo's political leaders have yet to participate in this
dialogue. The normalization of relations is a key
benchmark. On the other hand, we look to Belgrade to
support UNMIK's policies in words and deeds. Parallel
structures have to go.

Our message is "standards before status". Kosovo
has not yet achieved the standards that either the
international community or its own people demand, but
we can see progress. The benchmarks allow me to
measure that progress, to transfer power and to decide,
when the time is right, to begin the process to
determine Kosovo's future status, in line with
paragraph 11 (e) of resolution 1244 (1999). While we
cannot say now what shape that future status will be,
we can say what it will not be. There will be no
partition, no cantonization and no return to the status
quo ante of 1999. The outcome cannot be mono-ethnic
but must be multi-ethnic. It must be a democratic, safe
and respectable Kosovo on the way to Europe.

Progress towards this Vision of Kosovo is not
guaranteed. There are still many obstacles to overcome.
But together with the Kosovo institutions, with the
Kosovans and with the Security Council behind us, I
believe it is possible.

