I would like to express our thanks to High Representative Nakamitsu and the Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), Ambassador Arias, for their comprehensive briefings. I would also like to express our appreciation to Mr. Arias for his able leadership in ensuring the implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention despite the unprecedented difficulties caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic. We take note of the Director-General's eighty-sixth monthly report on the activities of the OPCW towards ensuring the elimination of the Syrian regime's chemical weapons programme (see S/2020/1152, annex). The report draws attention to the ongoing alarming situation regarding that stated goal. There are still 19 issues outstanding concerning the Al-Assad regime's chemical weapons declaration. One of those issues is particularly concerning, as it proves the existence of a chemical- weapon production facility. Such examples indicate yet again the urgent need to address the gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies identified in the regime's fraudulent declaration. The Syrian regime's non-compliance with its obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention cannot be condoned and requires a firm response from the international community, in particular from the Security Council. If we overlook that collective task, the global norm against the use of weapons of mass destruction will be irreparably undermined. If we do not take the necessary action, the efforts to hold the regime accountable for its well-documented crimes against humanity run the risk of failure. To reverse that ominous trend, concrete steps are required. The Syrian regime must fully cooperate with the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) and immediately declare the full extent of its chemical weapons programme to the OPCW. It was on that understanding that Turkey co-sponsored the OPCW Executive Council decision of 9 July, which set clear and verifiable parameters for action. The decision required that the Syrian regime return to full compliance with the Convention within 90 days. Regrettably, the October report of the OPCW Director-General established that the Syrian regime had failed to fulfil its obligations under that decision (see S/2020/1033, annex). We therefore support the implementation of concrete measures, in particular during the second part of the twenty-fifth session of the Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention, with a view to addressing the persistent non-compliance of the Syrian regime with the Convention, including its repeated use of chemical weapons and failure to declare and destroy all of its chemical weapons and production facilities in a fully verifiable manner. Along with 45 other States parties, Turkey sponsored the relevant draft decision that will be considered during the second part of the twenty-fifth session of the Conference of the States Parties. We look forward to seeing the results of the current investigations of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission and the Investigation and Identification Team (IIT). Turkey reiterates its full support to the IIT, which performs a valuable role in identifying the perpetrators of the use of chemical weapons in Syria. We have full confidence in the professionalism, integrity and impartiality of the OPCW Technical Secretariat, the DAT, the IIT and the Fact-Finding Mission. Their dedicated work is commendable and should have the support of us all. We regret the attempts to undermine their integrity and credibility. Turkey remains steadfast in its call for accountability in Syria. The reports by the OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism and the Fact-Finding Mission, and most recently the IIT report on the incidents in Ltamenah, provide a sufficient basis on which we can act to end impunity. In that context, we once again condemn in the strongest possible terms the use of chemical weapons by the Syrian Arab Air Force in Ltamenah on 24, 25 and 30 March 2017, as established by the IIT report. In conclusion, the Syrian regime must be urged towards result-oriented cooperation with the OPCW. It is crucial that the Security Council act in unity and ensure the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). That is the only way to prevent the Syrian regime's repeated use of chemical weapons against its own people. In that regard, we want to once again recall the special responsibility of those who have influence on the Syrian regime. We need to act decisively in order to ensure accountability in Syria and honour the victims of those chemical-weapon attacks. As for the absurd claims made by the representative of the Syrian regime about my country, it is quite clear that after seven years, 86 progress reports and many concrete cases of blatant breaches of its obligations, such remarks are nothing but a futile attempt by the Syrian regime to distract the Council's attention from Syria's well-known crimes against humanity, particularly its well-documented use of chemical weapons. We refute such fabrications entirely and affirm once again that we will continue to stand by the Syrian people.
