Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we would like to
thank the Secretary-General, Dr. David Nabarro and
Ms. Margaret Chan for their exhaustive briefings and
for the commitment they have shown on a topic that is
of importance to the entire international community.

I thank the presidency of the Security Council for
convening this important meeting at a time when our
African brothers and sisters are struggling against
a fierce epidemic, the Ebola virus disease, which
threatens to decimate communities and whole villages,
and on which the international community must act
immediately with the aim of saving as many human
lives as possible and prevent the current situation from
becoming a humanitarian catastrophe, as the World
Health Organization has warned. Besides the loss of
human lives and beyond the humanitarian tragedy such
loss signifies lie the impacts and the economic and
infrastructural damage that this horrible epidemic will
bring to affected countries in the medium and long term.
Food security, health systems, water and sanitation can
collapse if we do not give an immediate and supportive
response to our affected brother countries.

Our country is a poor country but we have the most
valuable resource - the human resource - that we
are disposed to contribute help and assistance, together
with other teams, to address a humanitarian emergency
with unpredictable consequences. We acknowledge
the work of the World Health Organization, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian and the
Secretary-General's initiative to launch the United
Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response. We
also recognize all brother countries that are providing
assistance in health workers, equipment, donations,
funds, logistics and guidance and which to date have
committed to contributing to this great effort, which
should demonstrate that the community of nations can
in fact work together, in good faith and with urgency,
to save lives in the face of a humanitarian catastrophe.

Those are the reasons that have led us to co-sponsor
resolution 2177 (2014) adopted by the Council today.

