Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I congratulate you, Sir,
and your country, Panama, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
express our confidence in your ability to wisely guide
the work of the Council. I also reiterate our thanks to
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya for its able leadership of
the Council in January. In addition, I thank
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Ms. Ann Veneman and
Ms. Jo Becker for their statements.

Armed conflicts continue to claim the lives of
innocent children around the world. Our world is not
one fit for all children, particularly those in situations
of armed conflict, who are surrounded by dangers that
force them to live in constant fear for their lives and
leave them needy and vulnerable. Their childhoods are
marred by violence, physical and psychological harm;
displacement; imprisonment; exploitation, including
recruitment as soldiers and sexual exploitation; hunger;
poverty; lack of education; and devastation of their
families and communities.

For children in situations of armed conflict,
including foreign occupation, all aspects of life are
detrimentally impacted and the meaning of childhood
is lost. As stated in the important Graca Machel study
"Impact of armed conflict on children",

"War violates every right of a child - the
right to life, the right to be with family and
community, the right to health, the right to
development and the right to be nurtured and
protected".
Moreover, the damage caused to children today has
negative short and long-term consequences for
children, women, families and societies as a whole,
inevitably impacting future prospects for peace and
development in our world. We know that to be true.
Yet, regrettably, children continue to be the victims of
appalling human rights violations and crimes, despite
the international community's Declaration, more than
five years ago, that

"Children must be protected from the horrors of
armed conflict. Children under foreign
occupation must also be protected, in accordance
with the provisions of international humanitarian
law". (General Assembly resolution S-27/2, para. 7 (7), annex)

We must act now, in reaffirmation of this commitment,
to protect children and to ensure their rights under the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and all other relevant
international legal instruments.

The wide gap between such international legal
standards and their actual implementation for
safeguarding children's rights must be closed. Ending
impunity for violations against children is paramount,
and we agree in this regard with the recommendations
in the 10-year strategic review of the Machel report,
including the application of targeted measures such as
sanctions against those persistently committing grave
violations against children in armed conflict.

Decades of human rights violations and hardships
have indelibly marked Palestine's children and
refugees and those under occupation, resulting in what
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Coomaraswamy,
described in a report following her visit to the occupied
Palestinian territory in April 2007, as "a palpable sense
of loss and a feeling of hopelessness that places the
children of the West Bank and Gaza apart from all
other situations the SRSG has visited to date".

Palestinian children continue to be killed and
wounded in Israeli military assaults and to be
traumatized by the vicious cycle of violence, with
nearly 1,000 children killed since September 2000 and
more than 3,500 injured, many of them permanently
disabled.

Children continue to be used as human shields by
the occupying forces, and their schools continue to be
targeted by attacks. More than 400 Palestinian
children, some as young as 12 years old, also continue

to be imprisoned by Israel under inhumane conditions
and subject to physical and mental ill-treatment,
including torture and threats of sexual violence.
Palestinian children also continue to suffer
displacement and its many associated consequences,
including induced poverty, as a result of the occupying
Power's wanton destruction of homes and refugee
shelters and unlawful construction of the wall and
settlements.

Palestinian children also continue to suffer
gravely from the deliberate denial of humanitarian
access by the occupying Power. Israel's collective
punishment of the Palestinian people has disastrously
impacted the humanitarian situation of children, with
the situation in the besieged Gaza Strip most severe.
There, Israel's obstruction of access for humanitarian
supplies and personnel is violating children's rights to
food, health care, education and, in some cases, the
right to life itself.

It has been reported that already more than 67
children have died due to blockage of access to proper
medical care, including prevention of treatment outside
the Gaza Strip and a shortage of 150 critical
medications. In conjunction with this, widespread
hunger in Gaza, where mothers and fathers cannot even
feed their children without food aid, and the severe
shortages of fresh drinking water have caused a
dramatic decline in health, with rampant child
malnutrition, anaemia, and stunted growth. Medical
research estimates that at least 70 per cent of children
in Gaza are anaemic and that, consequently, these
children lack immunity even to common childhood
diseases, not to mention other, more virulent diseases.
In such a situation, even a simple outbreak of influenza
could cause severe illness or widespread death among
children. Such a catastrophe must be averted by
immediate humanitarian and political intervention.

While it is our deepest hope that current peace
efforts will lead to a just and lasting settlement that
will bring to Palestinian children the freedom, security
and well-being of peace in their independent State,
living side by side with Israeli children in peace and
security, reiterate that the rights of children living in
such situations of armed conflict, including foreign
occupation, and response to their needs cannot be
postponed or withheld. For all of these children, there
must be collective efforts to ensure their protection and
their rights as well as the necessary assistance and
rehabilitation to give them hope and allow them to
become productive members of their societies,
contributing to the advancement of their nations.

In this regard, we agree with the recommendation
in the report of the Secretary-General that child
protection advisers should be posted in the occupied
Palestinian territory, among other places, to enhance
human rights monitoring and appropriate responses to
children's issues.

Moreover, we stress the central role of the United
Nation in assisting and protecting children, particularly
through the important work of UNICEF and, in the
case of Palestinian children, of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East as well, and the many other United Nations
agencies working with other international humanitarian
organizations to help children around the world. Such
efforts, combined with the important advocacy work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
will keep attention on the plight of children in armed
conflict, a plight that the Security Council must also
address as it endeavours to address armed conflicts in
their entirety for the promotion of peace and security
for all in our world.

