Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Just now, the Security Council adopted by
consensus a resolution on additional steps to be taken
to combat terrorism. We are convinced that these are
necessary and timely steps in the right direction,
required by the need for joint efforts by the
international community to combat the terrorist threat.
The unprecedented escalation of international
terrorism, of which there has been further confirmation
in recent days in Pakistan, Egypt and today in France,
in addition to the killings of hostages, the recent
tragedy in the Russian city of Beslan and other acts,
points to the need for the Security Council to take more
decisive action with a View to further developing a
global anti-terrorist strategy, as defined in Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001).

The current resolution is not just an expression of
anti-terrorist solidarity. It sets out concrete steps to
strengthen mechanisms for security and to improve
legal instruments with a view to enhancing
coordination of international counter-terrorism actions.

The major emphasis in the resolution is that
terrorist acts are crimes that can be justified by no
political, ideological, religious or other views of any
nature and that the perpetrators of terrorist acts should
receive the harshest possible punishment for their
crimes. We proceed from the practical need to improve
the legal and operational instruments to combat
terrorism and terrorist organizations, which are highly
skilled at adapting their structure and tactics to
changing circumstances.

We realize that there is a problem with respect to
identifying additional anti-terrorist measures. The task
of solving that problem has been entrusted to a
working group of the Security Council to be
established pursuant to the resolution we have just
adopted. It will have to discuss the practical
effectiveness and coordination of various approaches.
We firmly believe that one priority task of the working
group must be the search for ways and means to
identify terrorists, including the possible drafting of a
relevant list whereby they may subsequently be
brought to justice.

As I have said, the drafting of appropriate
procedures will be complex politically and
legislatively. That does not mean, however, that we
should not address such issues. We hope that the
working group will help us to bring our positions into
line with one another and to propose new approaches
to the solution of the task. We believe that today's
resolution will give a qualitative new impulse to the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and to the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate and that it will alter
and expand the range of activities to stem the activities
of terrorists and their accomplices worldwide.

We are convinced that resolution 1566 (2004)
further strengthens the central coordinating role of the
United Nations in the international campaign against
the terrorist threat. I wish to thank all my colleagues in
the Security Council, first and foremost the sponsors of
the resolution, for their active participation in its
preparation and adoption.

