Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Kosovo, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing
today. I am also delighted to welcome to the Council
His Excellency Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, Foreign Minister of
Kosovo, and His Excellency Mr. Ivan Mrkie, Foreign
Minister of Serbia.

Kosovo continues to make progress, both internally
and on the international stage, and is now recognized
by over half of the States Members of the United
Nations. The United Kingdom welcomes the European
Council's decision of 28 June to open negotiations for a
stabilization and association agreement between Kosovo
and the European Union. The United Kingdom fully
supports the stabilization and association agreement
with Kosovo, which is the first milestone on the path
to eventual European Union (EU) membership. It also
supports the decision to open accession negotiations
with Serbia. Those decisions highlight the way in
which improved cooperation and progress in the EU-
facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina
create opportunities and help yield progress in the EU
accession process.

Negotiations on the stabilization and association
agreement mark a new stage in Kosovo's relationship
with the European Union, NATO and the United
Nations. To that end, we have encouraged those
countries that have not yet recognized Kosovo to do
so. It is important that the stabilization and association
agreement negotiations begin in the autumn and that
they be finalized in good time. The United Kingdom
hopes that Kosovo will work effectively with the
European Commission to ensure that the areas for
reform identified in the 2012 feasibility study are
addressed. Kosovo must now make even greater strides
in improving electoral reform, minority rights and the
rule of law.

As we have said before, the normalization of
relations between Kosovo and Serbia is integral to
both countries' European Union accession paths. The
full implementation of the dialogue agreement will
be crucial to unlocking progress for both Kosovo and
Serbia. Special Representative ofthe Secretary-General
Zarif has set out in detail some of the important steps
that have been taken, and I welcome them. Those steps
need to be consolidated and built upon, so I encourage
continued efforts by both the Serbian and the Kosovo
Governments in taking those difficult steps, and
urge them to reach early agreements on energy and
telecommunication.

Prime Minister Dacie and Prime Minister Thaci
have shown great courage and political leadership thus
far. It is vital that the two Governments sustain progress,
continue to find compromise and work together to
overcome obstacles to implementation. Belgrade must
also continue to communicate the benefits of that
agreement effectively to the local communities in
northern Kosovo, and Pristina must continue to make
every effort to encourage the integration of Kosovo
Serbs in the north by demonstrating that it supports the
rights and cultures of all its minority citizens.

The continued assistance of the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the
implementation of dialogue agreements will be
indispensable. We support the important role of
EULEX, which will help integrate institutions in the
north under Kosovo's jurisdiction. To that end, the
United Kingdom urges the authorities in Pristina and
Belgrade to cooperate fully with EULEX, particularly
by ensuring the freedom of movement for all EULEX
personnel in the north.

I welcome Kosovo's commitment to providing
free, fair and democratic municipal elections on
3 November. We urge all those who have influence to
encourage wide participation in those elections. The
Kosovo Government should work constructively with
international organizations such as the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, which will
play a crucial role in facilitating the elections.

The United Kingdom is also keen to see wider
electoral reform in Kosovo before the end of the
year. Kosovo-wide elections will be a significant step
towards the integration of all minority communities
across Kosovo. Another important part of the process
is inter-ethnic reconciliation. In that respect, making
progress on the issue of missing persons is crucial. The
United Kingdom welcomes the formation of a joint
Kosovo Government and civil society working group
on dealing with the past. We hope UNMIK and other
international organizations will continue to contribute
to that process.

