The President (spoke in Russian): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Afghanistan in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Farhadi
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan,
document S/1999/994.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General concerning the situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international
peace and security of 21 September 1999
(A/54/3 78-S/I 999/994).

"The Security Council reiterates its grave concern
at the continued Afghan conflict, which is a serious
and growing threat to regional and international peace
and security. It strongly condemns the Taliban for the
launching in July 1999, only one week after the

meeting of the 'Six plus Two' group in Tashkent, of
a new offensive, despite the repeated demands by
the Council to cease fighting. This has undermined
international efforts to facilitate the restoration of
peace in Afghanistan. The fighting following the
offensive has resulted in enormous suffering to the
civilian population of Afghanistan. The Taliban has
a primary responsibility for this.

"The Security Council reiterates that there is no
military solution to the conflict in Afghanistan and
that only a negotiated political settlement aimed at
the establishment of a broad-based, multi-ethnic and
fully representative government acceptable to all
Afghans can lead to peace and reconciliation. It
recalls its demand that the parties to the conflict,
especially the Taliban, resume negotiations under
United Nations auspices without delay and
preconditions in full compliance with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Council. The Council notes that the United Front of
Afghanistan have repeatedly made clear that they are
willing to talk with the Taliban in order to reach a
solution to the country's problems.

"The Security Council reiterates that outside
interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan,
including the involvement of foreign combatants and
military personnel and the supply of weapons and
other materials used in the conflict, should cease
immediately. It calls upon all States to take resolute
measures to prohibit their military personnel from
planning and participating in combat operations in
Afghanistan, and immediately to withdraw their
personnel and to assure that the supply of
ammunition and other war-making materials is
halted. The Council expresses its deep distress over
reports indicating the involvement in the fighting in
Afghanistan, on the side of the Taliban forces, of
thousands of non-Afghans nationals, mostly from
religious schools and some of whom are below the
age of 14.

"The Security Council reaffirms its full support
for the efforts of the United Nations, in particular
the activities of the United Nations Special Mission
to Afghanistan (UNSMA) and those of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, in
facilitating the political process towards the goals of
national reconciliation and a lasting political
settlement with the participation of all parties to the
conflict and all segments of Afghan society, and

 

reiterates its position that the United Nations must
continue to play its central and impartial role in
international efforts towards a peaceful resolution of
the Afghan conflict.

"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern at the seriously deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Afghanistan. It calls upon all Afghan
parties, and in particular the Taliban, to take the
necessary steps to secure the uninterrupted supply of
humanitarian aid to all in need of it and in this
connection not to create impediments to the activities
of the United Nations humanitarian agencies and
international humanitarian organizations.

"The Security Council once again urges all
Afghanfactions to cooperate fully with UNSMA and
international humanitarian organizations, and calls
upon them, in particular the Taliban, to take the
necessary steps to ensure the safety and freedom of
movement of such personnel.

"The Security Council welcomes the Declaration
on Fundamental Principles for a Peaceful Settlement
of the Conflict in Afghanistan (A/54/174-S/1999/812, annex) adopted by the 'six plus two' group on 19
July 1999 in Tashkent, particularly the agreement of
members of the group not to provide military support
to any Afghan party and to prevent the use of their
territories for such purposes. It urges the members of
the group and the Afghan factions to implement these
principles in support of the efforts of the United
Nations towards a peaceful resolution of the Afghan
conflict.

"The Security Council strongly condemns the
continuing use of Afghan territory, especially areas
controlled by the Taliban, for the sheltering and
training of terrorists and planning of terrorist acts, and
reaffirms its conviction that the suppression of
international terrorism is essential for the maintenance
of international peace and security. It insists that the
Taliban cease the provision of sanctuary and training
for international terrorists and their organizations, take
effective measures to ensure that the territory under its
control is not used for terrorist installations and camps
or for the preparation or organization of terrorist acts
against other States or their citizens, and cooperate
with efforts to bring indicted terrorists to justice. The
Council demands once again that the Taliban turn over
indicted terrorist Usama bin Laden to appropriate
authorities as set out in its resolution 1267 (1999) of

15 October 1999. It reaffirms its decision to
implement on 14 November 1999 the measures
contained in that resolution, unless the Secretary-
General reports that the Taliban has fully complied
with the obligation set out in paragraph 2 of that
resolution.
"The Security Council is deeply disturbed also
by a significant increase in the cultivation,
production and trafficking of drugs in Afghanistan,
especially in areas controlled by the Taliban, which
will contribute to the war-making capabilities of the
Afghans and will have even more serious
international consequences. It demands that the
Taliban, as well as others, halt all illegal drug
activities. The Council calls upon Member States, in
particular those neighbouring Afghanistan, and all
others concerned to undertake concerted measures to
stop the trafficking of illegal drugs from
Afghanistan.

"The Security Council deplores the worsening
human rights situation in Afghanistan. It expresses
particular alarm at the continuing disregard by the
Taliban of the concerns expressed by the
international community. The Council underlines the
unacceptability of the forced displacement of the
civilian population, in particular that conducted by
the Taliban during their recent offensive, summary
executions, the deliberate abuse and arbitrary
detentions of civilians, violence and continuing
discrimination against women and girls, the
separation of men from their families, the use of
child soldiers, the widespread burning of crops and
destruction of homes, the indiscriminate bombing
and other violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law in Afghanistan. It
calls upon all Afghan parties, especially the Taliban,
to put an end to such practices, to adhere to the
international norms and standards in this sphere, to
take urgent measures to improve the human rights
situation and, as an immediate first step, to ensure
the protection of civilians.

"The Security Council reiterates that the
capture by the Taliban of the Consulate-General of
the Islamic Republic of Iran and the murder of the
Iranian diplomats and a journalist in Mazare-Sharif
constitute flagrant violations of international law. It
demands that the Taliban cooperate fully with the
United Nations in investigating these crimes with a
view to prosecuting those responsible.
 

"The Security Council looks forward to the
Secretary-General's next report on the situation in
Afghanistan, and encourages him to review options for
the Security Council and the General Assembly.

"The Security Council deplores the failure of the
leadership of the Taliban to take measures to comply
with the demands made in its previous resolutions,
especially to conclude a ceasefire and to resume
negotiations, and in this context reaffirms its readiness
to consider the imposition of measures, in accordance
with its responsibility under the Charter of the
United Nations, with the aim of achieving the full
implementation of its relevant resolutions."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1999/29.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 1.35 pm.

