I thank Ambassadors Ladeb and Djani for their briefings and their leadership to ensure the uninterrupted work of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities; the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism; the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and their expert bodies throughout the pandemic. Over the past year, the global terrorist threat has substantially evolved. Thousands of suspected foreign terrorist fighters and their families remain stranded in conflict zones. The threat from the Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) will likely increase if the international community does not meet its obligations under international law to repatriate its citizens. We encourage the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team to closely observe that global threat and continue to guide the Office of Counter-Terrorism's initiative on the prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration of terrorists. Beyond conflict zones, there is a surge in the threat posed by ISIS affiliates around the world, including alarming new levels of coordination in Africa. We look forward to working closely with our partners to tackle that challenge in the 1267 Committee. While the world rallies to respond to the serious challenges posed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), terrorists are exploiting the pandemic to disseminate disinformation to advance their agenda and garner support for their cause. Terrorist organizations are evaluating the extent to which Governments in regions where they operate are vulnerable. Terrorists are adapting their messages to undermine confidence in such Governments, threaten legitimate governance and provoke violence to further their agendas. Through its partnerships with Governments, civil society and the private sector, the United States is helping to counter COVID-related disinformation by rebutting terrorist narratives wherever they arise. The fear, anxiety and isolation caused by the pandemic have created especially fertile ground for what we term racially or ethnically motivated terrorism. That form of terrorism promotes the collapse of society as a precursor to a radical restructuring of political systems to marginalize certain ethnic and racial groups. With many people now working and socializing online, the pandemic has expanded opportunities for those spreading violent radical views to recruit and mobilize sympathizers. We need to counter them globally and systematically. On the non-proliferation front, resolution 1540 (2004) continues to guide actions taken by States to protect weapons of mass destruction-related goods, data and know-how from unauthorized use and transfer by non-State actors, especially terrorists. Resolution 1540 (2004) complements United Nations counter-terrorism resolutions by requiring, under its own provisions, that Member States take account of the tangible and intangible technology needed by terrorists to manufacture and use improvised weapons of mass destruction. Such work is all the more important today as we witness the rising use of weapons of mass destruction, particularly chemical-weapons use in Syria, the United Kingdom and Russia, and the increasing possibility of the use of deadly biological weapons by terrorists owing to technical advancements and increased access amid the profound global impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Let me be clear - anywhere and at any time, the use of chemical weapons is abhorrent and an affront to all humankind. We are therefore pleased with the Council's efforts to enhance cooperation among the 1540 Committee, the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the ISIL (Da'esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee. We encourage the Committees and their expert bodies to continue to include civil society groups in discussions throughout the pandemic so that we can learn from their experiences and recommendations on how best to prevent and counter violent extremism.
