Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank Mr. Volcker for his introduction of
the report of the Independent Inquiry Committee. I
would also like to thank him for the excellent work he
did in chairing the Committee. It would be pretentious
and utterly unreasonable of me to pass judgement at
this point on a document that is many hundred pages
long and that has just been distributed and introduced
to us. However, I would like to make some preliminary
general comments on the oil-for-food programme.

It cannot be denied that that programme - a
humanitarian programme whose scope was by far the
largest of any such United Nations operation - was

able to save the lives of millions of innocent people
against whom an implacable sanctions system had been
imposed by the Security Council. Without the
programme, they would have died. Furthermore, as the
Committee has made clear, the existence of the
programme meant that Iraq neither acquired nor
developed weapons of mass destruction. That is not an
insignificant achievement.

It cannot be denied, either, that the United
Nations was quickly overwhelmed by the immensity
and complexity of the tasks involved in managing the
programme. The United Nations - first of all, the
Secretariat - was not equipped, with regard to
management and planning or control of the operation,
to carry out so many tasks that had to be learned on the
job. However, also and above all, the Security
Council's major concern - if not obsession - was to
make sure that goods sold to Iraq could not be used for
military purposes. For example, contracts on the sale of
buses and river vehicles were blocked on the grounds
that such vehicles might be used for military purposes.

The Security Council must thus accept a very
significant share of the responsibility for the
aberrations that occurred, because it was the Council
that created the programme, that monitored the
sanctions that it had imposed and that authorized all
the contracts relating to the provision of goods to Iraq.

It is clear that differences of opinion - as is so
often the case - among some of the most influential
members of the Security Council did indeed hinder the
effectiveness of the Council's activities in ensuring
effective control of the programme. It is also
undeniable that, as a result of lack of vigilance on the
part of the Security Council and the Secretariat, there
was corruption in the activities of private companies
that had a relationship with the Council, as well as with
respect to certain Secretariat officials.

It is also undeniable that, from the time of the
imposition of sanctions until the aberrations occurred
in the programme, it was the people of Iraq who paid
the highest cost. First of all, they were buffeted by the
impact of harsh sanctions. The also suffered from
extortion by their leaders, by corrupt private
corporations and by certain Secretariat officials, having
their wealth stolen from them.

The Volcker Committee's report is shattering and
its judgment is definitive. The United Nations has
failed egregiously. That is all the more serious given
that, more than any other institution, its actions must
be above reproach. The Committee has also pointed to
the Organization's inadequacies, shortcomings and
malfunctioning, as well as to the way to redress them.
It has clearly highlighted the absence of truly
independent auditing and control and indicated that the
Secretary-General does not have at his disposal the
structures and tools to enable him effectively to
supervise and monitor the operational activities of the
Organization. The report correctly underscores the fact
that the Secretary-General is today perceived more as a
diplomat and a political official than as a manager. In
that connection, the report also pays well-deserved
tribute to the Secretary-General's work on the political
and diplomatic fronts.

One lesson that the Council must learn has to do
with the sanctions regime itself. The Council has
indeed stopped applying sanctions in an impersonal -
and I would even say blind - manner, but it should do
more. Sanctions must be imposed as a last resort, they
should be crafted in a way that does not impact upon
innocent civilians, and they must be time-bound.

The ambitious reform programme we are
involved in today - whose initiator and architect is the
Secretary-General himself, in whom we have full
confidence - provides us with the opportunity to
make, in a prudent and well-thought-out manner but
with a heightened sense of urgency, the changes needed
if we want the Organization, for which there is no
substitute, to be able to play its role on the
international stage effectively, responsibly and with
renewed confidence.

