Mr. Matussek (Germany): First of all, we would
like to commend the United Kingdom for convening
this timely and useful debate on enhancing the
international community's ability to respond to the
challenges of peacebuilding in the immediate post-
conflict phase.

The United Nations and regional organizations,
as well as individual Member States, have to address
the challenges of immediate post-conflict situations in
their complex and multifaceted nature. Germany
stresses the increasing role and capacities of the
European Union (EU) in that field and associates itself
the statement of the EU Presidency today.

In order to achieve lasting peace and take the first
steps in reconstruction, we need to rebalance our
approach to immediate post-conflict interventions.
Political mediation efforts and military peacekeeping
operations alone are not enough to achieve lasting
stabilization; rather, the root causes of conflicts need to
be addressed at the earliest possible stage, in a
pragmatic and step-by-step approach. In concrete
terms, the military side of peacekeeping needs to be
more and better complemented by civilian capacities
geared towards a set of priority goals - inter alia, in
the fields of disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration, security sector reform, the rule of law
and justice, as well as quick-impact projects, opening
up clear perspectives of a peace dividend for the
population.

There is no one-size-fits-all approach to post-
conflict stabilization. On the contrary, specific answers
and strategies have to be identified, targeting the root
causes of each individual conflict. That is why the
international community has to build up expertise and
capacities in a wide range of areas in order to respond
adequately to the various challenges. We welcome
initiatives at the international level, within the EU and
by Member States to strengthen those critical
capabilities and provide civilian tools for post-conflict
stabilization.

We should strive to improve the exchange of
information and, wherever possible, to define common
criteria and norms - for instance in the field of
recruitment, as well as deployment.

The United Nations is the main global actor in the
international peace architecture and therefore must
play a leading role. The groundbreaking Brahimi report
(S/2000/809) led to substantial improvements in the
functioning of the overall system. Through the
establishment of integrated and multidimensional
missions, United Nations peacekeeping operations
have started to address key issues of immediate post-
conflict situations. In that context, Germany welcomes
the new principles and guidelines document distributed
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, which
duly reflects the multidimensional character of today's
peacekeeping operations.

Germany would also like to underscore its
continued support for the Peacebuilding Commission.
It has developed innovative participatory working
methods, and it is also beginning to build up unique
experience in the area of post-conflict stabilization in
its country-specific formats.

We should like to underscore respect for the
principle of ownership by the partner country. Building
up local capacities must be a central and integral part
of our efforts, as we believe that early national
ownership of the peacebuilding process is
indispensable to achieve positive and lasting results.

The United Nations has also gained increasing
experience in building partnerships in concrete
operations with regional organizations like the EU, the
African Union and the NATO alliance. Germany
supports a cooperative approach that combines the
value added of each and every actor. In our
coordination efforts, we should realistically assess the
capacities of the different institutions and actors. We
should pragmatically join forces in a spirit of
constructive cooperation and coordination, rather than
competition. Our endeavours within and outside the
United Nations system should be guided not by
principled debate but by the capacity to deliver on the
ground.

The United Nations system needs to increase
coherence in its approach and rapidity in its responses,
on the political as well as on the operational level.
Those are the foundations for a leading coordinating
role in international efforts in peacekeeping and early
post-conflict activities. Germany would welcome a
broad discussion of possible concrete mechanisms and
different options to that end.

In 2004, the Federal Government adopted the
action plan entitled "Civilian crisis prevention, conflict
resolution and post-conflict peacebuilding". The action
plan aims to integrate all available crisis-prevention
instruments in a unified policy approach for more
effective crisis prevention on the national and
international levels. We are developing three key
instruments within that framework.

First, we are striving to enhance our police
capacity for international missions in the framework of
the Civilian Headline Goal of the EU's civil crisis
management and on the national level. Currently,
Germany employs 248 police personnel in international
police missions. Germany is also providing training for
police officers at the Kofi Annan International
Peacekeeping Centre in Accra.

Secondly, we established the Centre for
International Peace Operations, which aims to enhance
Germany's civilian crisis prevention and peacekeeping
capacities. A key element of the Centre's mandate is
the selection and promotion of German civilian
personnel for peace operations of the United Nations,
the EU and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, as well as other multilateral
bodies. Since 2003 the Centre has maintained a
national standby roster of about 1,100 experienced and
trained experts. Currently, about 110 German civilian
experts serve with United Nations peacekeeping and
political field missions.

Thirdly, we have developed the Federal Agency
for Technical Relief, which is currently participating in
emergency relief operations and missions in
75 countries around the world. During the last few
years, the Agency has become increasingly active in
United Nations peacekeeping missions in, inter alia,
Sierra Leone and Liberia.

A lot needs to be done and today's debate is a
very welcome step in that direction.

