Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Let me begin by thanking the United
Kingdom for organizing this important open debate
under the theme "Maintenance of international peace
and security f mediation and settlement of disputes".
We also thank the Secretary-General for his informative
briefing on this topic. In addition, we are very
grateful to be joined by The Most Reverend and Right
Honourable Justin Welby, Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Ms. Mossarat Qadeem for their briefings.

I am delivering this statement on behalf of the
three non-permanent African members of the Security
Council: Cote d'Ivoire, Ethiopia and Equatorial Guinea.

Although mediation is one ofthe most-used methods
for conflict resolution by the international community,
it has been almost a decade since the Security
Council formally discussed it as part of its agenda
(see S/PV.6108). Today's debate on mediation and the
peaceful resolution of conflicts is very timely. It is also
extremely fitting, given the increasing importance of
mediation to respond to some of the perennial and long-
term conflicts facing the world.

As the main organ responsible for the maintenance
ofinternational peace and security, the Security Council
has a special role to play in promoting the effective use of
peaceful resolutions to disputes in addressing security
threats and challenges. Even more important is its role
today in ensuring that mediation efforts - whether
led by the United Nations, regional organizations or
States Members - receive the necessary political
support. That is particularly obvious at a time when
the primacy of politics is becoming a guiding principle
in the formulation and implementation of peace
operation mandates.

Undoubtedly, the Secretary-General's call for a
surge in diplomacy for peace and the priority that he
has given to conflict prevention have gained momentum
since he assumed the highest office of the United
Nations. In view of the enormous peace and security
challenges that we are facing today, prioritizing
mediation is hardly an option. In that regard, we were
encouraged by the General Assembly's adoption of the
Secretary-General's reform process, which prioritizes
prevention and the maintenance of peace as its overall
goals. We also acknowledge the importance of the
High-level Advisory Board on Mediation, established
by the Secretary-General, and the role of its members
in complementing the work of his good offices,
including Special Envoys, regional offices and political
field missions.

Likewise, we especially welcome the great
importance that the Secretary-General attaches to
the mediation role of regional organizations. Clearly,
the current global security challenges facing us are
so complex and interconnected that they cannot be
addressed only by the United Nations and the Security
Council. Those challenges are not limited to a single
place or geographic area and transcend the borders
of individual nations and continents. Therefore,
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, such as the African Union, as set out
in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
remains indispensable, perhaps now more than ever,.

That is particularly true today when multilateralism
has been increasingly challenged and a renewed global
commitment to collective security and the peaceful
settlement of disputes, including through mediation,
is more than ever necessary. As an example, we
highlight the important and consistent role that the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
Economic Community of Central African States
and other organizations have played in the areas of
mediation and conflict resolution, which was well
illustrated recently by the regional interventions in the
crises of The Gambia, Guinea Bissau, South Sudan and
the Central African Republic, among others. Article 4
(e) of the Constitutive Act of the African Union calls
for the peaceful resolution of conflicts among States
members of the Union, which is also detailed in article
3 of the Protocol relating to the Establishment of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union.
In that context, the African Union has improved its
mediation role and activities in recent years.

There are approximately 20 African Union special
envoys, representatives and mediators deployed in
countries in conflict and post-conflict situations
throughout the continent. A mediation support unit was
also established to provide capacity support to African
Union mediators. We believe that the United Nations
must continue its multifaceted support to strengthen
the mediation role of the African Union and ensure
greater cooperation and coherence by working closely
with African Union special envoys, representatives and
mediators on the ground. It is also important to continue
to encourage and step up the Council's practice of
inviting special envoys, representatives and mediators
of the African Union to public briefings, open debates
and interactive informal discussions.

Considering the important role that women can play
in mediation and raising awareness among other women,
as acknowledged in resolution 1325 (2000), it is timely
and essential to strengthen regional and international
structures by including women, who bring to the table
the qualities necessary to carry out the important task
of mediation. The African Women Leaders Network is
a good example of the great potential of this approach
when applied to mediation.

In conclusion, the mediation efforts of the African
Union seeking the lofty goal of silencing the guns in
Africa complement the United Nations prevention
agenda. That is why it makes a great deal of sense
to work with the African Union to reach that noble
objective. Important debates have already taken place
during the twelfth annual joint consultative meeting
between members of the United Nations Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council on this issue and, as one of the three African
countries on the Security Council, we intend to continue
that discussion in coming months in order to continue
to explore avenues of cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union in that regard.

