Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the Japanese presidency for
haven taken the initiative to organize this briefing on
peacekeeping operations, just two months after that held
in October under the French presidency (see S/PV.8064).
This reflects the Council's ongoing concern and efforts
to make its missions - the main instruments available
to the United Nations to ensure international peace and
security - ever more responsive, agile and effective.

It also illustrates the importance of the Security
Council Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations,
which is increasingly emerging as an open and suitable
forum for discussing, without prejudice or taboos, the
best ways and means to bring peacekeeping operations
into line with the constantly evolving threats and
challenges to peace and security, as well as the changing
conditions for their deployment on the ground.

That is why the Security Council considered it
appropriate, through its resolution 2378 (2017), to
entrust the role of monitoring the implementation of the
recommendations to the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations, thereby strengthening its action.
This is very relevant when considering the number
and variety of peacekeeping operations, ranging from
the most complex and multidimensional missions
and hybrid missions to those conducted by regional
and subregional organizations that are authorized or
supported by the United Nations.

I shall limit my remarks to the important question
of the capability needs of peacekeeping operations.

We must welcome the introduction of innovations,
including the establishment of the Strategic Force
Generation and Capability Planning Cell, that render
the capacity-building system more efficient. In another
area, work under way in partnership with regional
organizations, particularly the African Union, will
undoubtedly help to strengthen the operational
capacities of African units called upon to carry out
missions in the context of the use of force. Examples
of such units include the Force Intervention Brigade of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Regional
Protection Force ofthe United Nations Mission in South
Sudan and, to a different degree, the African Union
Military Observer Mission in Somalia force. These
innovations are important because they allow us to gain
better understanding of the capacities of Member States
and better coordinate efforts for faster deployment of
the units offered by the contributing countries, thereby
responding to the most urgent needs.

It is also encouraging to see this new mechanism
come to fruition with support and commitment at the
highest level from member countries, including several
troop-contributors. That is reflected in the commitments
made by several troop- and police-contributors at the
September 2015 Leaders' Summit on Peacekeeping, as
well as at ministerial meetings in London, Paris, and,
most recently, in Vancouver. That means that troop-
and police-contributing countries show a real political
will to work with the United Nations in the realization
of this innovative Vision.

Notwithstanding all the strategic approaches,
much remains to be done to achieve the United
Nations ambition in the area of force generation and
peacekeeping-operation capacity-building. That is
Why, despite the commitment of the troop-contributing
countries and the announcements made during the
recent force-generation conference for Mali, it has
proved difficult to reach the ceiling of United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali troops. In truth, the capacities required for the
full implementation of mandates in certain theatres
of operation are lacking. Similarly, it is not always
easy to gather the required capabilities in terms of
medical support, engineering, construction, air and
road transport, security, and so on, commonly called
"enabling units".

In order to bridge the capacity gaps facing various
missions, pooling national efforts through ad hoc
coalitions among Member States and/or regional
actors could prove effective. In that vein, the Council
could stimulate the search for partnerships and the
definition of the minimum means to be used for the
rapid mobilization of adequate forces to respond to
multiple and complex crises. That was the point of
the Vancouver summit, which sought to solidify such
cooperation under the term "smart pledges".

In conclusion, and at the end of Senegal's mandate
as head of the Security Council Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations, I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his firm commitment to
moving the peacekeeping reform agenda forward, as
part of his vision of the comprehensive reform of the
United Nations peace and security architecture. In
her presentation, Assistant Secretary-General Keita
gave us a vivid demonstration of that. My delegation
welcomes with great interest the Secretary-General's
letter of 20 December on the continuing efforts to fill
the capacity gaps and the recommendations to remedy
them, including through more efficient and effective
training and constant capacity-building.

