Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
I, too, should like at the outset to thank the Under-
Secretary-General, Mr. Holmes, for his briefing and to
commend him for his courage. His visit to Somalia last
week was the first such visit by a United Nations
Headquarters official at that level in nearly 15 years.
That in itself sends a message that underlines the
commitment of the United Nations. In that context, we
welcome the fact that the Transitional Federal
Government has agreed to a visit by Ms. Louise
Arbour, High Commissioner for Human Rights. We
hope that that visit will take place very shortly.

The Under-Secretary-General had to cut short his
visit for security reasons, which confirms our concerns.
During the consultations we held on Somalia at the end
of April, my delegation had already expressed the
importance it attaches to the issue of the security of
humanitarian operations. The Transitional Federal
Government must stop questioning the scale of the
humanitarian crisis resulting from three months of
fighting. Several sources indicate that from 350,000 to
400,000 people - a considerable number - have fled
Mogadishu since February. It is not acceptable that
only one third have access to humanitarian assistance.
Nor is it acceptable that a majority of people, from a
certain ethnic group, are being prevented from
returning to their homes.

We call on the Transitional Federal Government,
the Ethiopian forces and the armed groups to respect
international humanitarian law. They must allow the
transit of World Food Programme and High
Commissioner for Refugees convoys; they must
facilitate the work of the International Committee of
the Red Cross; and they must help rather than hinder
those major non-governmental organizations that are
prepared to work in Somalia, such as Doctors without
Borders. An end must be put to the taxes imposed at
checkpoints and to the difficulties faced in the
obtaining of visas.

We are very concerned at the general lack of
access by humanitarian workers to the civilian
population, and we would like to know what could be
done to allow for greater access to the victims. We
would like to hear Mr. Holmes's comments on the
issue.

However, we welcome the commitments made by
the Transitional Federal Government during
Mr. Holmes's visit. They must be translated into
reality. Unequivocal instructions must be given to both
the armed forces and the militias. We also urge the
Somali authorities finally to commit themselves to a
genuinely inclusive political solution. That is the only
way to respond in the long term to the crisis in Somalia
and, in the short term, to the current humanitarian
cr1s1s.

Before concluding on the issue of Somalia, I
should like to pay tribute to the African Mission in
Somalia, which is paying a high price in that country.

The situation in northern Uganda is still of
concern, even though some progress has been achieved
with regard to displaced persons since the signing of
the ceasefire agreement. Millions of peOple in that
country have been displaced, and we hope that the
population, traumatized by two decades of violence,
will continue to return. The information provided by
Mr. Holmes is encouraging, even though the trend that
has been observed requires further confirmation. It is
likely that these persons will not return to their homes
in the absence of a lasting peace. Thus, the extension
until 30 June of the ceasefire agreement between the
Ugandan Government and the Lord's Resistance Army
must be fully taken advantage of. We reaffirm our
support for President Chissano and the Juba talks.

As we wait for peace, we take note of the
threefold effort that Mr. Holmes requests us to make,
with regard to those in the camps, those choosing to
return and those who, once they have returned home,
will still need the international community. We
understand that humanitarian aid cannot be reduced at
this stage; essential needs must still be met. We
understand that humanitarian aid cannot be reduced
until development assistance takes over, particularly in
the areas of education and health.

We are pleased to note that civilian
administration - particularly the police and the justice
system - is increasingly present in northern Uganda.
We congratulate the Government of Uganda, and we
encourage this trend.
Finally, I should like to highlight two concerns.
The first is the disarmament operations in the

Karamoja region, which are provoking violence. We
call upon the Ugandan authorities to avoid any use of
force. Secondly, we request the Ugandan authorities to
ensure that tangible progress is made within the local
defence units, which are under the authority of the
Uganda People's Defence Forces, so that the rights of
children are respected and the use of child soldiers is
strictly prohibited.

