The Secretary-General: I thank the Kingdom of
the Netherlands for organizing this important debate
and I thank you, Mr. Prime Minister, for presiding
over it.

In the past year I have addressed the Council
several times on peacekeeping reform. It is now
time to take action together. At its best, United
Nations peacekeeping is a remarkable enterprise of
multilateralism and international solidarity. From
Sierra Leone to Cambodia, Timor-Leste, Namibia, El
Salvador and elsewhere, United Nations peacekeeping
has helped countries move from war to peace and has
supported the work of civil-society activists such as
Ms. Fatimata Toure, who is with us today. In West
Africa, for example, Liberia, Sierra Leone and Cote
d'Ivoire are now peaceful, thanks in part to the support
of United Nations peacekeeping. It is inspiring to see
Cote d'Ivoire represented here today in the Council.
Three United Nations peacekeeping missions have
completed their mandates and left after a job well done.
That is our aim for every mission.

However, we all know that United Nations
peacekeeping faces serious challenges, particularly in
four of its largest deployments: Mali, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Central African Republic
and South Sudan. Put simply, peace operations cannot
succeed if they are deployed instead of a political
solution rather than in support of one. United Nations
peacekeeping missions now operate in far more
dangerous, complex and high-risk environments. They
are under threat from armed groups, criminals and
terrorists who have access to powerful modern weapons.
United Nations peacekeepers are often underequipped,
underprepared and unready for the dangerous
environments in which they now operate. There are
gaps in command and control, culture, equipment and
training. Peacekeepers are vulnerable and they are
targeted for attack. Last year we lost 59 peacekeepers
through malicious acts. That is a sharp increase over the
figure for 2016, which was 34. I pay tribute to the fallen.
We will never forget their sacrifice. Those figures are
unacceptable and weigh on us all. That is why this year
I will spend the International Day of United Nations
Peacekeepers in Mali, where our Mission sustained the
highest number of casualties of any operation last year.
We are damaging the instrument of peacekeeping, and
indeed multilateralism itself, by creating unrealistic
expectations. Lives and our credibility are being lost.

Such challenges require strong collective action.
We should focus our efforts on three areas: refocusing
peacekeeping with realistic expectations; making
peacekeeping missions stronger and safer; and
mobilizing greater support for political solutions and
for well-structured, well-equipped and well-trained
forces. The Secretariat has set change in motion on the
basis of the Security Council and General Assembly's
resolutions on sustaining peace, the Cruz report and
other reviews and reports over recent years. Today,
and on a regular basis, I will provide Member States
with a summary of the concrete actions that have been
implemented and that are the responsibility of my
Under-Secretaries-General for peacekeeping operations
and field support. The documents will be available at
the end of the meeting.

First, we are working to improve the safety and
security of peacekeepers. We have already started to
implement measures to improve the preparedness and
response of missions at high risk by strengthening
training, reviewing medical support and addressing
performance issues.

Secondly, we are conducting independent reviews of
peacekeeping missions aimed at refining their priorities
and configuration, while assessing the viability of
their mandates and political processes. The reviews
are aimed at ensuring that we have well-trained and
-equipped peacekeepers who are mobile and agile and
can be proactive in dealing with challenges and threats.
Too often in the past our troops have been reduced to
waiting in a defensive position, giving hostile forces the
time and space to plan attacks.

Thirdly, I have launched a new approach to sexual
exploitation and abuse by ensuring that victims have
a clear way to report allegations and by working with
troop- and police-contributing countries to address
allegations, end impunity and prevent future cases.
I am encouraged that 90 countries have joined the
compact on preventing sexual exploitation and abuse.
I have appointed a system-wide Victims' Rights
Advocate, who works closely with Governments and
civil society. A further four Victims' Rights Advocates
now work in the peacekeeping missions where there
have been the highest numbers of allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse. I have invited Heads of State and
Government to join the Circle of Leadership, which is
a visible and powerful symbol of our joint commitment
to preventing and ending the scourge.

Fourthly, the reforms of the peace and security
architecture should result in better analysis, stronger
support to troop- and police-contributors, more effective
political engagement and enhanced accountability and
transparency, as requested by many Member States. The
overall goal of the reforms is to improve our capacities
to prevent conflict and to sustain peace.

Such efforts are critical. However, action by the
Secretariat alone is not enough to meet the challenges that
we face. Our chances of success increase dramatically
when we work together with Member States and share
the burdens, risks and responsibilities. We urgently
need a quantum leap in collective engagement. That
is why I am launching a new initiative, Action for
Peacekeeping, aimed at mobilizing all partners and
stakeholders to support the great enterprise of United
Nations peacekeeping. As peacekeeping marks its
seventieth anniversary, I hope that we can develop a
set of mutually agreed principles and commitments
for creating peacekeeping operations fit for the future.
They will be formulated with all our partners, including
at a high-level side event on the margins of the General
Assembly in September, and I hope that we can reach
a formal agreement by the end of the year. I thank the
Netherlands and cote d'Ivoire for moving this effort
forward, and I encourage all Council members and
all our partners for peace to join. As we build this
agreement together, I have six immediate requests for
Member States.

First, I urge Security Council members to sharpen
and streamline mandates and put an end to mandates
that look like Christmas trees. Christmas is over, and
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan cannot
possibly implement 209 mandated tasks. By attempting
too much, we dilute our efforts and weaken our impact.
I hope that our mission reviews will help to end this
mandate inflation.

Secondly, I call on Member States to sustain their
political engagement and push for political solutions and
inclusive peace processes, including through bilateral
diplomacy and sanctions, if necessary. A peacekeeping
operation is not an army or a counter-terrorism force or
a humanitarian agency. It is a tool for creating the space
for a nationally owned political solution.

(Spoke in French)

Thirdly, I ask the Council to continue building and
strengthening partnerships with regional organizations.
The African Union is one ofour most importantpartners,
and I thank the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, for being
here with us today. Political partnerships are critical,
particularly when a United Nations mission is deployed
to support a peace process facilitated by other actors, as
in South Sudan with the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and the African Union. Operational
partnerships with regional or subregional partners
are vital to peace-enforcement and counter-terrorism
missions when United Nations peacekeeping is not the
right response. I encourage the Security Council to back
these initiatives with strong mandates and predictable,
sustained funding. Our partnership with the African
Union in Somalia offers important lessons. The Group
of Five for the Sahel presents similar advantages, and I
urge Council members to give it their full support and
all it needs to achieve success. Triangular partnerships
among the Council, troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat are also a vital part of
reinforcing our support to peacekeeping.

Fourthly, I appeal to the peacekeeping leadership
and personnel - civilian, military and police - to come
ready to deliver. Caveats imposed by troop- and police-
contributing countries should not hobble our operations.
Special Representatives, Force Commanders and Police
Commissioners must ensure a clear, functional and
responsive chain of command and control, without
interference. Troop- and police-contributing countries
and their partners have a duty to improve the level of
training and preparedness ofpeacekeepers. I am grateful
all who contribute. I hope that they have seen our videos
showcasing the dedication, service and sacrifice of the
Blue Helmets from many different countries. However,
we cannot continue as a patchwork of personnel, with
varying approaches and mindsets. I welcome innovative
arrangements, such as triangular partnerships between
the United Nations, donors of equipment and training,
and troop- and police-contributing countries. Thanks
to such partnerships, we are able to equip and train
troops better and more efficiently. United Nations
peacekeepers must aim for the highest standards across
the board.

Fifthly, I urge the Security Council to uphold its
responsibility to align human and financial resources
with mandates. I am totally committed to budgetary
discipline and to optimizing peacekeeping resources.
But arbitrary budget cuts undermine efforts to implement
ambitious and comprehensive mandates. There have
been more than 140 deaths in Mali since the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali was established in 2013. How can Blue
Helmets operate in such an environment when they
lack nearly 100 of the armored personnel carriers they
need? How can our peacekeepers in the Central African
Republic deploy to remote parts of the country without
any of the ground-to-air communications equipment
that they need?

In our peacekeeping operations overall, 15 field
hospitals are either not deployed or not functioning.
Many of the gaps are in the most hostile environments,
including northern Mali. These shortfalls reduce
mobility, medical support and communications capacity,
and severely impair our peacekeepers' effectiveness and
ability to actively prevent conflict and engage hostile
forces. We also face critical shortages of appropriate
personnel. The presence of women in our operations
contributes directly to increase mission effectiveness
and credibility, yet we have to repeatedly ask for more
female military officers, soldiers and police personnel.
We also need experienced leaders, skilled technicians,
logistics and air assets, and specialized equipment,
including intelligence capabilities.

Sixtth and finally, I call on host countries to
give their full consent and active cooperation to
peacekeeping operations. That includes holding the
perpetrators of attacks on peacekeepers accountable
and removing impediments to their full freedom
of movement. If peacekeeping operations are to be
successful, the parties to conflict must want peace and
actively participate in a political process. When the
will of host countries wavers, United Nations Member
States, led by the Council, must use every possible
incentive and their full influence to put the peace
process back on track.

I believe that we all know what peacekeeping
operations need to succeed. I count on the engagement
and support of Council members in meeting our
joint commitments.

