Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): Brazil firmly supports
the establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission to
fill the institutional gap between action to keep peace
and the activities required to consolidate and sustain
peace. During our two-year term in the Security
Council, my delegation has consistently called
attention to the need for action in the economic and
social spheres in post-conflict situations to run parallel
to peacekeeping efforts. We remain committed to that
View.

Brazil believes that resolution 1645 (2005)
contains an imbalance in the interaction between the
Peacebuilding Commission and the main organs of the
United Nations. There can be no doubt that, in
accordance with the Charter, the primary responsibility
in questions pertaining to international peace and
security lies with the Security Council. However, when
peacebuilding activities come into play, a greater role
for the Economic and Social Council should have been
provided for in the resolution, especially given the
reformed and active Economic and Social Council we
are striving for.

In our View, the Peacebuilding Commission
should be able to determine its own agenda and to
provide recommendations and advice to any body as it
deems necessary. It must not be understood to be a
subsidiary organ of the Security Council, and it should
not operate as such.

We understand subparagraph (e) of operative
paragraph 4 to be a balancing category aimed at
correcting geographical imbalances, thereby allowing
for great representativeness and legitimacy. The
composition of the Peacebuilding Commission should
be subject to rotation, and no permanent membership
should be established.

Despite the concerns I have expressed, Brazil
voted in favour of resolution 1645 (2005), in support of
the aspirations of developing countries in post-conflict
situations. They will benefit from greater coordination
and from the availability of resources in peacebuilding
activities. We reaffirm our commitment to the
Peacebuilding Commission.

Brazil abstained in the voting on resolution 1646
(2005) because it departs from the principles agreed
upon concurrently by the General Assembly and the
Security Council in resolution 1645 (2005), on the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission.

