Mrs. Gallardo Hernandez (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): Mr. President, my delegation welcomes
your initiative to hold this open debate on
peacebuilding. Countries such as El Salvador that have
passed from a culture of violence to a culture of peace
are committed to defining and implementing national
strategies that will make it possible for us to move
forward to sustainable social peace.

This month, my country is commemorating 15
years since the signing of the peace agreements. On
16 January 1992, we began a new historic stage, one
ripe with achievements, but also, we have to recognize,
one bringing challenges and new threats. We have a
story to tell, and that is our reason for wanting to be
part of the Peacebuilding Commission. The United
Nations system has accumulated a great deal of
experience and developed important strategies on the
ground, which can now be formalized through the
Peacebuilding Commission.

The mandate entrusted to El Salvador as a Vice-
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission can be found
in the wording of Security Council resolution 1645
(2005) and of General Assembly resolution 60/180,
which state that "countries that have experienced
recent post-conflict recovery would make valuable
contributions to the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission ...". Those resolutions also refer to the
primary functions of the Commission, namely, to
provide advice, to develop integrated strategies related
to the processes of peacebuilding, to integrate best
practices, among others.

Formalizing lessons learned on the ground, we
believe, will help in the development of global
strategies in the future. We must recognize that those
countries which can share their post-conflict
experiences have certainly shown a courageous
national will to meld the efforts of a number of actors
from the political, military and humanitarian spheres,
as well as from the area of sustainable development.
That achievement should be recognized and shared.
Measures that allow countries with post-conflict
experience to participate actively in the work of the
Commission will benefit all of the members of the
Commission, since lessons learned are a source of
inspiration for formulating comprehensive strategies
and providing advice on the ground today in Burundi
and in Sierra Leone.

We welcome the decision taken by the members
of the Commission to set up a working group on
lessons learned. The group will meet in an open
manner and will benefit from the participation of
national actors and representatives of civil society, as
well as key United Nations actors. The dialogue will
focus on the priorities established so far for Burundi
and Sierra Leone.

The purpose of the process is to enrich the
discussions and the work the Commission in general
and, in particular, to strengthen strategies for the
benefit of those countries under consideration. The
systematization of lessons learned should also be
translated into action on the ground, and should lead to
a greater interplay among initiatives relating to, inter
alia, reform of the justice and security sectors, youth
employment, the empowerment of women, governance
and institutional capacity, as well as promoting respect
for human rights.

As I said, the work of the group of countries
interested in lessons learned will be making a
contribution in Sierra Leone and Burundi. Its members
will share their thoughts and recommendations with
civil society organizations and national academic
institutions from both countries.

El Salvador reaffirms its commitment to
contributing, on the basis of its own experience, to the
enrichment of the conceptualization and
implementation of a comprehensive peacebuilding
process. Putting an end to violence necessarily requires
national will and a suitable regional and international
environment. It also requires shared determination by
the various actors with a View to dealing with the
structural causes of the conflict.

While certain aspects of the peacebuilding
process will respond to the specific causes of the
conflict, we must bear in mind that there are certain
factors common to all post-conflict situations. The
peace processes in Burundi and Sierra Leone have
particular resonance in a number of countries members
07-22708
of the Commission, in particular countries that have
themselves been through post-conflict situations.

The impact of El Salvador's own peacebuilding
experience leads us to affirm that, while resources for,
inter alia, initiating national development strategies
and ensuring human security, including through
implementing security policies, are important, we must
not forget to heed the intangible aspects of social
peace: educating for peace, promoting tolerance and
citizens' confidence in new institutions and teaching
respect for the rule of law, as well as encouraging the
participation of civil society and the private sector in
new national development projects.

The participation of women in the post-conflict
decision-making process is also essential. Similarly,
young people must have new opportunities for
employment and recreation so that they do not
themselves become elements that threaten social peace.

In conclusion, El Salvador would like to repay the
international community and the United Nations by
actively participating in the Peacebuilding Commission.
We express our gratitude for the very valuable assistance
that we received when we needed it most.

