Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to congratulate you, Madam President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I would also like to thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her briefing.

For Libya's Government of National Accord,
administering justice and preventing impunity are
central to national reconciliation, which requires
support from the United Nations and from the countries
that are our friends and brothers. We also affirm that
the ICC is an important and essential partner for us in
achieving justice during this period. The memorandum
of understanding concluded in 2013 between the
Prosecutor of the ICC and Libya's Prosecutor-General
solidified the partnership and complementarity between
Libyan justice and the ICC on cooperation with the
Prosecutor-General's Office on a number of requests for
support in its investigations, as the Prosecutor mentions
in paragraph 30 of her report.

We are aware of the delays that have occurred with
regard to prosecuting the accused, but they do not mean
that our national justice is unwilling to investigate and
punish the perpetrators of crimes. They have more to do
with the security situation in Libya, which has prevented
the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC from conducting
investigations on Libyan territory. In that regard, we
want to emphasize that while our national judiciary
has honoured its commitment to bringing justice and
strengthening the rule of law, it is in urgent need of
assistance from the international community in order to
help the Libyan authorities emerge from the country's
security crisis and enable them to ensure the success of
the political dialogue. In order to achieve that, we will
have to intensify our efforts to unify and restore our
security institutions and rebuild our State institutions,
so as to enable them to strengthen peace and security,
deal with the factors that lead to potential violations and
confiscate the tools used to commit crimes, particularly
firearms. That will undoubtedly help to strengthen the
capacity of Libyan justice to ensure the prosecution of
those responsible for crimes and to prevent additional

crimes, particularly considering the proliferation of
arms among militias and those outside the law.

We understand the Prosecutor's concern about the
reports of incidents of the arbitrary detention and abuse
of migrants. We recognize migrants' rights and are
aware of the degree to which they have suffered, owing
to the unstable security situation and the proliferation
of militias and weapons in Libya. However, the
reports of the Prosecutor, the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya and other relevant organizations
seem to emphasize crimes and violations in Libya
without, however, acknowledging the problems of
trafficking in persons and other atrocity crimes against
migrants, and ignoring the issue of human trafficking,
which is one of the most heinous crimes perpetrated
by criminal transnational networks. Those crimes
must be combated in accordance with international
humanitarian law and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
known as the Palermo Convention, and the relevant
Security Council resolutions. We hope that future
reports will mention the proceedings that are being
undertaken to fight such criminal networks in their
countries of origin and destination. We all know that my
country is one of transit, and that our security situation
is unstable. Without the presence of these criminal
networks in their countries of origin and destination,
we in the countries of transit would not be dealing with
these kinds of violations.

In conclusion, the Government of National Accord
is determined to punish the perpetrators of every
crime and to combat impunity, in accordance with the
principle of territorial sovereignty and the primacy of
the law. Our national jurisdiction is very important to
the Libyan authorities, but that certainly does not mean
that they do not respect the decisions of the ICC. On
the contrary, the Court obliges our authorities to take
on their responsibility for prosecuting the criminals.
Libyan justice is independent and has integrity, and
it is also focused on achieving social justice. In that
regard, a memorandum of understanding on criminal
justice was concluded in April between the United
States and Libya, aimed at strengthening the capacities
of professionals in the justice sector in order to enable
Libya to meet its obligations in this area. In that regard,
the Libyan authorities hope to see greater support from
the international community aimed at enabling the
rebuilding of the security and administrative situation
and launching efforts that can help to strengthen the
rule of law. We also hope to increase cooperation and
complementarity with the ICC, while respecting Libyan
sovereignty and our national legislation.

The meeting rose at 11.40 am.
