President Grabar-Kitarovie: I congratulate Japan
for assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of December. I would also like to welcome
Judge Agius, Judge Meron and Prosecutor Brammertz,
who are present here today.

Twenty-four years ago, Croatia was one of the
States that strongly advocated for the establishment of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY). Its creation lifted the hopes of thousands of
Croatians who suffered at the hands of a merciless
aggressor. Croatia looked to the ICTY to shield
its citizens from grave breaches of international
humanitarian law and to punish perpetrators and
their sponsors.

Croatia shares the assessments that the ICTY
greatly lived up to the expectations of the international
community, played an important role in the fight against
the culture of impunity and provided an instrument for
ensuring accountability for war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide. Equally important is the
Tribunal's role in giving voice to over 100,000 victims
of horrific crimes. The Tribunal has demonstrated that
crimes will not go unpunished, as weall as the fact
that the international community has found a means
through which it can and must react. That is confirmed
by the fact that, following the establishment of the
ICTY, the international community established other
ad hoc tribunals and the International Criminal Court,
while taking into account its experience with the ICTY,
its best practices and shortcomings.

A quarter of a century later, as the Tribunal closes
its doors, we assess its work and legacy against its
expected role in securing justice for victims of all
war crimes committed in the territory of the former
Yugoslavia, paving the path to reconciliation and
putting the troubled past behind. Allow me at this point
to express my deepest respect for all the victims of
crimes committed on all sides, and especially to extend
my heartfelt condolences to the families of all those
who perished or remain missing.

In the overall assessment of the work of the Tribunal,
we have to distinguish between legal assessment of
its work and political connotations attached. In that
regard, I can speak only for Croatia. When we look at
the ICTY's record in bringing to justice perpetrators of
war crimes committed during the onslaught on Croatia,
we can be fairly satisfied with its legacy. As an example,
let me highlight the case Prosecutor v. Milan Martie
and the case Prosecutor v. Milan Babic', where the
Tribunal established the existence of a joint criminal
enterprise to expel the Croat population from occupied
Croatian territory in order to create a Greater Serbia.
I also note that two so-called Yugoslav People's Army
officers responsible for the unimaginable atrocities at
Ovcara, where over 260 Croatian prisoners - mostly
wounded - were executed by Serbian forces and
buried in a mass grave, were convicted and sentenced.
One of them has since died in prison, and the other was
released early. In the case Prosecutor v. Pavle Strugar,
the ICTY convicted yet another Yugoslav People's
Army officer for attacks on the civilian population of
Dubrovnik and the destruction and wilful damage to a
UNESCO protected heritage site.

On the other hand, last month, Croatia marked
another mournful anniversary of the tragedies and
atrocities of the war in the autumn of 1991. Besieged for
three long months and levelled to the ground, the city
of Vukovar and its inhabitants suffered a fate unseen
in Europe since the Second World War. Nearly 1,000
white crosses at the Vukovar cemetery stand today as a
reminder of the massacre and for the victims exhumed
from mass graves in and around the city. They also
stand for 86 children killed during the siege of Vukovar,
the youngest being a 6-month-old infant. In Croatia, to
borrow the words of International Court of Justice Judge
Cancado Trindade, there was an onslaught, not exactly
war. Regrettably, the ICTY did not charge anyone for
the horror of the three-month siege of Vukovar.

While the judgement in the trial of Ratko Mladie
brought a degree of relief to the families of his many
victims of the genocide in Srebrenica, I would recall
again that it was in Croatia in 1991 that he began
his infamous warpath, which he later continued in
neighbouring Bosnia and Herzegovina. Hundreds of
his victims in Croatia, in Skabrnja or Nadin, to name
just a few infamous examples, never saw him stand
trial for those crimes. What is more, they were never
even included in his indictment. As some of these
most horrific crimes occurred in November 1991, they
were commemorated in Croatia only a few days before
the final judgements rendered by the ICTY, thereby
creating an emotional, highly sensitive setting.

Sharing some critical assessments about the ICTY
does not diminish our support for the work of the
Tribunal. As in all justice systems in the world, there
are deficits. I note that the ICTY Prosecutor himself
has in the past publicly stated that in some cases that
resulted in acquittals of the defendants, he respects the
judgements of the judges but fundamentally disagrees
with them. Similarly, Croatia fully supports the work
of the ICTY and respects all its judgements, even if it
may on occasion express its disagreement with certain
aspects of the Tribunal's work.

In the final analysis, it has to be said that, in the
more than 10,000 days of its duration, the ICTY spent
too much time on procedural and status-related matters,
and not enough on providing the victims with a true
sense of justice. We have stated in this Chamber on
many occasions that justice delayed is justice denied.
On far too many occasions, justice came too late or not
at all.

It has to be underlined that a fair trial and the
due process of law in front of the ICTY depended
on the interaction of responsible work by the Office
of the Prosecutor, defence counsel and judges.
Furthermore, one of the results of the protracted work
of the Tribunal - achievements in putting the focus
on the future and reconciliation - were often set
back by particular judgements that provoked opposing
interpretations, not allowing the sands of time to settle
over the troubled history of the area.

Lastly, the mastermind of the greater Serbian
project that brought on the tragedy that struck the
former Yugoslavia - Slobodan Milosevic - evaded
final legal judgement. That remains a gaping hole in the
Tribunal's legacy.

The Tribunal was not established to determine the
legitimacy and justification of wars, but rather whether
certain individuals acted in accordance with the laws
of war, in accordance with international humanitarian
law and criminal law. Therefore, the Tribunal was not
a court dealing with the legitimacy of war, but with
the criminal responsibility of individuals during the
course of war. Nevertheless, despite the fact that the
Tribunal judged individuals, the quagmire of political
connotations in individual judgements and the legal
and political consequences that resulted, and that will
result, from its judgements, including the work of the
Tribunal as a whole, is unavoidable.

However, throughout its work the ICTY did
contribute to the realization that crimes were committed
during the war by all sides in the conflict, and those
findings facilitated the process of accountability. It
is not easy to find the strength to admit that some of
your own compatriots committed crimes and that they
should be held accountable for them. We have faced
that truth in Croatia and expect nothing less from
others. However, there is a difference between dealing
out individual responsibility and collective guilt.

In creating the ICTY, the Security Council tasked
the Tribunal with establishing individual criminal
responsibility and confined the Tribunal to the strict
application of existing international humanitarian
law and criminal law. The ICTY was not to create
precedents or legislate international humanitarian law
and criminal law. Its duty, rather, was to uphold the
highest of standards with regard to the interpretation
and appropriate application of existing law. The
mandate of the ICTY was to establish individual
criminal responsibility for committed criminal acts,
that is, to prosecute concrete individuals for concrete
deeds - no more and no less than that.

Consequently, we reject interpretations of the ICTY's
recent judgement in the case Prosecutor v. Jadranko
Prlic' et al. - and let me add that it was overshadowed
by the tragic death of General Praljak - that it was
Croatia, Croatian leadership at the time or the Croatian
nation that were indicted or found guilty in front of
the ICTY. The ICTY was dealing with the individual
defendants who were before the Tribunal and who were
parties to the proceedings. Any interpretation of that
judgement outside the legal framework and the absence
of explicit findings necessary to establish the criminal
responsibility of Croatia or its leadership is misleading
and erroneous.

It is important to stress that, in July 2016, the
same Appeals Chamber, when rejecting Croatia's
amicus curiae request and interpreting the 2013 trial
judgement, clearly and unequivocally stated that no
explicit findings concerning the participation in ajoint
criminal enterprise of high Croatian officials were
made, that they were neither indicted nor charged in the
case, and that they were not found guilty of any crimes.
Furthermore, the same Appeals Chamber confirmed
that the Tribunal did not have the competency to make
findings on State responsibility and that the findings
of the Trial Chamber in no way constituted findings of
responsibility on the part of Croatia.

The recent ICTY judgement in the Prlic' et al case
should not be misused to imply the collective guilt
of the Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina or to hinder
their legitimate political objectives as one of the three
constituent peoples in the country. No community there
should feel unsettled - and that is, unfortunately, what
we have witnessed these days. Croats must feel secure
in the homeland they share with Bosniaks and Serbs. I
appeal to all politicians in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
think first and foremost of their responsibility for the
good of both entities, and of Bosnia and Herzegovina
as a whole. Croatia, as a co-signatory and guarantor of
the Dayton Peace Accords, has a special responsibility
for the stability of our neighbourhood and for the
preservation of Croats in their homeland of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We will relentlessly advocate for
productive dialogue among the constituent peoples
and all minorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, thereby
paving the way for its prosperous future in the
European Union.

It is a historical fact that Croatia was crucial
in the very survival of Bosnia and Herzegovina as
an independent State. While a victim of aggression
and under threat itself at the time, Croatia for years
sheltered hundreds of thousands of refugees from
Bosnia and Herzegovina and treated more than 10,000
of its wounded in Croatian hospitals. The overwhelming
part of humanitarian and military aid to Bosnia and
Herzegovina arrived from or through Croatia. At
the same time, Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina
were victims of war crimes by the army of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, in particular in central Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Those crimes remain unpunished.

Ultimately, Croatia played a pivotal role in
defeating greater Serbian aggression. Upon the request
for aid from Sarajevo and in accordance with our
bilateral agreements, Croatia prevented the imminent
danger of a repetition of the Srebrenica genocide in
Bihar in 1995. The Croatian army, supported by the
Croatian Defence Council and the army of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, confronted Slobodan Milosevic with his
inevitable and total military defeat, which forced him to
the negotiating table, thereby ending the war in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Let me be clear: when we in Croatia speak about
the greater Serbian aggression that brought about the
conflict, the destruction of property and the loss of
life, we do not in any way attach blame to the Serbian
people as a whole, but highlight the sole responsibility
of Slobodan Milosevic and his regime at the time.

In conclusion, my wish is that we leave the war
and all the misfortunes in our neighbourhood behind
us, that we pay tribute to all the victims and condemn
all the crimes and that we primarily and above all look
foremost to the future. With the closing of the Tribunal,
we continue to bear the responsibility of finding the
strength to reconcile all nations and all peoples in our
region. Saint Pope John Paul 11 said,

"no peace without justice, no justice without
forgiveness the path of forgiveness, which opens
the way to mutual understanding, respect and trust".

The victims of crimes committed on all sides and
the families of all those who perished or remain missing
deserve justice. Some received it in The Hague, many
did not. Crimes must be addressed for the benefit of our
future. Croatia has done that and will continue to do so,
and expects it from others.

I call upon the other leaders in our neighbourhood
to ensure that the ICTY's judgements are not
misinterpreted, misused or misconstrued, and
to view this moment as the beginning of a new
period - one of mutual understanding, respect and
trust. My responsibility is to improve relations with
our neighbours and to focus on the future. I hope
that we can all agree that it is not only mine, but our
common responsibility.

