Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We wish to thank Assistant Secretary-
General Sach for his briefing, which highlighted
various aspects of the workings of the Development
Fund for Iraq (DFI) and of the International Advisory
and Monitoring Board (IAMB), of which he is a
member. We believe that the briefing was extremely
useful because of the transparency of the process. The
Russian delegation supports the conclusions and
recommendations presented by Mr. Sach, particularly
with regard to improving the effectiveness of the
verification process.

As for the briefing by the representative of the
Secretary-General, we have some brief comments to
make and one wish to express.
3

As members are aware, the Secretary-General, in
accordance with a decision taken by the Security
Council, must submit to the Council regular reports by
his representative to the IAMB. We wish to recall that
the last such document was received in June 2006. We
note that the DFI and the IAMB were not officially
established by the Security Council. Paragraph 12 of
resolution 1483 (2003) states that the Council notes the
establishment of the Fund and looks forward to the
early meeting of the International Advisory and
Monitoring Board. The Board, in turn, must facilitate
the implementation of resolution 1483 (2003). It
proceeds from that logic that United Nations Member
States are entitled to receive reports about the activities
of the financial structures facilitating the
implementation of important Security Council
decisions.

Now to our wish. During the discussions in
preparing the resolution to extend the mandates of the
multinational force, the DFI and the IAMB, a number
of delegations referred to the possibility of organizing,
in the near future, a briefing on DFI activities in
Washington, at the headquarters of the International
Monetary Fund, which currently chairs the Board. We
believe that that sort of idea could be useful,
particularly in terms of the transparency of the process.
Such a briefing could be held for representatives of
embassies of Security Council member States in
Washington. Russia is interested in organizing such a
meeting. If there are no objections from our Council
colleagues, we wish to propose to Mr. Sach that he
represent the United Nations in the IAMB and that he
take the steps necessary to organize such a briefing at
the beginning of next year.

