Mr. Hunter (United States of America): The
United States strongly supports the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and is pleased to
have voted in favour of resolution 2463 (2019) today.
We thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Zerrougui and her team for their stewardship
of MONUSCO at an important moment in the country's
history and commend their engagement in support of
the Congolese people.

MONUSCO's new mandate seeks to align
the Mission with the new Administration's
priorities - tackling corruption; increasing
transparency; fostering accountability; improving
security throughout the country, particularly in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
improving human rights practices; and providing
opportunities for all Congolese people. MONUSCO's
new mandate also prioritizes the safety and well-
being of the Congolese people. Through its focus
on the protection of civilians, stopping sexual and
gender-based violence and preventing violations and
abuses committed against children, the Council has
ensured that the Mission's fundamental responsibility
is to support those who have suffered from conflict,
instability and violence for far too long.

Today's resolution includes new language on
peacekeeping performance to help ensure that
MONUSCO is composed of the best-performing
civilian and uniformed personnel. As a result, we expect
to see improvements in MONUCO's implementation
of its mandate to neutralize armed groups and
prevent conflict, including through disarmament and
mediation. The mandate also emphasizes the important
role that MONUSCO can play in the response to the
ongoing Ebola outbreak. If requested, MONUSCO can
provide security assistance to responders providing
life-saving support.

Perhaps most important, thanks to its emphasis
on strengthening Congolese institutions within
existing resources, the Council has given MONUSCO
the mandate to work closely with the Congolese
authorities to provide technical assistance and build
capacity in areas of strategic importance, such as
security, the rule of law and the management of natural
resources. Those efforts are critical to the long-term
success of MONUSCO and the eventual transition of
responsibilities to the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
We note that resolution 2463 (2019) contains
references to the International Criminal Court (ICC).
In that connection, we refer to the United States policy
on the ICC, as announced by the White House on
10 September 2018, as well as to Secretary Pompeo's
announcement on 15 March regarding visa restrictions
on Court officials in furtherance of that policy. In
particular, the United States reiterates its continuing
and long-standing principled objection to any assertion
of ICC jurisdiction over nationals of States that are not
parties to the Rome Statute, including the United States
and Israel, absent a referral by the Security Council or
the consent of such a State. We also wish to reiterate
our serious and fundamental concerns with the ICC
Prosecutor's proposed investigation of United States
personnel in the context of the conflict in Afghanistan.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is a State
party to the Rome Statute and, as recalled in resolution
2463 (2019), has consented to the Court's exercise of
jurisdiction. We understand that MONUSCO's mandate
with respect to the ICC will be limited to working
with the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in circumstances in which all the relevant States
have consented to the ICC's activities. The United
States remains a leader in the fight to end impunity
and continues to support justice and accountability
for international crimes, including war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide. We respect the decisions
of those nations that have chosen to join the ICC and,
in turn, we expect that our decision not to join and not
to place our citizens under the Court's jurisdiction will
also be respected.

