Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak on
behalfofthe European Union and its member States. The
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Iceland, Serbia and Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and
Georgia align themselves with this statement.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report (S/2014/656),
Special Representative Kubis for his briefing and
Ambassador Tanin for his statement.

With so many competing issues, it is particularly
important to ensure there is continued focus on
Afghanistan and the difficult times faced by the Afghan
people. Let me start by reiterating our full support for
the important continuing role played by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and all the United Nations agencies in supporting the
Afghan people and in coordinating the international
community's assistance. The role of the United Nations
will be even more important in the years to come.

We would like to acknowledge the role played by
the United Nations in supervising the unprecedented
audit of all the votes cast in the run-off presidential
election. Both United States Secretary of State Kerry
and Special Representative Kubis deserve praise for
their tireless efforts regarding the election process.
The European Union is pleased that we were able to
play our part in mobilizing the required observers to
satisfy Afghans' desire for an international observation
capacity. It remains important that the electoral process
be completed in as transparent a way as possible. It is
now urgent that both candidates put the national interests
of Afghanistan first and live up to their commitments
to establish a Government of national unity.

The new Government will face many immediate
challenges. It needs to be unified and robust in tackling
them head on and in not allowing vested interests to
divert its sense of purpose. Afghans have shown that
they are hungry for reform, both to safeguard the
progress that has been made in the past thirteen 13 and
to use that platform as a basis for renewed progress. We
look forward to the London Conference on Afghanistan
in November as an opportunity to reaffirm our
partnership with a new Government on the basis of
their commitment to reform.

I want to highlight three critical areas, namely,
security, economic and human development, and the
rule of law and human rights.

Afghans must be assured that their security will be
maintained. The early signing of the bilateral security
agreement between Afghanistan and the United States
is of key importance in that regard. The agreement is
critical for a continued international presence to support
Afghans in their endeavours. The role of neighbouring
countries is also important in ensuring that insurgents
are unable to undermine hard-won gains and cause
instability that could threaten peace and security in the
region.

Security is a necessity for the continuation of the
economic and human development that has taken place
in Afghanistan. Progress has been impressive in many
areas, but the new Government will need to take rapid
action to improve confidence in the economy. Above
all, it has to take quick action in order to overcome the
reform backlog and to tackle the current fiscal crisis.
Beyond that, the new Government should prioritize the
rural economy, which remains the lifeblood of the vast
majority of Afghans. It also needs to increase the rule
of law while fostering transparency and combatting
corruption. The rule of law is critical to progress
in many areas, none more so than human rights, in
particular the rights of women and girls.

It is worth recalling that 13 years ago women and
girls were treated as second-class citizens. They were
not allowed to work or go to school. They could not leave
their house, except in the company of a male relative.
Today, Afghans, and Afghan women in particular, are
to be applauded for the progress that has been achieved.
But there is still much to be done. In many areas, the
statutory framework is no longer the problem. But
consistent and routine application of the law remains
an area where sustained action is needed. We believe
that must be a clear priority for the new Government.

In conclusion, all those challenges will require a
strong commitment from both the new Government and
the international community. The European Union and
its member States will remain steadfast partners, as set
out in our new comprehensive strategy for Afghanistan,
which was endorsed in June.

Finally, like others, I would like to pay tribute
to Special Representative Kubis for his tremendous
contribution to a better future for all Afghans - the
future they want and that they deserve.

