Mr. Da Costa Freitas (Timor-Leste): I would like
to express our congratulations to you, Mr. President, on
your presidency of the Security Council for the month
of August, as well as to thank you for convening this
meeting. I would also like to thank His Excellency
Mr. Modibo Ibrahim Toure', Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau, for his
briefing and for his efforts in assisting the country's
authorities to resolve the crisis.

I am honoured to address the Security Council
on behalf of the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP), whose members include Angola,
Brazil, Cabo Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Equatorial Guinea,
Mozambique, Portugal, Seo Tome and Principe and my
own country, Timor-Leste.

We welcome the two latest reports (S/2016/675 and S/2016/720) of the Secretary-General on Guinea-
Bissau, whose recommendations we fully endorse.

The member States of the CPLP remain deeply
concerned about the continuing political impasse and
the overall situation in Guinea-Bissau. Of particular
concern are the impacts on the provision of basic
services to the population and the suspension of crucial
reforms. The strains are already being felt, particularly
in the health and education systems and in the economic
deprivation of Bissau-Guineans. We are deeply
concerned that this could escalate into social tensions.
We call on all the parties to engage in constructive
dialogue and to create the conditions for the approval
of the Government programme and a national budget,
thereby exhibiting the necessary commitment towards
long-term development in the country. That would
lead to the much-needed lifting of the suspension on
international cooperation aid.

The CPLP commends the concerted action of the
international community and, in that regard, welcomes
the decision by the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Summit to renew the
mandate of its Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB).
Its role in contributing to stability in Guinea-Bissau
cannot be overstated. In that regard, we congratulate
the European Union on its decision to provide funding
assistance to ECOWAS. We are deeply concerned about
the detrimental effects of an eventual withdrawal of
ECOMIB before the security situation is guaranteed,
and we urge international partners to consider ways
by which we can continue to support peace and
development in Guinea-Bissau.

We very much appreciate the briefing by Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman
on his recent visit to Guinea-Bissau, given during
a meeting of the Guinea-Bissau country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. For
that and for his continued efforts, we also thank His
Excellency Ambassador De Aguiar Patriota, Chair of
the configuration.

We reiterate our call to all national stakeholders,
namely, the organs of sovereignty, the political parties
and civil society, to commit to constructive and
inclusive dialogue, with respect for the Constitution,
democratic principles and the rule of law. Statesmanship
is required to resolve the political impasse and to move
towards greater political stability and socioeconomic
development, as well as for the protection and promotion
of the civil, political, economic, social and cultural
rights of all Bissau-Guineans.

