Mr. Jessen-Petersen: The three months since my
last report to the Security Council have been marked
by a positive trend in what is a crucial year for Kosovo
and for the region. The challenges ahead of us in the
coming months are, however, considerable. Let me first
say a few words on the progress made.

The security situation continues to improve based
on strong daily cooperation between the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), the Kosovo Police Service (KPS) and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR), to whose Commander and
forces I would like to pay tribute. Levels of serious
crime are low - indeed, not higher than other
comparably populated areas of Europe - and the trend
is positive. Crime rates are showing no evidence of
ethnic bias in policing or judicial processes.
Community policing initiatives and the ongoing
successful transition of policing responsibility to the
Kosovo Police Service are helping to bring policing
closer to all the people of Kosovo. Where additional
security measures are required for particularly
vulnerable areas, these are taken.

Two recent trips, by the Prime Minister and by
the President of Serbia, passed off Without incident and
confirmed the professionalism of KFOR, the UNMIK
police and the KPS, and the good cooperation among
them.

While we have made progress, the Kosovo
security environment does, however, remain fragile. I
therefore welcome the recent decision by NATO to
maintain KFOR'S operational capabilities during this
crucial year.

Members of the minority communities continue
to feel insecure. Kosovo's Serb community is,
regrettably, often the victim of misinformation that is
disproportionate to the facts on the ground. Fears,
whether fuelled by misinformation or by intimidatory
acts, and even when not borne out by facts, translate
into largely self-imposed limits on freedom of
movement, and, thus, limits on access to employment,
health care, electricity, justice and education. These
perceptions of insecurity also prevent many displaced
Kosovo Serbs from returning to their homes. The
Prime Minister of Kosovo, Ramush Haradinaj, has set
an example to political leaders and officials, and to the
people of Kosovo, by continuing to reach out to
Kosovo Serbs and other minorities through repeated,
inclusive public statements and through visits to
municipalities, where he has met with returnees. It is
important that other political leaders and citizens
follow his example.

The new two-party coalition government has,
since taking office on 3 December 2004, undertaken a
sustained effort to accelerate standards implementation
on the basis of a number of priority standards goals and
indicators to measure progress, agreed upon between
the government and UNMIK. As members know,
priority standards goals are those central to the
improvement of the rights and living conditions of
minority communities and to the building of a multi-
ethnic, democratic and stable Kosovo.

The conclusions of the technical assessment
before the Council are clear: The Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government have made tangible
progress, but there is further to go to ensure that the
positive processes are translated into action on the
ground. The new government is aware of that and
continues to be committed to delivering standards as its
first priority. Leadership by the Prime Minister and his
Cabinet are creating both ownership and
accountability. I am pleased to report to the Council a
key step forward in the construction of democratic
institutions in Kosovo. In accordance with the
Constitutional Framework and in fulfilment of his
commitments to me and to representatives of the
international community, President Rugova has
announced his resignation from the position of
president of the political party he helped to found, the
Democratic League of Kosovo.

In recognition of the central role of municipalities
in delivering the most essential standards, the Prime
Minister wrote to the presidents of all municipal
assemblies to ask them to directly target their efforts on
a number of immediate priorities agreed between the
Government and UNMIK - including the use of
languages, equal employment, property rights and
returns - and to set clear deadlines for action. That
initiative by the Prime Minister has resulted in
considerable efforts and the beginning of results in
many municipalities. I shall report on the full extent of
the efforts and the results achieved in my next
technical assessment.

All the elements of institution-building that I
have mentioned, and upon which the implementation
of standards is based, are important and will help the
institutions of Kosovo better serve all the people of
Kosovo in the future.

The Government has undertaken the
reconstruction of almost all properties damaged or
destroyed last year in March * nearly 900 houses in
all, plus several schools. It has also provided cash
grants to returning families. The Government and
UNMIK are committed to achieving progress in the
reconstruction of certain Orthodox churches and
monasteries. The Provisional Institutions have
transferred €4.2 million into the 2005 budget to finance
the reconstruction of religious sites. Regrettably,
progress has been blocked since last September by a
senior figure in the Serbian Orthodox Church.
However, the Holy Synod has now decided that
Serbian Orthodox Church will re-engage constructively
on the basis of the earlier agreement, a decision that
opens the way to progress on church reconstruction.

The Government is moving on the devolution of
authority to the local level to realign centralized
structures of the past with European standards of local
self-government. That is a complex and difficult
exercise anywhere, and Kosovo is certainly no
exception. Nevertheless, we do detect a welcome
degree of interest transcending ethnic division on the
part of local authorities to implement the process, as
that process offers tangible benefits to all. To succeed,
the process must be aimed at bringing municipal
authorities closer to citizens. It must be an essential
element in the process of integration, and, if
successfully implemented, it will defeat the forces of
division and do away with parallel structures once and
for all.

The Government has just agreed on five pilot
municipalities, two of which are of particular interest
to Kosovo Serbs. The next step will be to define the
exact nature of additional municipal competencies,
with particular attention given to areas such as
policing, justice, education and health. As we move
forward in that delicate and difficult process, it is
important that all political parties at the central and
local levels, as well as all communities, are involved
and that a Kosovo-wide consensus on the way ahead is
pursued.
Over the last six months, we have accelerated the
transfer of competences from UNMIK to the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in areas
not related to sovereignty. Three new ministries -
those of Communities and Returns, Local Government
Administration, and Energy and Mining - have been
established and are now becoming operational. In the
field of the economy, significant transfers are taking
place. We are looking at transferring further
responsibilities in the areas ofjustice and police. Those
transfers go hand-in-hand with an emphasis on
accountability, including the availability of corrective
measures if officials block progress. The Prime
Minister has already demonstrated readiness to deal
with non-performing officials. In order to ensure that
transferred competencies can be exercised efficiently,
we are also encouraging donors to coordinate and
better target their efforts to help the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government build capacity across
all areas.

Economic stagnation remains a serious concern.
Unemployment is rampant, the social safety net is non-
existent, and social and economic hardship could at
any moment turn into a threat to political stability. The
European Union's UNMIK pillar, which is under new
leadership, is making some progress, and we are giving
privatization greater impetus. However, it is clear that
we will not find miracle solutions.

Real progress on the economy requires certainty
on status combined with a healthy environment for
investors and a functioning market economy. At
present, we are focusing on short-term job generation,
microcredit schemes and other measures that provide
some degree of hope, in particular for young people, to
pre-empt dramatic expressions of frustration. The
Government is engaged in developing a comprehensive
Kosovo development plan comprising different sectors
of the economy, including energy, to help chart the
road ahead in the medium and the long term.

The full receipt of telecommunications revenues
would give an important boost to the economy in
Kosovo. In that context, I am pleased that a study
group of the International Telecommunication Union
(ITU) has just concluded that there is no obstacle to the
allocation - on a temporary basis and in accordance
with Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) - of a
dialling code to UNMIK, in line with our request. We
trust that the ITU will now rapidly allocate such a
code, as requested by the United Nations, and thus help
stimulate the economy.

Work is proceeding on a census of the population
of Kosovo, which will - and should - include
internally displaced persons in Serbia and Montenegro.
That is needed as a basis for important activities,
including the development of economic strategies and
the reform of local self-government. We are looking at
best practices from recent similar exercises in the
region. The Provisional Institutions will present their
project document to a donors' meeting on the census
next month.

As we move forward, dialogue remains essential
at various levels, including local dialogue between
majority and minority communities. Regrettably,
following their election boycott last October, Kosovo
Serbs are still staying outside most political and
democratic processes. There is some progress,
however. A Kosovo Serb recently joined the
Government as Minister for Returns and Communities,
and Kosovo Serbs have participated in recent talks on
decentralization. However, it is my impression that
many Kosovo Serbs are frustrated and are waiting for
more positive signals from Belgrade. They know that
their future lies in Kosovo - as confirmed by Mr. Tadie,
the President of Serbia, during his recent visit to
Kosovo - and they need to take an active part in the
democratic process to help shape that future.

I am pleased to inform the Council that direct
dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade is about to
resume, after 12 months of boycott by Belgrade. It has
now been confirmed that the Working Group on
Missing Persons will resume its work on 10 March,
with the International Committee of the Red Cross
acting as chair. I hope that the Working Group will
make a significant contribution to an early resolution
of one of the most painful legacies of the war. We are
also discussing other areas of dialogue with Belgrade,
and I am hopeful that the recent more positive signals
from Belgrade will result in an intensification of the
direct dialogue.

The regional dialogue with Tirana, Skopje and
Podgorica continues to develop in a variety of fields,
including the economic one. We expect high-level
visits to Pristina from both Skopje and Tirana to take
place shortly.

Finally, in the international field, UNMIK, KFOR
and Kosovo's Provisional Institutions are maintaining
close and frequent contact with the Contact Group -
meeting about every six weeks in Pristina - and with
our close partners NATO, the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
We also have frequent and continuous dialogue with
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and the Council of Europe, among others.
Last Monday, I had the opportunity to brief the EU
foreign ministers on the situation and the way ahead,
and I stressed the key role that the European Union
must play, in close cooperation with the members of
the Contact Group and, of course, with the United
Nations.

So there is progress, but at the same time
problems do remain. Much more has to be done to
reassure the minorities that they have a future in
Kosovo, to guarantee freedom of movement for the
minorities, and to speed up the process of returns of
displaced persons. There is constant pressure from our
side for progress, and we are holding the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government fully accountable for
continuing to make progress in line with the promising
start of the Government. At the same time, the
improvement of the economy in the short term,
pending the outcome of status discussions, must
receive and is receiving constant attention and action.

Following my next technical assessment in May,
a comprehensive review of standards is planned to take
place in mid-2005. Should that review conclude that
sufficient progress has been made, the international
community should be prepared to embark on a process
leading to status talks. My evaluation is that we have a
good chance of keeping to that timetable and that the
process leading to status talks could therefore begin in
the second half of this year. At the same time, we must
also understand that, as we move towards the status
process, tensions may rise. The Kosovo Albanians who
want to enter that status process have understood that
violence will be a major setback. On the other hand,
those bent on derailing the process may see violence as
their only means to do so. The message must be clear:
Provocations and violence cannot be allowed to stop
progress towards a stable, multi-ethnic society in
Kosovo.

I will not comment today on the principles that
will guide status talks, with one exception. As I
mentioned when I addressed the Council last
November, the partition of Kosovo is simply not a
realistic option as we move forward. The society we
are trying to build in Kosovo must have space for all
communities as a stable, tolerant, multi-ethnic
democracy. As such, all talk about the partition of
Kosovo becomes an agenda for those who may be
eager to reignite the divisions and flames of the past.
Partition, in my View, would betray European values of
integration and coexistence. Partition would also
sacrifice the 60 per cent of Kosovo Serbs who do not
live in the North, and it would reopen many wounds
that are slowly beginning to heal throughout the region.

2005 is a key year for Kosovo. There is now
broad agreement on a clear way forward and a clear
timetable that could lead us to the negotiations on final
status in the second half of this year. To defer that
process for much longer would only prolong the pain,
increase the risks and delay the day when the region
turns its back on a painful past and moves forward
towards a common European future.

Almost 14 years after the outbreak of a series of
wars across the former Yugoslavia, and nearly six years
after NATO intervened to put a halt to gross violations
of human rights in Kosovo, 2005 is the year in which
we must seize the opportunity to resolve one of the last
conundrums of the former Yugoslavia: ensuring
peaceful coexistence and mutual tolerance among all
communities in Kosovo. The Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government, the institutions and the people of
Kosovo have further to go in implementing the priority
standards, but initial progress, determination and
effort, and accelerated pace are all tangible. I count on
the Security Council to continue supporting the efforts
of the institutions and the people of Kosovo to develop
and shape their society and their future in Europe - as I
have said, a multi-ethnic, stable, tolerant and
democratic Kosovo at peace at home and at peace with
its neighbours.

