Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
The Russian Federation welcomes the initiative of the
President of the Republic of Kazakhstan, Nursultan
Nazarbayev, to hold a special meeting of the Security
Council on "Non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction: confidence-building measures". This is
especially relevant given that on 1 July this year we will
mark the fiftieth anniversary of the opening for signature
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), which undergirds the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime. We believe firmly
that the risks and threats we are encountering in this
area today should be dealt with specifically on the
basis of the Treaty, with a balanced approach to its
three pillars - non-proliferation, disarmament and the
peaceful use of nuclear power.

Unfortunately, we are approaching that half-
century milestone weighed down by contradictions
that could complicate the current NPT review cycle,
which will conclude with the Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons in 2020. Its main goals include confirmation
of our commitment to the goals of the Treaty and our
obligations under it, as well as its strengthening on the
basis of the Action Plan adopted at the 2010 Review
Conference. To that end, all countries must renounce
the unwillingness to listen to one another that was so
evident at the 2015 Review Conference - in particular
in the misguided and dangerous trend prevailing at the
time involving attempts to compel nuclear Powers to
abandon their nuclear arsenals without accounting for
their security interests or strategic realities.

That approach resulted in forced efforts to draft
the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons that
is now open for signature. Russia does not intend to
join the Treaty. We believe that the total eradication
of nuclear weapons is possible only in a context of
comprehensive, full disarmament, with equitable,
equal and indivisible security for all, including those
possessing nuclear weapons, as is provided for in the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
The provisions of the Treaty on the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons, as presented for signature, are
far from being based on those principles. It ignores
the importance of taking into account every factor
affecting our strategic stability today. It has given
rise to profound disagreement among members of the
international community and could have a destabilizing
effect on the non-proliferation regime. I would like to
stress that we embrace the goal of building a nuclear-
weapon-free world. However, we cannot achieve that
with the unilateral measures on which the Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons is based.

The prospects for the current review cycle also
cast doubt on the lack of clarity regarding the creation
of a zone in the Middle East free of nuclear and other
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery. We believe that the conference convened to
create such a zone remains relevant. For our part, we
will continue to work to make progress in this process.
We see a promise of success through consideration of
the issue within the broader context of regional security.
Russia's specific views in that regard are well known to
all stakeholders and remain in force.

The status of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-
Ban Treaty is another important issue. As a principal
supporter of the Treaty, we call on all the countries on
which its entry into force depends to sign and ratify it,
as some of them have frequently promised to do. At the
same time, it is still important to ensure the continuation
of a moratorium on any nuclear explosions.

One of the crucial concrete steps aimed at
maintaining the nuclear non-proliferation regime in
its current phase is that of combining our efforts to
sustainably implement the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) so as to resolve the issue of the Iranian
nuclear programme. The Security Council supported the
JCPOA through its unanimous adoption of resolution
2231 (2015) and therefore bears some responsibility for
its implementation. Iran has complied strictly with its
obligations, as the International Atomic Energy Agency
has regularly confirmed. An overwhelming majority of
the international community recognizes that the J CPOA
is making a tangible contribution to strengthening the
non-proliferation regime and maintaining international
peace and security. We cannot repudiate this genuine
achievement of multilateral diplomacy - the result of
the efforts not only of the participants in the agreement
itself but also of other stakeholders that supported the
initiative, including Kazakhstan - for the benefit of
certain countries' political agendas.

It is obvious that if the JCPOA were to fail, and
especially if one of the members of the P5+1 was
responsible, it would send an alarming message about
our entire international security architecture, including
the prospects for resolving the nuclear problem on
the Korean peninsula. We would like to reaffirm
the relevance of Russia and China's proposals for a
road map aimed at reaching an exclusively peaceful
settlement of this issue.

We are gravely concerned about the growing threat
of chemical terrorism in the Middle East, in particular
in Iraq and Syria. Militants are not only using toxic
chemicals but also have their own technological and
manufacturing capacities for synthesizing full-fledged
military toxic substances and have established far-
reaching channels for access to their precursors. We
should never ignore the very real threat of chemical
terrorism spreading beyond the Middle East,
particularly when we consider the significant numbers
of foreigners who are fighting alongside the extremists.
Terrorists who have come to Syria and Iraq from
abroad have already had the opportunity to acquire
practical experience and skills in manufacturing and
using chemical weapons. For many years - the past
three at least - we have repeatedly proposed adopting
a Security Council resolution, or at least a presidential
statement, condemning specific instances of chemical
terrorism in Syria and Iraq. Unfortunately, all of
our proposals have consistently met with obstinate
resistance from some of our Western colleagues, who
prefer to turn a blind eye to the facts of the use, and
even manufacture, of chemical weapons by terrorists,
and to level unsubstantiated accusations at Damascus.
We consider it unacceptable to exploit efforts to combat
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction in
order to achieve narrow geopolitical aims, as occurred
15 years ago with the intervention in Iraq on an utterly
trumped-up pretext.

We have recently witnessed persistent attempts
to manipulate the activity of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the
OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism,
which has concluded its work. This is deplorable, and
we reiterate our proposal for creating a new mechanism
for investigating incidents involving the use of
chemical weapons in Syria on the basis of principles
that fully reflect the standards of the Chemical
Weapons Convention.

We also call on all States to comply with their
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004), adopted
in 2004, which directs all countries to take effective
measures to prevent weapons of mass destruction and
all other related materials from falling into the hands
of non-State actors, including terrorists, of course. The
resolution's relevance was reaffirmed by the Security
Council following the 2016 comprehensive review of
its implementation. The Council is required to respond
severely to any breach of the resolution, whether in
Syria, Iraq or elsewhere, especially in cases where
non-State actors receive assistance in getting access to
weapons of mass destruction. Russia supports efforts
to establish and strengthen the national, regional and
subregional capacities needed for dealing with these
challenges. Under the auspices of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
United Nations Office of Disarmament Affairs, we
recently held a special seminar in Kaliningrad on the
practical aspects of the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). Last year, during our chairmanship of the
OSCE Forum for Security Cooperation, we organized
a special meeting on the issue. We also welcomed the
consensus three months ago approving a decision by the
OPCW Executive Council aimed at preventing threats
of non-State actors using chemical weapons, which in
our View is a step in the right direction.

In the interests of improving the effectiveness of
multilateral cooperation in preventing the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and the threat of such
weapons falling into the hands of terrorist groups and
other non-State actors, Russia has proposed formulating
a new, legally binding instrument, in the form of an
international convention to combat acts of chemical and
biological terrorism. We presented the draft convention
at the Conference on Disarmament, in Geneva, and we
call for negotiations for its approval to begin as soon
as possible.

The current state of affairs in non-proliferation and
disarmament urgently requires us to work together to
find ways of surmounting these growing contradictions,
while taking a careful approach to the cooperative
measures that have been proven to be effective and
strengthening their international legal foundations by
taking the interests of all States into account. We hope
that today's Security Council meeting and the initiative
put forward by the President of Kazakhstan will help us
to resolve these issues.

