Mr. Holmes: Mr. President, I wish to thank you
for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on my
first mission to the Sudan, Chad and the Central
African Republic.

I chose this region for my first visit because
Darfur is the world's largest humanitarian operation
and because throughout the region we face particularly
difficult challenges to civilian protection. I will take
the three countries in alphabetical order, not least to
ensure that the points I want to make about the Central
African Republic in particular are not overshadowed
by Darfur, thus reflecting what too often happens in
reality. I will report in French on the Central African
Republic and Chad, and I will revert to English for the
Sudan.

(spoke in French)

In the Central African Republic, I first visited
Paoua, in the north-west region of the country.
2

Following the fighting that took place on 28 January
between rebels of the Armee pour Ia Restauration de la
Republique et de Ia Democratic (APRD) and the Forces
Armees Centrafricaines (FACA), part of the population
of Paoua and of surrounding villages fled into the bush,
where they remain today. I was able to visit certain
villages that had been completely or partially burned,
plundered and depopulated.

There are no real camps for displaced persons.
On the contrary, displaced persons remain scattered in
the bush, which makes it particularly difficult to locate
them, as they tend to flee when a vehicle approaches. I
was, however, able to meet with a number of displaced
persons, see the conditions in which they live and hear
their often moving stories. Displaced persons are
generally clustered by family groups, a few kilometres
from their home and their fields. There they have
nothing - no drinking water, no shelter, no health or
education services.

Those people told me almost unanimously that
they had not fled the rebels but, rather, reprisaIs by
FACA and the Presidential Guard. They also stated that
they did not feel safe enough to return to their villages.
It is also clear that the State is no longer present in any
form. People have been left to fend for themselves.

Other areas of the country have been affected in a
comparable manner. In Kaga Bandoro, as well as in
Birao, in the north-east, fighting last month between
rebels of the Union des Forces Democratiques pour Ie
Rassemblement and governmental forces, along with
the settling of scores that followed, destroyed 70 per
cent of the town and caused the population to flee. I
used the word "comparable" because it seems that in
certain regions the burning and plundering of villages
was the work of the rebels rather than of governmental
forces. Lastly, I could not refer to the disastrous
security situation in the northern Central African
Republic without mentioning the actions of highway
bandits and road blockers, which have a devastating
impact on civilians.

Humanitarian organizations estimate that
lmillion people of the Central African Republic -
about a quarter of the population - are in need of
humanitarian assistance. The number of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) is estimated to have risen
from 50,000 to 212,000 in less than a year. In addition,
there are 70,000 refugees in Chad and Cameroon. That
situation, which is disturbing to say the least, could
07-29528
further deteriorate in the coming months, particularly
during the rainy season.

It is clear that, despite a very enthusiastic team on
the ground, the humanitarian response remains
insufficient. We need more partners, more resources
and more advocacy. In this regard, I appeal to United
Nations agencies, non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) and donors. By 31 March, only 18 per cent of
the $54 million United Nations humanitarian appeal for
the Central African Republic had been financed.

Here, as elsewhere, humanitarian assistance can
be only a palliative. A lasting solution requires that the
Central African Republic authorities meet their
obligation to protect the civilian population and put an
end to impunity. I made that clear to both President
Bozize and Prime Minister Dote. I do not believe,
however, that the authorities of the Central African
Republic - despite their stated goodwill - are in a
position to confront that challenge alone. The
international community, including the Council, must
therefore assume its responsibilities with a view to
finding political and security solutions to this political
and security crisis.

In political terms, the various parties to the
conflict must urgently agree to a ceasefire and begin
negotiations aimed at achieving a lasting political
solution, as recommended by the Group of the Wise.

As regards the security situation, a dramatically
accelerated reform effort is needed to support the
efforts of the Central African Government to restore its
authority throughout the territory and to establish a
professional and disciplined army that is capable of
protecting the population, with respect for international
humanitarian law.

Furthermore, we must urgently ensure better
protection of the borders of the Central African
Republic, particularly the border with Darfur. This
prompts me to wonder about the approach to be
adopted: must the deployment of a multidimensional
force in the north-east of the Central African Republic
be dependent on the acceptance by the Chadian
authorities of an international presence on their own
territory? Another possibility would be to ask the
African Union and the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community to study the possibility of
strengthening the mandate and the role of the 380
soldiers of its Multinational Force. This could include,
07-29528
for example, the monitoring of military activities in the
north of the country and in border areas.

The Central African Republic remains one of the
poorest countries in the world. Despite that fact, over
the past two years the country has made significant
progress, as attested to by the return in 2006 of the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. The
democratically elected Government seems to want to
take up the economic and development challenges
facing the country. The international community must
accompany the people of the Central African Republic
in that effort, and must respond to the humanitarian
needs in the north and prevent the security and political
crises there from wiping out the progress that has been
achieved.

Regarding the situation in eastern Chad, in
particular Goz Beida, which I visited, I have little to
report to the Council. I would like to quote from the
June 2006 report (S/2006/433) of the mission which
you, Mr. President, led to eastern Chad. Paragraph 55
of that report states:

"In Goz Beida humanitarian organizations
[expressed] considerable concern at the
deteriorating security situation particularly the
frequent rebel movement through, and
recruitment within, the camps, as well as the
Janjaweed attacks against villages. They stressed
that, unless better protection was provided, the
humanitarian character of their operations would
be seriously compromised. They were also
concerned at the negative impact of the refugees
on the local environment, in particular the use of
scarce local resources."

Almost one year later, humanitarian concerns in
eastern Chad remain. Finding pragmatic responses to
this is more essential and urgent than ever. Since the
Council mission, the situation in eastern Chad has
deteriorated significantly. The Chadian army, which is
focused on other objectives, has abandoned a large part
of the east of the country to militias and armed groups
of all kinds. A great deal of ethnic and political
violence has thus ensued.

Since the autumn of 2006, hundreds of people
have been killed. Dozens of villages have been burned
down. In just a few months, the number of displaced
persons in eastern Chad has risen from 50,000 to
140,000, including more than 100,000 in the
department of Dar Sila alone, of which Goz Beida is
3
the main town. The militarization of refugee camps and
IDP areas has accelerated. The phenomenon of forced
recruitment, including of children, is becoming a major
problem. Finally, pressure on local populations and on
the region's natural resources - in particular, water -
which were already difficult to manage, is reaching an
unsustainable level. The humanitarian organizations,
which in the past had always been able to deal with the
problem, are in danger of being overwhelmed.

There can be no doubt, therefore, that the
humanitarian response must be stronger, swifter and
more strategic. In particular, we must respond in a
better coordinated way to the most urgent needs before
the rainy season begins. That is why I have decided to
further strengthen the presence in Chad of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
Furthermore, we must recognize that refugees and
displaced persons will not be able to return home over
the next few months. We therefore now need to define
a longer-term strategy. This should include finding
lasting solutions to the continued presence of refugees
and displaced persons and proposing balanced
assistance that takes into account the needs of the host
populations. Relocating the most exposed refugee
camps must also be a priority, with full respect for
current international rules and for the dignity of the
refugees. In order to ensure that those measures are
properly implemented, it is important that donors
finance the $174 million humanitarian appeal for Chad.
To date, only 23 per cent has been financed.

I must warn the Council, however, that if nothing
is done to improve the security situation in eastern
Chad, the humanitarian situation will continue to
deteriorate, because humanitarian needs will continue
to increase, while humanitarian organizations - whose
access to the most venerable populations is already
restricted by the current security environment - will
no longer be able to respond to new needs. To avoid
that disastrous scenario, it is essential - as I said to
Prime Minister Coumakoye - that the Chadian
Government begin to combat impunity and provide
protection to Chadian and refugee populations in the
east of Chad.

It is also vital that the discussions under way
between Council members and the Government on the
deployment of a multidimensional force conclude as
swiftly as possible. Indeed, in my view, and as
indicated in the Secretary-General's report on the
subject (S/2007/97), an international security presence
is essential to ensure the protection of refugees and
displaced persons in eastern Chad.

(spoke in English)

Let me finally turn to the Sudan. This week
marks a sad anniversary: it was on 2 April 2004, three
years ago this week, that the Council heard its first
briefing on Darfur, by my predecessor, Jan Egeland.
Three years ago, 230 relief workers in Darfur were
struggling to assist 350,000 people. Today, more than
13,000 relief workers aim to help almost 4 million
people affected by the conflict, more than 2 million of
whom are displaced. I was impressed by the scale -
and, in many respects, the success - of the operation.
I was inspired by the dedication and courage of the
relief workers.

Currently, while there is relatively little actual
fighting between Government forces and the rebel
groups, violent incidents occur almost daily, from
bloody tribal clashes in South Darfur, through
continued Janjaweed and other militia attacks on
villages, to the present state of generalized insecurity
and lawlessness, in which unpredictable violence and
impunity are the rule. If military casualties are
relatively few, civilians remain the principal victims.
The need for massive humanitarian assistance
continues to grow, with the international community
providing 95 per cent of the $800 million or so now
needed every year, because the problem itself
continues to grow remorselessly.

Over the past six months, nearly a quarter of a
million more innocent civilians have been forced to
abandon their homes, seeking refuge mainly from
Government-supported militia attacks. They have fled
to camps in all three Darfur states - in many cases, to
camps that were already beyond capacity. WeIl over a
third of the population - at 2.2 million people - is
now displaced. At the current rate, the same could be
true for over half the population in another 18 months
or so. That is a truly horrifying prospect. Meanwhile,
the poIiticization and militarization of camps have
become a fact of life, creating a time bomb just waiting
to go off.

One of the saddest facts about the three years that
have passed is that the people who were in the camps
then are still there today, no doubt beginning to lose
hope of ever being able to return to their homes and
their former lives.
07-29528
Violations of humanitarian law and abuses of
human rights - not the least of which is gender-based
violence - continue unchecked. On 16 March, just
two weeks ago, a 10-year-old girl and a 12-year-old
girl were raped, apparently by police officers, in the
Tawilla IDP camp in North Darfur. As I walked
through the Al Salaam camp, near El Fasher, also in
North Darfur, hundreds of little girls and boys trailed
in my wake. I could not help but wonder how many
might yet suffer that horror themselves.

I said that the humanitarian operation in Darfur
has been, in many respects, a success. The majority of
the 4 million people in need appear to have adequate
food, clean water and basic sanitation, shelter, medical
care and - at least in some cases - access to
rudimentary education. However, and fundamentally,
as I have already made clear, we have all failed to
protect people effectively from violence and abuses,
even if the humanitarian presence itself can represent a
significant deterrent, as do the successive reports about
what is going on in Darfur - for example, the recent
damning report of the Human Rights Council.

No one party to the conflict can claim the moral
high ground; all parties appear to be responsible for
these continuing and widespread violations of
international humanitarian law and abuses of human
rights. Nevertheless, as I reminded them at every
opportunity, the Government of the Sudan has the
primary responsibility for protecting its population and
is accountable for the proper investigation and
prosecution of those accused of committing crimes.

There are also a number of threats to the
humanitarian effort itself that could easily lead to its
unravelling. The first is the sheer scale of that effort.
How long can the international community sustain such
a costly and difficult operation? How long can the
people of Darfur bear the human cost?

The second threat is to access, which has been
shrinking steadily for some time now. The position
varies from day to day, but at any one time there are up
to a million people whom we cannot reach. For
example, I visited a rebel-held area in the Jebel Marra,
which has had virtually no help for several months
because the main road is blocked and where lack of a
decent diet and medical care is beginning to tell. The
biggest obstacle to free access is, of course, the general
and unpredictable insecurity in Darfur. The impact of
that limited access is already beginning to be seen in
the main nutrition and health indicators, which are
beginning to turn once again in the wrong direction.

But there are also significant bureaucratic
obstacles. I experienced this third threat first-hand
when I was stopped and turned around at a military
checkpoint just outside Kutum in North Darfur while
trying to visit the Kassab camp. Although the
Government Iater apologized, if such an incident could
happen on my visit, with journalists documenting my
every step, one can easily imagine the daily struggles
faced by aid workers on the ground in Darfur - a
point that I made forcefully both to the local authorities
and to the central Government.

Despite that personal experience, I can report
some recent potential progress. On 28 March, the
Government of the Sudan signed a further joint
communique with the United Nations designed to
alleviate the administrative burdens that have so
severely hampered the relief operation in recent
months. The communique commits the Government of
the Sudan to the speedy delivery of visas, permits and
customs clearance, with specific deadlines. It also
establishes a joint follow-up committee, co-chaired by
the Sudanese Minister for Humanitarian Affairs and the
United Nations Humanitarian Coordinator, which will
meet monthly. Full and continued implementation of
all aspects of that agreement is not too much to expect.
The Government of the Sudan should do all it can to
facilitate the work of those who are saving the lives of
its own citizens.

The fourth threat is the continuing consequences
of violence against the aid workers themselves. Staff
have been physically and verbally abused, offices and
residences raided and personal belongings stolen.
Vehicles are routinely hijacked at gunpoint, often in
broad daylight - even, on occasion, right in state
capitals. Here too, none of the parties can claim
innocence. In short, those who have come to help the
population are now themselves targets, not helped by a
media campaign about the supposed crimes of relief
workers, including suggestions of espionage and
hidden political agendas.

One particular incident, in Nyala in January,
involved a raid conducted by Government officials on
an NGO compound. Twenty United Nations, NGO and
African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) staff were
arrested, verbally and physically abused and charged
with criminal offences. I asked all those I met from the
Government to ensure that those charges would be
dropped altogether. The humanitarian community
rightly feels doubly victimized in this incident. Those
concerned were not only assaulted, but then themselves
charged with a crime, literally adding insult to injury. I
strongly urge once again that my request be quickly
acted upon. However, the latest news that those
concerned have been asked to appear in court
tomorrow in Nyala does not look like the symbol of
cooperation that the international community is
expecting.

Let me deal with one important point in that
context. During my trip, Government officials
repeatedly suggested that some NGOs were engaged in
inappropriate political activities in Darfur. That
allegation usually appeared to refer to advocacy
activities concerning the protection of civilians from
abuse of their rights. In other words, giving food and
shelter is acceptable; speaking out about violations of
humanitarian law is not. But speaking out to protect
civilians is part of the core of humanitarian action
today and reflects the overwhelming concern of the
international community - and this Council - with
the safety and protection of civilians in Darfur. I expect
that kind of insidious pressure on agencies, and
discrimination between "good" and "bad" ones, to
cease.

Let me also take this opportunity to offer my
deepest condolences to the families of the five
Senegalese AMIS protection force soldiers killed in
Darfur on Sunday. That grievous loss, following so
closely after the murder of two AMIS peacekeepers in
Gereida exactly one month ago, is yet another example
of those who come to assist the population of Darfur
themselves being targeted.

In sum, despite its scale and success in sustaining
millions and saving literally hundreds of thousands of
lives, the Darfur humanitarian operation is increasingly
fragile. The agencies and the people keeping it going
are under growing pressure from the factors I have
described. Morale is low. If things do not get better, or
if there were to be more serious incidents involving
humanitarian workers, some organizations could start
to withdraw, and the operation could start to unravel.
Then we could face a rapid humanitarian catastrophe.
No one wants that. We must do everything in our
power to avoid it. But the Government of the Sudan
has a particular responsibility to ensure that it is
avoided. I hope, from the bottom of my heart, that I do
not have to do another briefing like this one, or an even
worse one, next April.

I also visited Juba, in southern Sudan, to review
humanitarian efforts there in the context of the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. While there has been significant progress,
such as the beginning of the return of refugees and
IDPs, other issues - including those relating to the
Abyei boundary, the realignment of forces and
demobilization - remain outstanding. However, while
the immediate humanitarian need is diminishing, there
is an urgent need to increase recovery and development
assistance to help maintain peace. In particular, Darfur
must not distract the international community from the
fundamental importance of the north-south Agreement.
On the other side, as the Government of southern
Sudan themselves clearly recognizes, they have a huge
stake in a peaceful and rapid resolution of the conflict
in Darfur.

Similarly, the success of the peace talks between
the Lord's Resistance Army and the Government of
Uganda, which are set to restart later this month, is
vital. A peaceful resolution to that 20-year conflict
would not only help to stabilize the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, it would also relieve one of the
longest-standing humanitarian crises in Africa - with
1.4 million people still displaced in northern Uganda.
Special Envoy Chissano's work has been critical in
reinforcing that African-led initiative. For our part, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
will continue to support the Juba Initiative Project,
together with our colleagues in the Departments of
Political Affairs and Peacekeeping Operations.

Let me conclude - and I apologize for the length
of my presentation - with a few brief thoughts about
what I saw and heard overall.

First, I was struck by the complexity of the
conflicts in each of the countries I visited, involving as
they do, in addition to deep political problems, many-
layered mixes of ancient rivalries and tensions between
different ethnic and tribal groups, between pastoralists
and farmers, exacerbated by the encroachment of the
desert and the breakdown of traditional structures, and
between leaders with complex past and present
relationships.

Secondly, there is a clear regional aspect to the
conflicts that drive the deep humanitarian problems
with which we are trying to grapple. The spillover
effect from Darfur is clear, not least in eastern Chad. If
we are going to solve the individual conflicts in a
lasting way, we need a regional approach in which the
issues are tackled, as far as possible, in parallel.

Thirdly, however, there is a clearly internal aspect
to each conflict as well, as tempting as it is for the
Governments concerned to shift all the blame onto
Darfur. In other words, there have to be national
solutions in addition to the regional approach.

Fourthly, and finally, in each country the
fundamental and crying need is above all for political
solutions brought about through dialogue and
mediation, aided from outside where necessary but
relying on national actors themselves. That means that
the politicians and leaders concerned must cease to
play protracted games with each other with little or no
thought for the lives and livelihoods of hundreds of
thousands of their fellow citizens, whom the
international community meanwhile keeps alive. For
the international community itself it means investing
more intensely than ever in conflict prevention,
resolution and mediation. There is no more important
actor in that endeavour than the United Nations
Security Council. That is the best investment of all,
especially compared to the appalling human cost of
what we see in the three countries I visited. Of course,
what we are spending on the sticking plaster of
massive humanitarian aid could be so much more
productively spent on development.

