Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution
2314 (2016). France wholeheartedly supports the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) and
therefore, of course, today's resolution, which enables
us to extend the JIM's mandate until 18 November. We
hope that this is simply a preparatory step before the full
and complete renewal of the mandate for another year.
We urge all Council members to commit immediately
and in good faith to that effort.

The JIM's latest report (S/2016/888) leaves no
more room for doubt. We know that the Syrian Arab
Army and Da'esh have not hesitated to use chemical
weapons against civilians in Syria on at least four
separate occasions. In addition to the overwhelming
evidence against the Syrian regime and Da'esh, this
especially serious and unacceptable attack undermines
the non-proliferation and our collective security as
a whole.

Given such dire stakes, political divisions within
the Council on the Syrian conflict must be set aside so
that we can act. Given such dire stakes, action is not
an option but a necessity, and it is our responsibility.
We cannot allow violations of international law
prohibiting chemical weapons and their use, and we
cannot take the risk of allowing such actions to become
commonplace. It is up to all members of the Security
Council to shoulder their responsibilities pursuant to
the commitment undertaken in establishing the Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM).

We need to draw all the appropriate lessons from
the reports issued by the Mechanism and ensure that
those crimes reported do not go unpunished. As Foreign
Minister Ayrault has said repeatedly and openly, France
is in favour of the eventual adoption of a resolution
under Chapter VII to sanction the perpetrators of
the chemical attacks, as identified by the JIM. Given
the serious nature of those crimes, it is of paramount
importance that we ensure that the JIM. continues to
function so that any further resort to chemical weapons
against civilians will be reported.

The Joint Investigative Mechanism has fully lived
up to our expectations by reaching accurate findings
in very difficult circumstances, despite failing to enjoy
the full cooperation of all actors. The Mechanism
was established upon a unanimous decision of the
Security Council. There is therefore no question about
its legitimacy. France commends the the commitment
and professionalism of its members and the rigour and
earnest of their methodology.

Let us call a spade a spade. If the Security Council
is not in a position to shoulder its responsibilities
vis-a-vis the proliferation and use of weapons of mass
destruction - in this case, chemical weapons - against
civilian populations, its credibility and utility will
be at stake. France therefore calls on all members of
the Security Council to come together, set aside our
differences about the Syrian conflict to put a swift end
to the use of chemical weapons and hold the perpetrators
to account. When proliferation and the use of weapons
of mass destruction are at stake, weakness and division
for tactical purposes cannot be an option.

