Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Let me first
congratulate you, Sir, for assuming the presidency of
the Council this month and thank you for convening
this debate on Afghanistan. These debates offer an
important opportunity to take stock of the situation and
ensure that we move forward in a unified fashion. Let
me also thank my friend Kai Eide for his typically
insightful briefing. We welcome the Secretary-
General's report on Afghanistan (S/2009/323), and are
grateful for the incisive, detailed assessment of where
we are now and where we are going.
We are nearing a new beginning in Afghanistan.
Five years ago we held our first elections after decades

of a bloody power struggle. Despite the continuing
terrorist activities by the Taliban and Al-Qaida,
Afghanistan has made enormous progress since 2001
and our people are ready to go to the polls for a second
time. This, in itself, is a huge success and reflects the
enduring Afghan support for the stabilization process
and the value of the partnership between Afghanistan
and the international community.

The elections have been planned for less than
three months from now. Between now and August, we
must act to ensure the transparency and fairness of the
electoral process. There is a lot at stake. Afghans know
that the elections are the only feasible way to build on
the positive progress of the past years, but in order for
them to do so the elections must be credible and
legitimate. The results of the elections should serve to
unite the Afghan people, strengthen Afghan institutions
and provide momentum for ongoing stabilization
efforts.

In terms of the campaign, the rules of the game
have been defined by law and the Government of
Afghanistan and other relevant bodies are working to
ensure that the candidates receive security,
transportation and access to the media. For the
elections themselves, the essential priority is to ensure
security so that people from all over the country will be
able to vote. In that regard, the Afghan National Army
and Police will provide the main security for more than
7000 polling stations nationwide, supported by a
strengthened international force.

In addition, independent bodies like the
Independent Election Commission, the Electoral
Complaints Commission and the Media Commission
will be responsible for providing information, logistics
and oversight, guaranteeing access to media for
candidates and responding to concerns and questions
from the public. The United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General continue to
play an essential role here as the international focal
point, along with the Government of Afghanistan, in
ensuring a transparent, legitimate and credible
elections process.

The upcoming elections have deservedly been the
centre of attention among both Afghans and the
international community. However, we must remember
that they are part of larger ongoing efforts for change
and stability that go beyond the election process. The
coming months should reinvigorate the partnership
between the Government of Afghanistan and the
international community. We should use the elections
to add additional momentum to the strategic shifts that
began this year. And we should unify our approach and
focus on, first, the need to strengthen Afghan
institutions and make them sustainable and, secondly,
the need to be increasingly responsive to the growing
expectations of the Afghan people, who want to see a
tangible improvement in their lives.

The past months, with some welcome strategic
reviews by the United States and the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), have provided us with a
timely opportunity to review our achievements and
rethink our strategies in different multilateral arenas.
Combined with increasing involvement from Afghan
ministries, this has resulted in a shift towards a more
unified strategic approach, focusing on an intensified
civilian effort, an improvement in subnational
governance and service delivery and increased
alignment of international priorities with Afghan
national strategies. We must continue to build on the
substantial progress made thus far.

In the past eight years, Afghanistan has grown
from a country devoid of society, Government and
infrastructure to one with thousands of miles of roads,
millions of children in school and access to basic
health care for 85 per cent of the population. In
addition, the Government of Afghanistan has made
positive developments in anti-corruption and the rule
of law. The international community has helped us to
build, train and equip an army and police force that can
begin to protect our citizens. Kabul and a few other
cities now have uninterrupted electricity, and, in a
promising and historic development, Afghanistan will
be agriculturally self-sufficient this year for the first
time.

But daunting challenges remain to be adequately
addressed in the areas of security, development and
regional cooperation. First, security is worsening,
rather than improving, and civilians continue to
disproportionately bear the costs. The Taliban have
shown an increasing disregard for human life,
intentionally targeting civilians, particularly women,
children and humanitarian staff, and using populated
areas to stage attacks on international forces in order to
impose civilian casualties.
As the international military force increases in
strength over the summer and as security worsens in
parts of the country in advance of the elections, we
must be particularly careful to avoid an increase in the
loss of civilian lives. We applaud the recent steps taken
by NATO and by the United States to address those
concerns and the recently announced improved
guidelines for rules of engagement and use of air
bombardment. It is our hope that those steps will serve
to strengthen the partnership between the international
community and the Afghan people and to reassure
Afghans that the Government and the international
community see their protection as a priority.

Secondly, despite more focused and unified goals,
our development efforts remain fragmented, inefficient
and incomplete. Poverty in Afghanistan has increased
since 2001, and unemployment is one of the biggest
challenges. Governance, corruption and the rule of law
still need sustained attention both from the
Government and from the international community.
Humanitarian and development aid should be better
coordinated and more accountable. Resources need to
be funnelled towards capacity-building for the Afghan
Government because, as the Secretary-General's report
so eloquently states, we need a lasting expansion of
Government presence and not a temporary expansion
of foreign presence.

To address that issue, the civilian surge will be
the backbone of the successful implementation of the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy, because it
will further support national development priorities and
programmes in key sectors. In addition, improvements
in subnational governance and service delivery can
help disrupt the negative impacts of insecurity and
provide Afghans with the incentives to engage with the
stabilization process. In both those efforts, donors'
political, technical and financial assistance must be
aligned behind national priorities.

In that regard, my Government continues to fully
support the essential coordination role of UNAMA. We
welcome UNAMA's strengthened mandate and applaud
the courageous work of its men and women, who have
accomplished so much. We also welcome the recently
signed United Nations Development Assistance
Framework, as it provides priorities that are in line
with our Development Strategy and other national
development priorities.

And, finally, while the international community
and the United Nations have essential roles to play in
the coming months and years, Afghanistan also needs
to have stronger cooperation with its neighbours. As
has been widely recognized, this conflict is not limited
to the borders of Afghanistan, but involves the entire
region, and endangers people all over the world. Our
enemies are not local, but regional, and they find
sanctuary and support outside of Afghanistan. A full
regional approach will be needed to combat them.

We have recently begun to move towards more
positive regional interaction with Pakistan, particularly
through trilateral arrangements with the United States,
as well as with Turkey and Iran. There have been
promising bilateral and multilateral advances towards
better regional understanding as well. It is our hope
that all regional stakeholders can recognize the mutual
advantages of a stable, prosperous Afghanistan and
will be involved in helping to confront our shared
challenges in a sustainable, cooperative way.

In conclusion, we share the Secretary-General's
assessment that we have an opportunity to make
significant progress, if we maintain our new
momentum and focus in the coming months. That
effort will require broad and consistent international
engagement going forward. If we can ensure
transparent and open elections, increase security for the
Afghan population, improve coordination and
effectiveness of aid, strengthen Afghan institutions and
constructively address the regional dimensions of the
situation, we can clear a space on which to build a
strong, sustainable Afghanistan.

