Mr. Mladenov: I have the honour to present to the
Council today two reports of the Secretary-General, the
first pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 2110 (2013)
(8/2013/661), on the activities of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and the most
recent developments in Iraq, and the second pursuant
to paragraph 4 of resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2013/654).

As they strive to build a democratic State, founded
on the rule of law and the protection of human rights,
the people of Iraq continue to face serious challenges.
The most pressing of these challenges is the security
environment, which is currently deteriorating. It
is compounded by political deadlock. It is readily
exploited by terrorist and armed groups that target
civilians with the intention of inciting sectarian hatred
and undermining the Government and the country's
elected authorities. The ongoing conflict in Syria has
added a regional dimension to sectarian tensions and is
enabling groups such as Al-Qaida to forge links with
similar factions across the border.

Today more than ever, Iraq's challenges cannot
be considered in isolation from the broader risks that
face the region. Resolving the Syrian crisis through
an inclusive national project and adopting a regional
strategy against all forms of religious or sectarian
extremism is vital to bringing stability to Iraq. This
would create an enabling environment in which the
country's ethnic and religious communities can find a
balance without undue outside influence. In addressing
the regional challenges the United Nations and, indeed,
the Security Council have a responsibility and an
important role to play.

I believe that the latest developments announced
over the past couple of days regarding the holding of the
"Geneva II" meeting and the interim agreement with
Iran are positive first steps that will have a positive
impact on the region as a whole.

Despite the violence, Iraqis remain hopeful for a
peaceful, inclusive and democratic State. The people of
Iraq have shown unparalleled resilience and a strong
commitment to building a common future together. The
United Nations has a crucial role to play in supporting
their aspirations.

Since my arrival, I have held discussions with
political and civic leaders in Baghdad, Najaf, Erbil,
Anbar and Kirkuk. All my interlocutors expressed
their support for the United Nations as an impartial
and trusted partner that can reach out to all parties. All
expressed deep concerns over the escalation ofviolence.
All spoke of the need to ensure that no component of
Iraqi society feels marginalized. And finally, all shared
a growing anxiety that outside influences, including the
situation in Syria and the regional tensions as a whole,
are fuelling the terrorist threat to Iraq. These were the
messages that Iraqi political, civic and religious leaders
asked me to deliver to the Security Council.

Terrorism remains a significant threat to Iraq.
Armed groups seek to foment a vicious cycle of
violence reminiscent of the dark days of 2006 to 2008.
Against the wishes of ordinary Iraqis, these groups are
attempting to impose their will in parts of the country.
They seek to create a political vacuum by assassinating
political leaders in governorates such as Ninewa, Anbar
and Salah al-Din. They target Shiite pilgrims and Sunni
mosques in order to incite communal conflict. The
terrorists want to make parts of Iraq ungovernable.

I Wish to use this opportunity to call on the
Security Council to condemn in the strongest terms the
recent spate of terrorist attacks. The Council's message
will be seen as support for the people of Iraq in their
just struggle against terrorism. As the international
community stands up to crimes against humanity, so
we must take a stand against all forms of widespread
and deliberate targeting of civilians.

Experience has shown that successfully countering
terrorism requires a range of political and development
interventions that advance social cohesion, democratic
accountability and the rule of law. Most important,
however, it requires leaders to work together to reduce
political tensions. Achieving inclusion requires the
complete implementation of the Constitution, including
its articles on the separation of powers, federalism and
decentralization.

Recently, elements of such a multifaceted approach
were utilized to successfully address two key political
priorities. First, and critically, a new general election
law was enacted on 4 November. With UNAMI's
support, a spirit of compromise prevailed and consensus
was reached. I call on all Iraq's political leaders to
build on this momentum and move forward to enact
the Federation Council and political parties' laws. The
United Nations stands ready to offer technical advice
in this process.

I strongly welcomed both the adoption of the new
election law as well as the setting of 30 April 2014
as the date of the next general election. In a separate
development, the Kurdistan regional authorities
announced that the recently postponed provincial
election in Iraqi Kurdistan should be held on the same
day as the national vote.

Secondly, in September, many of Iraq's political,
religious, tribal and civil leaders took part in the
Conference for Social Peace where they signed a
National Code of Honour and committed to upholding
the unity of Iraq and its people. They pledged to reduce
tensions and avoid issuing potentially divisive public
statements. They also committed to a comprehensive
dialogue and reform process, known as the Social Peace
Initiative. This process has been supported by UNAMI
and warmly welcomed by the international community.

Both the national elections law and the Social
Peace Initiative remain in a nascent and fragile state.
They are at risk of being subverted by new tensions,
which are expected to rise as election campaigns get
under way. I therefore call on all political, religious and
civic leaders to maintain their commitment to holding
parliamentary elections on 30 April 2014 and to refrain
from any actions that may unduly delay or undermine
the process. I further call on them to ensure that a
favourable environment is in place to facilitate the
preparations and conduct of elections in a transparent,
peaceful and secure manner.

I also appeal to all political and civic leaders to
engage in a genuine effort to promote national cohesion
by adhering to the principles ofthe Code of Honour and
to engage constructively in the Social Peace Initiative.

I would like to briefly note that a number of issues
remain outstanding between Iraq's central Government
and the Kurdistan Regional Government, including
revenue-sharing and budget allocations. There is
an urgent need to make progress on the security
arrangements in the disputed areas. This includes
identifying more effective coordination mechanisms,
the absence of which has major consequences on
security in the disputed areas, where many of Iraq's
minorities reside. The Turkoman community continues
to suffer terrorist attacks, as do the Shabak, the Yezidis,
the Christians and other minorities in their respective
areas.

The unresolved issues around the disputed areas,
including article 140 of the Constitution, also need to
be addressed with a sense of urgency. The status of
Kirkuk is at the forefront of these issues, as is the need
for an equitable power-sharing arrangement endorsed
by all its constituents. I call upon all leaders to ensure
that the Governorate Council elections in Kirkuk take
place as soon as possible.

The United Nations estimates that a total of just
under 9,000 civilians and members of the Iraqi security
forces were killed, with thousands more injured,
between July and October. I have joined the Secretary-
General and others in publicly condemning this spiral
of senseless violence. I would like to once again pay
tribute to the men and women who have lost their
lives in the service of their nation and to the countless
innocent lives that have fallen victim to violence.

While a military response is necessary, as I earlier
noted, a range of strategies is needed to successfully
implement policies that inhibit terrorist activity.
These include rectifying violations of human rights by
ensuring justice and appropriate compensation for the
victims or their families, no matter when or by Whom
those violations were committed. It is essential that, as
the Iraqi Constitution provides, there be equal access
to justice. In order to ensure that due process, fair
trial standards and the presumption of innocence are
respected, some legislative changes may be needed.

The Government must ensure that law enforcement
agencies have sufficient capacity and resources to
prevent acts of terrorism and that they can properly
investigate such crimes in a manner that respects
democratic principles, including the rule of law and
human rights. UNAMI is working with the Ministry of
Justice on improving prison conditions and on criminal
justice reform. I am pleased to report to the Council
that the Government has now agreed in principle to
permit UNAMI to conduct visits of detention centres
under the authority of the Ministry of Interior. We look
forward to defining more clearly the parameters of such
cooperation.

The Government has also implemented some
positive measures to address gaps in the justice system,
including the establishment of an interministerial
committee, which UNAMI has recently been invited to
attend. According to this Committee, which is chaired
by Deputy Prime Minister Hussein al-Shahristani, the
Government remains committed to releasing those
improperly detained, restoring seized assets, and
compensating families of the victims of terrorism.

I am pleased to report that on 14 November,
UNAMI was invited to observe the Committee's
facilitated release of 54 prisoners, including two
women. UNAMI commends this initiative and is eager
to move forward with the Government on these matters.
Against this encouraging backdrop, I regret noting that
on 17 November, Iraq executed 12 persons convicted
under the Anti-Terrorism Law and the Penal Code,
bringing the total number of executed this year to 159.
Once again, I appeal to the Government to declare a
formal moratorium on the implementation of the death
penalty.

The central and provincial authorities in Iraq must
complement each other in addressing the fundamental
socioeconomic and development priorities. The
Government took an important first step by issuing
its new national development plan in September. It
focuses on a number of key developmental challenges,
namely, Iraq's reliance on hydrocarbon resources, the
lack of a strategic role for the private sector and the
banking system, the imbalance of public spending in
favour of operational spending, the high unemployment
rates, corruption and the reach of essential services
to the most vulnerable and impoverished. In the light
of the development plan, the United Nations in Iraq is
preparing a new development assistance framework to
align United Nations programming more closely with
those priorities.

Let me now turn briefly to Iraq's regional relations.
I strongly believe that Iraq can and is poised to take up
a prominent regional role. To that end, normalizing its
relations with all neighbours is key. The process can be
built on successfully on the basis of its experience with
Kuwait.

I am pleased to report that, in recognition of the
extent of their mutual interests, both Iraq and Turkey
have recently taken important steps to improve their
bilateral relationship. Furthermore, Iraq can take
advantage of the region's ongoing transition to pursue
closer ties in a range of areas. Chief among those areas
of cooperation must be containing the threat posed
by terrorist groups. I would also like to note Prime
Minister Nuri al-Maliki's bid to host an international
conference in order to unify efforts to combat terrorism
and ward off radicalism.

The Syria conflict continues to put pressure on
the humanitarian response capacity of all actors. The
total number of registered Syrian refugees in Iraq now
exceeds 200,000 persons. I would like to thank the
Government and the people of Iraq for extending their
hand towards those Syrians fleeing violence in their
own country.

The impact of the crisis is especially visible
in the Kurdistan region of Iraq, which to date has
accommodated more than 98 per cent of the refugees.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees estimates that, while some 40 per cent
of the refugees are hosted in camps, over 60 per cent
reside in local communities in the governorates of
Erbil, Dohuk, Suleymaniyah and Anbar. Currently,
there are 80,000 Syrian refugees settled in 14 transit
areas and permanent camps in Iraq, the largest being
Domiz, which hosts some 45,000 refugees.

I would also like to commend the Kurdistan
Regional Government for its hospitality, generosity
and excellent work in setting up camps that address the
needs of the refugees, as well as for their willingness
to allow refugees to access educational services and to
receive treatment in the camp medical facilities.

The humanitarian crisis has major security and
political implications that need to be addressed in
coordination with the authorities. I would therefore
like to call upon all authorities and actors to preserve
the humanitarian space and to reopen the borders for
those seeking refuge from the armed conflict and
indiscriminate violence.

Let me now address the issue of the former residents
of Camp Ashraf, which was officially closed on
11 September after the last 42 residents had been safely
transferred to the temporary transit location in Camp
Hurriya. UNAMI remains particularly concerned about
the security of the residents after unidentified gunmen
attacked the camp on 1 September. The attack left
52 people dead, while seven are still reported missing.

UNAMI has condemned that barbaric act in the
strongest terms, and we have repeatedly called on the
authorities to investigate the incident.

I call upon the Government of Iraq to ensure the
provision of all security and humanitarian arrangements
for the remaining Camp Hurriya residents in accordance
with the memorandum of understanding. Nearly 300
residents have been resettled outside Iraq, with the
largest number accepted by Albania and Germany.

Resettlement to third countries remains the
only avenue to guarantee the safety and security
of the residents. To that effect, the United Nations
has established a trust fund aimed at facilitating
humanitarian relocation efforts. I would like to appeal
to all Member States to provide relocation opportunities
to the remaining residents and to contribute to the fund.

I now wish to present the first report of the
Secretary-General on the issues of missing Kuwaiti and
third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property,
including its national archives, pursuant to resolution
2107 (2013). In accordance with the resolution, based
on an agreement between Iraq and Kuwait, the Council
decided to hand over, under Chapter VI of the Charter
of the United Nations, the responsibility to UNAMI, in
particular to my political deputy, Gyorgy Busztin, to
oversee the file.

I would like to add that the transition to act under
Chapter VI is clearly a testimony to the trust and mutual
respect between the two neighbours. UNAMI's task is

made easier by the deepening and expanding nature
of the Iraq-Kuwait relationship. For the first time
since 1990, in February, the Iraqi and Kuwaiti airlines
resumed flights between Baghdad and Kuwait.

Subsequent to those developments, the two
countries are exploring cooperation in the areas of
culture, youth, trade, transport and commerce, as well
as other fields of common interest. The cementing of
ties bodes well for furthering progress on issues that
are 22 years old and need to be brought to a close. The
victims who have lost their loved ones deserve nothing
less.

National archives are seminal to a country's history.
Kuwait rightly considers the original national archives
as part of its identity, treasure and history. Iraq's efforts
to remedy the loss of property and items belonging to
Kuwait have yielded results over the years. However, it
is disappointing to note that few clues have emerged to
date that would give stakeholders the hope of identifying
the whereabouts of those national archives.

Iraq itself is not a stranger to the grief of missing
persons. Many families have lost loved ones. Iraq's
Ministry of Human Rights and the relevant bodies have
shown commitment in that humanitarian search. It is
regrettable that such painstaking efforts have failed to
produce tangible results to date. I wish to assure the
families of the missing Kuwaiti nationals that UNAMI
will play its mandated role with that in mind.

I am also delighted that my political deputy
received support for UNAMI's role from all the relevant
stakeholders during his visit to Kuwait in October. It is
my hope that that momentum will translate into UNAMI
becoming an observer in the tripartite mechanism.

As for the Government of Iraq, it is clear that it
sees us as a constructive partner in its desire to fulfil its
responsibility. It has subsequently invited us to be part
of its interministerial committees on missing persons
and property in an observer capacity. On 13 November,
my deputy attended the first interministerial meeting
on missing persons at Iraq's Ministry of Human Rights.
I welcome the Government of Kuwait's intention to
appoint an official dedicated to the file, to be based in
Baghdad, and with Whom UNAMI looks forward to
working closely.

I wish to reiterate that, for UNAMI, the issue
of missing persons remains an important priority.
We therefore urge the parties to avail themselves of
UNAMI'S engagement with both the Government and
a wide range of political actors in Iraq, which may
potentially assist us in carrying out that very important
humanitarian task alongside the commendable efforts
of the International Committee of the Red Cross.

In conclusion, I would like to express my gratitude
for the trust that has been placed in me by the
Secretary-General and the Council to lead the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq. I look forward
to fulfilling the mandate entrusted to UNAMI by the
Council and I express my deep and sincere appreciation
to the Government and people of Iraq for their warm
and cordial welcome.

I wish to place on record my deep thanks to the
Security Council for its continued support.

