The Secretary-General: I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this important debate on
peacekeeping training and capacity-building. It reflects
your country's strong engagement in peacekeeping,
here in New York as well as in the field.

I salute the more than 3,000 uniformed personnel
from Indonesia who currently serve in eight of our
operations, and I pay tribute to the 37 Indonesian
peacekeepers who have made the ultimate sacrifice
under the United Nations flag.

Improving training is a major shared commitment
of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative. Training saves
lives. Our peacekeepers are deployed to increasingly
complex and often hostile environments. Training
prepares them for their vital peacekeeping tasks and
improves their performance. As we know, improved
performance reduces fatalities. As such, training is a
necessary and strategic investment in peacekeeping
and a shared responsibility between Member States and
the Secretariat.

This system of collaboration was recognized in
1995. The General Assembly confirmed Member
States' responsibility for the predeployment training
of uniformed personnel, while the Secretariat assists
Member States by establishing training standards and
providing training materials. The Secretariat is also
responsible for training civilian personnel. We need
to build on this approach of shared responsibility and
deepen our collaboration.

I thank the 151 Member States and 4 international
and regional organizations that have supported the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative by endorsing the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on Peacekeeping
Operations. In doing so, they have reconfirmed the
shared responsibility for peacekeeping performance
and stated their commitment to providing well-trained
uniformed personnel.

Today, I would like to update the Council on the
Secretariat's progress in fulfilling our commitment to
training and capacity-building.

On safety and security, we continue to take
forward the action plan to improve the security of
United Nations peacekeepers. This is supported by the
roll-out of a comprehensive training plan. In the five
high-risk missions - the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali - we have
conducted training support and assessment visits. We
are also instituting casualty evacuation training, stress
testing and crisis management exercises in these five
missions. Strengthening medical training is another key
component, and to help address the threat of improvised
explosive devices and other dangers, we are working
with troop- and police-contributing countries to ensure
that units joining our missions meet our operational
readiness standards before deployment and that they
have undergone predeployment training in accordance
with United Nations standards.

We are also placing a renewed emphasis on
in-mission training to ensure that our peacekeepers
benefit from the necessary support in the field. We are
particularly keen to develop the use of mobile training
teams, and we are encouraging Member States to
send such teams to provide targeted, flexible support
to our missions. We have established a framework
of performance standards and assessments based on
continuous evaluations of military units, including
command and control, protection of civilians, and
conduct and discipline. And we have strengthened
peacekeeping leadership training for civilians, military
and police, including through scenario-based exercises.

We are also working to increase the number of
women in our peacekeeping operations. A talent
pipeline specifically for senior women military officers
is under development, and we are looking at how we
can make mission environments more conducive
to women. The Council's continued support will be
essential to enhance those efforts - through the
provision of training programmes and mobile training
teams, translating training materials into the six official
languages of the United Nations and funding.
Strengthening conduct and discipline is one of
our key priorities. We are encouraged that the number
of allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse in
peacekeeping appears to be decreasing. But we are
also mindful that we must be vigilant in our prevention
efforts and seek accountability whenever the zero-
tolerance policy has been violated. We must continue to
do so in strong partnership with Member States.

Conduct-and-discipline issues are an essential
component of predeployment and in-mission induction
training, which is mandatory for all civilian, military
and police peacekeeping personnel. The Secretariat
is helping troop- and police-contributing countries to
improve their predeployment training on the prevention
of sexual exploitation and abuse, by making core
training materials available and deploying mobile
training teams to troop- and police-contributing
countries in response to requests from those countries.

I am pleased that our collective commitment
to better train and equip peacekeepers has led to a
number of effective triangular partnerships among
the Secretariat, Member States that have expertise
and resources, and Member States that deploy our
uniformed peacekeepers. We have facilitated and
conducted training for 330 uniformed engineers
and 2,700 uniformed signals personnel. Many of the
trainees, including 23 female officers, have deployed
to missions, including the African Union Mission in
Somalia, which we support. Following the success
of engineering training in Kenya, we are launching a
field medic assistant course in Uganda this year and
will conduct engineering training in Viet Nam and
Indonesia in 2020.

We have made notable progress, but much still
needs to be done. Training gaps remain in critical areas
such as weapons handling, first aid, human rights and
protection issues. To ensure the long-term sustainability
of triangular and other partnerships and initiatives,
I urge Member States to consider increased funding,
in-kind contributions of equipment and the provision of
trainers. I must also stress how important it is that we
receive far more nominations of women to take part in
training. We are grateful to those Member States that
have sponsored 50/50 male/female officer courses, and
we ask more Member States to do so.

Improving performance is at the heart of
our collective effort. We look forward to our
continued collaboration.

