Mr. Jagne (Gambia): In his widely acclaimed report
entitled "The causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa", the
Secretary-General defined post-conflict peace-building as

"actions undertaken at the end of a conflict to
consolidate peace and prevent a recurrence of armed
confrontation". (S/1998/318, para. 63)

Since the absence of conflict does not necessarily
mean the prevalence of peace, the consolidation process
for the restoration of durable peace should start almost
immediately - and we cannot agree more that time is of
the essence. With the help of the rest of the international
community - coupled with the required degree of
political will - reintegration, rehabilitation and
reconstruction programmes should be put in place as
quickly as possible. This is one way of creating
confidence-building measures that in turn could facilitate
efforts geared towards national reconciliation.

This presupposes, of course, that, should there be a
large number of refugees and displaced persons, the
priority of priorities would be to ensure their safe
repatriation and resettlement, with special attention given
to women, children and the elderly.

It will be recalled that a few months ago, when we
discussed a related topic - I am referring to the question
of "Children and armed conflict" - Ambassador Olara
Otunnu spoke at length on post-conflict peace-building
and his plans to set up a pilot project in Sierra Leone for
this purpose.

In neighbouring Liberia the first United Nations
Peace-building Support Office has been established, and
we can learn a lot from the experience acquired there to
establish similar offices elsewhere. A United Nations
presence, no matter how symbolic, always provides a
feeling of security for the local populations, and, by
extension, it has a salutary effect on confidence-building
measures generally.

For all intents and purposes, the success of any
peace-building programme depends to a large extent on
the availability of resources. This is why a concerted and
coordinated effort is indispensable for the effective
mobilization of the necessary domestic and international
resources.

In addition to the basic short-term peace-building
programmes, there should be a sustained effort to support
medium- and long-term programmes as well - such as
the strengthening of national institutions, monitoring
elections, the protection and promotion of human rights,
good governance and so on and so forth.
This is all fine, but the crux of the matter is to
address with equal zeal the question of sustainable
development. Experience has shown that widespread
poverty breeds conflict. It is difficult to envisage how

 

democracy, good governance, the rule of law and respect
for human rights can flourish in conditions of abject
poverty. In order to achieve durable peace, the people must
first be empowered. Then there will be no need to take up
arms again.

