Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): The
Mission of the Republic of Panama is grateful for the
singular opportunity of addressing the Council in the
presence of Mr. Jose Ramos Horta, Prime Minister of
the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, since it gives
us an opportunity to welcome him and express our
respect for his dedication and resolute commitment to
the welfare of the people of Timor-Leste. It is not very
often that the Council has the honour of welcoming a
Nobel Peace Prize winner who also plays an
outstanding political role in a conflict situation in a
country to which the Security Council and the United
Nations have dedicated particular attention.

Along with earlier speakers, I am grateful for the
detailed and comprehensive report from the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Atul Khare, who is also the head of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT). We also
wish to congratulate him on his appointment.

The delegation of Panama has listened carefully
to the report on the progress achieved and the
difficulties encountered by Timor-Leste in its effort to
carry out the first elections since independence. We
have also taken note of comments on the particular
support by UNMIT to promote favourable conditions
for the holding of fair, credible elections that are in
keeping with international standards.

However, as we have had opportunity to say in
the Council in the past, transparent and credible
elections are important, but they are merely one step in
the complex process of consolidating a stable, just and
representative democracy. This is the process that will
give the people the confidence that the Government is
able to secure social peace and sustainable
development within the fair and inclusive rule of law.
But none of this can be achieved without genuine
commitment of national actors. It is in this context that
we appreciate the efforts undertaken by President
Xanana Gusmao's Dialogue Commission, which has
been welcomed by Timorese leaders at all the nation's
political and social levels. We are convinced that
UNMIT has a crucial part to play in this process, as
shown by, inter alia, the legal and standard-setting
advice that is being implemented and by the integrated
coordination mechanism set up among the various
actors associated with the United Nations to arrive at a
single criterion.

Many difficulties have to be overcome in order to
create conditions propitious to the holding of national
elections. We urge the Timorese Government to
redouble its efforts to consolidate the necessary
institutions and mechanisms in Dili and elsewhere to
make sure that the elections can be held within an
atmosphere of transparency and peace.

On earlier occasions, Panama has stated in this
Council that efforts in favour of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding must be coordinated in a comprehensive
and consistent manner, so as to ensure that countries
that put an end to hostilities have programmes,
institutions and capacities enabling them to implement
the measures necessary to the achievement of
development that is both economically sustainable and
socially responsible.

That is how the United Nations Integrated

Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) is carrying out its
functions. In the Secretary-General's own words,

"UNMIT functions as an integrated Mission,
which aims to bring together the peacekeeping,
peacebuilding, humanitarian and development
actors of the United Nations system". (S/2007/50, paragraph 2)

Consequently the Government of Panama
energetically supports the Secretary-General's proposal
to extend UNMIT's mandate for a 12 month period, to
signal the Security Council's commitment to the people
and Government of Timor-Leste. Because of the
priority that should be attached to deploying police and
personnel for electoral assistance from UNMIT in
districts outside Dili to prepare support for the
elections, we also support deployment of an additional
police unit.

