Mr. Brammertz: I thank Council members for the
opportunity to again address them on the Office of the
Prosecutor's progress in completing its mandate.

In this reporting period, we continued to make
every effort to complete our work on the Tribunal's final
trials and appeals. As the President already mentioned,
four final trials and three appeals are ongoing. My
Office is awaiting the issuance of trial judgements in
two trials, those ofKaradzic and Seselj. On the Mladie
case, we remain very focused on responding to the
evidence presented by the defence and, in the Hadzie
case, my Office is exploring all reasonable options to
make possible the completion of that trial.

In relation to appeals, during the reporting period
my Office presented its oral arguments in the Stanisie
and Simatovic case, and we note the scheduled delivery
of the appeal judgement in that case next week. Next
week we will also present our oral arguments in the
Stanisie and Zupljanin case. And finally, the Prlic et al.
appeal is now fully briefed and we await the scheduling
of the oral arguments.

Attrition remains a persistent challenge. During
the reporting period, many of our Appeals Division
staff were recruited by the Office of the Prosector of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. Also, we have seen significant attrition
over the past few months in the Mladic' trial team.
Nonetheless, my Office is overcoming those and other
challenges. We have continued to downsize, abolishing
50 per cent of our posts since January 2014. By
improving the efficiency of our operations and flexibly
managing our staff resources, we have ensured that
attrition does not delay the completion of our work. In
the final phase of our mandate, we will increasingly
look to the Office of the Prosector of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for
support through double-hatting and other cost-efficient
arrangements, just as we supported the Mechanism in
its start-up phase.

The countries of the former Yugoslavia continue to
cooperate with my Office and to respond as required to
our requests for assistance. Even at this late stage in the
Tribunal's mandate, State cooperation remains essential
to enable the completion of our work on schedule. I
therefore trust that, with regard to the contempt case
made public last week, Serbia will continue its recent
record of full cooperation and appropriately execute the
Tribunal's arrest warrants.

With regard to the category II cases that my Office
transferred to national prosecutors, my previous
reports noted our significant concerns about delays by
the Prosecutor's Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina in
processing those cases. During my mission to Sarajevo
in May, the Chief Prosecutor gave me his assurances
that prosecutorial decisions would be taken by the end
of the year in all remaining category 11 cases. I am
pleased to report that, in large measure, that pledge has
been honoured. While a few cases may not be finalized
until early next year, it is clear that over the last six
months the Prosecutor's Office redoubled its efforts
and redeployed significant resources to the cases
transferred by my Office a few years ago.

Throughout the region, however, there continue
to be a number of concerns. Progress in national war
crimes cases is uneven and still fragile.

In Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Prosecutor's
Office has reported that it filed a significant number of
indictments in the past few years. That is the positive
news. My Office welcomes these results, but also notes
that the targets established in the National War Crimes
Strategy will not be met by a significant margin. My
Office encourages the Prosecutor's Office in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to dedicate its efforts to prosecuting the
most complex and highest-priority cases, in accordance
with the National War Crimes Strategy. In addition,
cooperation between prosecutors' offices at the state,
entity, district and cantonal levels remains problematic,
and there is general consensus that the justice sector is
not yet meeting the public's expectations.

In Serbia, important results continue to be
achieved, including in regional cooperation and the
exhumation of mass graves. My report (S/2015/874, annex II) emphasizes that the accountability process
in Serbia is at a critical crossroads. Further progress
in Serbia will require strong political commitment. In
this regard, the fact that last week senior Government
ministers escorted and welcomed a convicted war
criminal, General Vladimir Lazarevie, back to Serbia
upon his release sends absolutely the wrong signal.

In Croatia, there was an important development in
regional cooperation with the transfer of one Category
II case from Bosnia and Herzegovina to Croatian
authorities. In addition, Croatian authorities last
week began exhumations of a mass grave believed to
contain the remains of Croatian Serbs killed during
Operation Storm. The Croatian judiciary now has the
important opportunity to visibly demonstrate that the
accountability process continues in an independent and
impartial manner.

While recognizing the progress that has been made,
it is clear that throughout the former Yugoslavia, more
accountability can and should be achieved. Victims
from every group are dissatisfied that investigations
of many notorious incidents remain unresolved after
so many years. While those who directly committed
crimes are being brought to trial, impunity remains
the rule for senior and mid-level leaders who planned,
ordered and facilitated the crimes. Regional cooperation
continues to face many challenges, and in some
respects has even regressed. These challenges can be
addressed with political will and appropriate technical
assistance. Within existing resources, my Office will
continue to support national judiciaries in achieving
fuller accountability, as we have since the completion
strategy was adopted.

Missing persons from all sides of the conflict must
be found and identified. Enormous progress has been
made, thanks to the work of organizations like the
International Commission on Missing Persons, but far
too many families still do not know the fate of their loved
ones. During my mission to Sarajevo a few weeks ago,
I met with national authorities responsible for missing
persons and their international partners. They were
unanimous in their opinion that if further meaningful
progress is to be achieved, those who know where
mass graves and other burial sites are located must be
encouraged to come forward. Yet today in many parts
of society, war criminals are still glorified, and people
providing information about missing persons risk being
branded traitors and exposed to possible retribution.
My Office therefore calls upon all States of the region
to undertake prominent public-awareness campaigns
encouraging witnesses, including perpetrators of the
crimes and their associates, to come forward with
information about missing persons.

As the end of our mandate approaches, my Office
has a limited window of opportunity to distil our key
operational insights and make them available to others
in the future. We believe this is critical in order to
maximize the value of investments in our work and
strengthen future prosecutions by other courts. As a first
contribution, my Office has now completed a detailed
assessment of our work on prosecuting conflict-related
sexual violence crimes, which will be published in
April next year. We have taken an honest look at the
challenges we faced, the strategies we adopted, the
results we achieved and the things we could have done
much better. We have crafted the publication to be a
practical resource for other prosecutors grappling with
similar challenges.

In conclusion, the foremost objective of my Office
is completing our remaining cases, in accordance with
the completion strategy. We will continue downsizing
staff and significantly reducing expenditures. We will
also continue to support and build capacity in national
criminal justice sectors prosecuting war crimes in the
Western Balkans. I firmly believe that as a result of the
Council's leadership, the former Yugoslavia is today one
of the most successful examples of complementarity in
international criminal justice.

Yet the completion strategy is not simply a matter
of winding down operations and transitioning our
responsibilities to national courts. At the Tribunal,
our final cases are among the most important we have
undertaken. It is anticipated that, in a few months, the
trial judgement will be delivered in the case against
Radovan Karadzie, former President of the Republika
Srpska. The significance of this moment should not be
overlooked.

While in accordance with the mandate given by the
Security Council, my Office brought many prosecutions
against military and civilian leaders from all parties to
the conflicts, the Karadzie and Mlaa'z'c' trials perhaps
best exemplify why the Tribunal was created, as well
as the many challenges we have had to overcome. For
that reason, their successful completion will be an
unmistakable demonstration of the commitment shown
by the Council, the United Nations and its Member
States to international peace, security and justice.

