Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): Allow me to join other
delegations in thanking you, Mr. President, for your
initiative in organizing this important debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

I should like to join the representative of Cote
d'Ivoire in supporting the initiative adopted by the
members of the Economic Community of West African
States as a group with regard to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

This debate is very timely given that, in
contemporary armed conflicts, which have been
exacerbated in recent times, innocent civilians,
especially women and children, often constitute an
overwhelming majority of the victims.

My delegation also thanks the High Commissioner
for Human Rights. Ms. Navi Pillay, and the Director
for International Law and Cooperation of International
Committee of the Red Cross, Philip Spoerri. In their
informative briefings, they brought to the fore the
heavy price that civilians pay as they face daily threats
of violence and death when they find themselves
inadvertently caught up in the middle of a conflict.

Nigeria welcomes the Secretary-General's progress
report (S/2012/376) and commends its analytical depth
and recommendations. Judging from its wide-ranging
perspectives, the protection of civilians in armed conflict
is an important yet daunting global challenge. Despite
being protected under international humanitarian and
human rights law, civilians continue to be victims of
violence. Therefore the efforts to build consensus on the
subject and the progressive development of normative
frameworks to address civilian protection challenges,
including resolutions 1738 (2006), 1888 (2009) and
1894 (2009), are encouraging developments.

We recognize the importance of the collective
efforts of the various entities of the United Nations
to ensure apposite protection of civilians from the
terrors of war. The Security Council has set important
precedents for the protection of civilians through its
resolutions and the mandates of United Nations peace
operations. Resolution 1265 (1999) and 1674 (2006)
were resolute and comprehensive in their provisions
for the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Other
United Nations organs and entities, in particular the
General Assembly Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, in which Nigeria plays an important role,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
have included civilian protection in their agendas and
enhanced their efforts to protect endangered civilian
populations.

Despite those notable developments, the grim
reality of today is that civilians are still casualties of
conflict and the direct targets of abduction, sexual
violence and the denial of humanitarian access. Recent
developments have underscored the failure to comply
with the law. We continue to encounter obstacles as
we endeavour to address the five core challenges
articulated in the Secretary-General's report.

The assault on civilians, especially women and
children, and the denial of humanitarian assistance
in conflict zones illustrate the magnitude of the task
of civilian protection. Therefore, difficult protection
challenges remain in the Congo, Syria, Afghanistan,
Somalia and many other areas of conflict. Indeed, in
our own subregion, the situation in Mali may present
serious protection challenges for which the international
community must be prepared. As stakeholders in
international peace and security, our efforts should
be directed at addressing the constraints that militate
against the effective protection of civilians.

Nigeria has made great strides in the area of
protecting civilians through its contributions to various
peacekeeping operations around the world. At the
subregional level, the Economic Community of West
African States has also, through its steady intervention
in conflicts, continued to remind States and other
parties to conflict of their obligations to respect and
protect civilians, as well as support them in meeting
those obligations. Therefore, in order to rededicate
ourselves to the moral undertaking to protect defenceless
civilians in conflict situations, it is imperative that the
international community, especially the United Nations,
deepen its commitment to bolstering accountability for
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law. It is time to translate our words into action
and adopt standardized measures to bring persistent
perpetrators of violations against children to justice.
In that connection, the Council should take the lead by
adopting targeted measures against such perpetrators.

Going a step further, we are cognizant of the
fact that State and non-State actors alike can and do
instigate and prosecute wars and armed conflict of
which civilians bear the brunt. It therefore behoves
the Council to move beyond discussing the impact of
conflict and begin to adopt resolutions that criminalize
war. Such action would serve as a means not only of
potentially settling disputes but also as a measure of
protective, preventive diplomacy.

I must stress that our growing understanding of
the needs and vulnerabilities of civilians in armed
conflict must be marked by the ability and capacity to
protect those same civilians. There is a legal obligation
to ensure compliance with international humanitarian
and human rights law, where the protection of civilians,
including, in particular, health-care providers, women
and children, is the main focus. Parallel, and equally
important, is the moral obligation we also have to prevent
attacks against health-care facilities and providers;
violence against women and children, especially sexual
violence, from which women and girls suffer; and the
other various forms of debasement to which innocent
civilians are subjected in times of conflict.

It is important that we consolidate and ensure the
implementation of the existing normative framework
on the protection of civilians, bearing in mind the
challenges. The international community should
remain vigilant and bear its fair share of our collective
responsibility to protect civilians. Ifwe act purposefully
and in concert, we can better shield civilians from the
ravages of armed conflict.

