I thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her Office's thirty-first report on the situation in Darfur, pursuant to Security Council resolution 1593 (2005), and for her informative briefing today. I also wish to welcome the Permanent Representative of the Sudan to this meeting. Tunisia welcomes the surrender and transfer to the custody of the ICC yesterday of suspect Ali Kushayb from the Central African Republic on counts of war crimes and crimes against humanity in Darfur. This is a momentous development in international justice for core crimes and a reminder that perpetrators of such atrocities cannot enjoy impunity. But in order to better appraise international accountability for serious crimes committed in Darfur, we must situate prosecutions in their proper contemporary context. The need for resolution 1593 (2005) and for the ICC's intervention back in 2005 in the Sudan/Darfur situation reflected the failure then to prevent mass atrocities. Now the future of international engagement in the new Sudan is to be guided by the principle of Sudanese ownership of its ongoing transition and by a renewed sense of partnership, cooperation and support for the Sudanese Government from the Security Council and the broader international community. It is within this framework, which was charted last week by the Council, that Tunisia views the future ICC course in the Sudan in relation to accountability for core international crimes allegedly committed by Darfur suspects: in a manner consistent with the principles of complementarity of the Rome Statute and of Sudanese ownership of post-conflict justice. The ICC is said to be a backstop to national jurisdictions - an ultimate guarantee against impunity. ICC trials must not therefore come at the expense of domestic ownership of the political transition and judicial capacity-building to ensure sustainable and lasting rule of law. Tunisia emphasizes that accountability in Darfur is best advanced through dialogue and the empowerment of national proceedings, premised on both the primacy of domestic jurisdiction and the necessity for international justice. We are encouraged by the commitment of the ICC to maintain a cooperative relationship with the Government of the Sudan based on a spirit of respect and constructive engagement. Tunisia also praises the commitment of Sudanese Prime Minister Hamdok to implementing the human rights, accountability and rule of law provisions of the Constitutional Document. But, despite their best commitment, Sudanese authorities will require both time and resources for institutional capacity-building in the context of a challenging post-conflict transformation. Sudanese courts should therefore be given a fair opportunity and breathing space to exercise jurisdiction, thus making complementarity a practical reality. Similarly, Sudanese authorities may explore opportunities provided for by the complementarity scheme as a tool for capacity- building, burden-sharing and a division of labour. Meaningful interaction between the ICC and the Sudanese Government is therefore necessary to steer efforts towards common goals and help foster options for the joint objective of effective investigations and prosecutions, with due account taken of the constraints and realities of the Sudanese transition. In conclusion, let me reiterate Tunisia's unwavering commitment to the Rome Statute and support for the impartial and independent work of the ICC, free from any interference. At a time when the multilateral system faces many challenges, it is crucial to empower the only permanent international court as part of efforts to promote a rules-based world order and support the global fight against impunity for the gravest crimes.
