Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are also grateful to Mr. Guehenno,
Ms. McAskie and Mr. Fall for their comprehensive
information on the situation in West Africa.

The Russian Federation is deeply concerned
about the difficult situation that has come about in that
subregion, and in particular about the explosive
situation on Guinea's borders with Liberia and Sierra
Leone. We support the efforts undertaken by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) to settle this problem on the basis of good-
neighbourly relations, a rejection of the use of force
and the development of agreed political measures to
halt the activities of armed rebel groups on the territory
of those States.

A solution to this problem would allow for
substantial progress towards eliminating the
humanitarian crisis that today threatens the civilian
populations of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. That
would establish conditions for the safe return of
refugees. A personal meeting between the leaders of
the countries members of the Mano River Union could
be essential for achieving this objective.

In our view, building trust in the subregion could
also be furthered by the deployment of a contingent
from the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) to the areas
of most intensive activity by the unlawful armed
groups. We believe that such an operation should be
based on the agreement of all States on whose
territories it would be conducted and on the basis of a
mandate that includes an enforcement component
based on the authorization of the Security Council.

On the whole, the Russian Federation advocates
strengthening coordination between United Nations
and ECOWAS efforts to settle the situation in West
Africa and in averting and preventing conflicts. We are
impressed by the proposals in that regard contained in
the report of the Inter-Agency Mission to West Africa.

There can be no doubt that the most destabilizing
element of the situation in West Africa continues to be
the conflict in Sierra Leone. We greatly value the
efforts of the leadership and personnel of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) to settle
this conflict. We note that there has recently been a
tangible turn for the better in this area. In our view, this
demonstrates the correctness of the strategy, adopted
by the Security Council, to combine strong pressure on
the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) with
encouragement for the process to find a political
settlement of the conflict. Appeals to retreat from such
a strategy would only fan the flames of armed conflict
in the subregion.

As progress is made towards a settlement and as
State administration expands over the territory now in
the hands of the rebels, we expect that the Government
of Sierra Leone will step up its compliance with the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programme for ex-combatants. Those efforts should
have the support of UNAMSIL. We agree in principle
with arguments put forward in the report of the Inter-
Agency Mission calling for a zonal approach to solving
problems related to DDR and other aspects of post-
conflict peace-building in the Mano River Union
region. However, we have some doubts about the
appropriateness of expanding UNAMSIL's mandate by
extending its activities to the territory of all three
States of the Union, primarily because of the differing
types of problems that exist in those countries.

We believe that it would be preferable to adopt a
policy that would focus on enhancing the coordination
of the efforts of the international community, with a
key role being played by West African subregional
structures.

Of key significance to the settlement of the
conflict in Sierra Leone is full compliance by Liberia
with the demand of the Security Council that it end its
support for the RUF, as set out in Security Council
resolution 1343 (2001). Here I would emphasize that it
should end its support, not its contacts, with the Sierra
Leonean rebels, within the framework of collective
efforts to encourage them to achieve peace. This is the
objective of the sanctions with regard to Liberia, and
relevant steps taken by its authorities would be duly
valued by the Security Council.

We take note of Monrovia's statement on
measures adopted in compliance with resolution 1343
(2001) and of its intention to continue to cooperate
with the Security Council. We deem valid ECOWAS'
recommendation concerning the establishment of a
mechanism for monitoring the implementation of
sanctions and Liberia's compliance with the demands
of the Security Council.

We call upon all States fully to abide by the
provisions of resolution 1343 (2001) to prevent armed
individuals and groups from using their territory to
prepare and commit attacks on neighbouring countries
and refrain from any action that might contribute to
further destabilization of the situation on the borders
between Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.

