Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2228 (2015) renewing the mandate of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). The need for that mission is greater
than ever. As Council members heard so powerfully
in the Arria Formula meeting earlier this month, the
region saw, this past year, the worst suffering for a
decade. Darfur now has more than 2.5 million long-term
displaced people. The Sudan has the greatest number
of internally displaced persons in Africa. Millions go
hungry, and humanitarian access is too often limited by
parties to the conflict. We remain deeply concerned at
the growing reports of abuses and violations of human
rights, including those that emerged from Tabit last
year.

Let us now set aside our differences and give our
full support to UNAMID, so that it can continue its vital
mission. UNAMID should now focus on improving its
protection of civilians, conflict mediation and support
for a peace process. We welcome that it will continue its
important human rights role. Serious and unanswered
allegations of abuses and violations of human rights
have dogged the Sudan for over a decade. We encourage
UNAMID to monitor, verify and draw the attention of
the authorities to those reports as a matter of priority.

UNAMID cannot continue forever. Through the
resolution just adopted, we have set out that UNAMID's
long-term planning should be based on progress
towards a set of agreed benchmarks. A political solution
to the conflict, starting with a cessation of hostilities,
is fundamental to achieving those targets. We call on
all parties to the conflict to work together towards that
goal.

As the African Union Peace and Security Council
set out in its communique, we hope that the Government
of the Sudan will play a more constructive role with
UNAMID. We all share the objective of a peaceful,
stable and prosperous Sudan. Ultimately, a well-
functioning mission that is able to fulfil its mandate
will be in a position to leave safely much sooner, in the
best interests of all parties.

However, until the Government of the Sudan and
the United Nations are working together to resolve
the terrible situation in Darfur, we cannot consider an
imminent exit for the mission. We simply cannot afford
to lose focus. In renewing UNAMID's mandate for
another year, we have taken the right step to prevent
that from happening.

