Mr. Mayr-Harting (spoke in French): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union and
its member States. The acceding country Croatia; the
candidate countries Montenegro, Serbia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Armenia, the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine,
align themselves with this statement.

I would like, first of all, to thank Mr. Nigel Fisher
for his briefing, and the representative of Haiti for
his statement. During our last statement before the
Security Council, the European Union welcomed the
relative stabilization of the political scene since the
appointment, in May 2012, of the new Prime Minister
Mr. Laurent Lamothe (see S/PV.6842). The European
Union also expressed the hope that political reforms
would move forward thanks to the enactment, early in
2012, of several amendments to the 1987 Constitution.
We reaffirm our full support for the efforts of President
Martelly and Prime Minister Lamothe to move forward
in the economic, political and social renewal of Haiti.

In that context, we regret to note that the ongoing
tense political climate, the lack of cooperation and a
tedency towards pointless political confrontation have
to date impeded the progress of those reforms, which
the still-fragile Haitian democractic system desperately
needs. It is particularly worrisome that the different
parties concerned have not yet succeeded in agreeing
upon the establishment of an electoral council, which
has been an obstacle to setting a date for the forthcoming
elections. We can only reiterate our appeal to all
stakeholders to work responsibly and in the interest
of Haitian society as the whole. The European Union
supports the Secretary-General's request for free, fair
and transparent elections to be held without delay, and
reiterates our readiness to financially contribute to the
convening of future elections and to the strengthening
of the capacities of the future permanent electoral
council.

Nevertheless, we know that the slow-down in the
reform process is not limited to electoral matters. We
share the concerns expressed by the Secretary-General
in his report (S/2013/139) in a certain number of areas
where little progress, even backsliding, has been noted.
In that regard, I am referring to persistent shortcomings
in the justice sector, arbitrary appointments in many
key areas of State administration, incidents of forced
evictions of displaced persons still living in camps and
a continuing climate of impunity, among other things.
On the whole, those observations lead to very mixed
results regarding the improvement of governance, even
though President Martelly has rightly made the rule of
law a priority of his presidency.

The European Union will continue, within the
framework of its political dialogue with Haiti, to
remind all interested stakeholders of the urgency of
adopting a more inclusive approach in inter-institutional
relations and to work for national consensus on a small
but realistic number of political and socioeconomic
reforms on which to move forward in cooperation with
international partners.

With respect to certain aspects of the report of the
Secretary-General, in particular on activities related
to the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), the European Union reiterates its
support and appreciation for the contribution to security
and stability that the Mission continues to provide
in Haiti. We welcome the consolidation plan for the
Mission and the focus of its future activities around the
four priority areas proposed by the Secretary-General.

Hand in hand with other donors, and in the
framework of its programmes for cooperation with
Haiti, the European Union will make its contribution
to fulfilling the responsibilities that will no longer be
part of MINUSTAH's mandate, as well as to assisting
in the progressive handover of MINUSTAH's mandated
competencies to the Haitian authorities. In that vein, the
support of the European Union for a broad range of State
administration reforms, announced by the Government
in November 2012, should facilitate that handover by
improving the capacities of Haitian institutions.

The European Union will continue to consider
other possible contributions in security sector
reform, including in transborder cooperation with
the Dominican Republic in order to back the Haitian
Government's activities.
