Mr. Gata Mavita Wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): As the
French presidency of the Security Council comes to an
end, allow me to note the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, French Minister for Europe
and Foreign Affairs, who has done us the honour of
presiding over this meeting. His presence here testifies
to the importance that his country has always attached to
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I would also like to thank him for this opportunity to
address the Council at this meeting, which is devoted to
the adoption of resolution 2463 (2019), on the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO).

I would like to especially thank Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres for his determination and personal
involvement in the quest for a solution and lasting
peace to the situation in the eastern part of my country.
I would also like to express to the Council the gratitude
of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and its people for the efforts that it has continued
to make for more than two decades to bring peace and
stability back to my country.

I would be remiss ifI did not also thank Ms. Mapisa-
Nqakula, Minister of Defence of South Africa, and
Mr. Marcel Amon-Tanoh, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of C6te d'Ivoire, who have personally come to attend
this meeting, thereby demonstrating the friendship and
fraternity their countries share with mine.

My delegation welcomes the Security Council's
adoption of resolution 2463 (2019), which renews the
mandate of MONUSCO for a period of nine months.
That minimal period will enable the Government of my
country to take charge of the matter, become familiar
with it and be able to take an informed decision on a
number of the issues that require its attention. That
time will also be used to calmly prepare the strategic
dialogue and exit strategy of MONUSCO.

My delegation is pleased to note that the protection
of civilians is at the top ofthe mandate's priorities. That
will allow MONUSCO to benefit from the necessary
means to provide support to the Government, which
has the primary responsibility to protect persons
and property throughout the national territory. The
complex situation in the eastern part of my country
and the suffering of our people affected by the abuses
of the various armed groups oblige us to combine our
efforts and fight together for their eradication and the
restoration of lasting peace in that part of the country.

In the same vein, my delegation welcomes
the consensus reached on the importance of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process, even if it does not figure among the priorities
of the mandate. In our opinion, that programme can
effectively contribute to the eradication of armed
groups, if sufficient financial resources are available to
enable the successful social reintegration of combatants
who lay down their arms.

We welcome the continuation of the Force
Intervention Brigade in its current configuration with
a mandate that remains offensive. As we stressed
in our statement to the Council on 18 March, the
operational capabilities of the Brigade, as well as of
all MONUSCO'S troops, must be strengthened with
the appropriate equipment to enable it to deal with
asymmetrical warfare (see S/PV.8486). With regard to
the armed groups that are wreaking havoc in the eastern
part of my country, my Government will formally
request the Security Council, within the framework of
the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic ofthe
Congo, to include the Allied Democratic Forces on the
list of terrorist groups.

My delegation is pleased to note that the resolution
recalls, as we stressed before the Council on 26 March,
the importance of the involvement of the signatory
countries in the effective implementation of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework to help establish
lasting peace in the region, and more particularly in the
eastern part of my country (see S/PV.8491).

With regard to the resizing oftroops, it is regrettable
that the Council has not adopted the Government's
point of view, or the Secretary-General's proposals,
and that the strategic dialogue must conclude before a
decision is taken. However, we welcome the principle
of organizing that dialogue in collaboration with the
Government, in accordance with the stipulations of
resolution 2277 (2016).

Moreover, as clearly stated in the letter addressed
to the Secretary-General of the United Nations on the
subject, the highest authority of my country expressed
the wish that the political mandate entrusted to
MONUSCO should be limited solely to supporting
the Government in the implementation of reforms. My
delegation hopes that the wording of resolution 2463
(2019) with regard to the mandate accurately reflects
the view of my Government and that the mandate will
effectively provide it with the support it needs to carry
out its reforms in order to succeed in the challenge of
restoring peace and rebuilding the country. In addition,
my delegation believes that taking into account the
evidence of the illicit trafficking in natural resources
in the solution of the crisis in the eastern part of my
country is a positive option on which to be capitalized.

My delegation appreciates the Security Council's
recognition of the first steps taken by the President
of the Republic in the area of human rights. My
country recognizes that the road ahead is long and that
challenges remain, and promises to continue its efforts
to make a reality of the Head of State's desire for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to be a State of
rights and a haven of peace for all Congolese, as well
as for all those who have chosen our country as their
second homeland.

On the issues of the protection of children, sexual
violence, the humanitarian situation and so many
other matters of concern covered by the resolution,
the Government remains committed and will pursue
the actions laid out in our President's programme in
order to improve the situation on the ground in those
various domains.

I would like to conclude with two observations.
The first relates to the agreed language in several
resolutions, which my delegation believes is in some
instances outdated and should adapt to the current
circumstances and times. The second has to do with
the translation of the resolution, the French version of
which does not seem to match the original English,
particularly in paragraph 11, where the translation does
not reflect the development of the text. It is therefore
important that the translation service reread the entire
text in order to produce a faithful translation that
reflects the adopted version.
I wish to assure the Council, without abandoning
our substantive concerns about the various issues
covered in the resolution, that my Government has
taken note and will continue to work with the United
Nations, as it has done in the past, for the benefit of the
Congolese people.

Finally, I would like to thank MONUSCO, its
Intervention Brigade and all troop-contributing
countries for their work throughout the mandate that
hasjust ended. We hope that MONUSCO's new mandate
will be the culmination of efforts to bring sustainable
peace and stability to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

