Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I should like
to thank the United Kingdom presidency for having
convened this meeting under the agenda item on the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. I
also thank Ms. Guebre Sellassie, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Sahel, for her briefing.

Unfortunately, the Sahel region continues to face a
security situation characterized by the ongoing crisis in
Libya and many enduring threats, including terrorism,
in the Lake Chad Basin. As indicated in the report of
the Secretary-General on progress towards the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel (S/2015/866),
security threats in the region - terrorism and violent
extremism in particular - require the countries of the
region to prioritize security, undermining efforts in
equally essential areas.

The major source of the terrorist threat in the
Sahel is Libya, which is engulfed in total chaos and
where a multitude of heavily armed terrorist groups
find safe haven and flourish. Moreover, the absence
of a Government of national unity that is capable of
restoring security in the country is fuelling the threat
to security in the Sahel. In that regard, Chad is deeply
concerned by the establishment and entrenchment of
a Daesh stronghold in southern Libya. In facing this
threat, we stress the urgent need to do everything
possible to thwart the expansionism ofthe Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and to assist Libyans in creating
a Government of national unity.

In the Lake Chad Basin, the terrorist group Boko
Haram has been severely weakened, although it
continues to carry out deadly asymmetrical attacks

on innocent civilians. The group is no longer able to
launch headlong attacks against military positions or
to conquer cities, as it did some months ago. Despite
its modest means and an especially difficult economic
situation, Chad has contributed significantly to the fight
against barbarism and obscurantism. On the various
fronts of the fight against Boko Haram in neighbouring
countries, Chad has lost dozens of brave soldiers and
made significant financial sacrifices in its own budget.
We reiterate our appeal to the international community
and our bilateral and multilateral partners to support the
efforts of the countries of the Sahel and the Lake Chad
Basin, and call on the African Union to accelerate the
establishment of a trust fund to finance the operations
of the Multinational Joint Task Force.

Aware of the magnitude of the terrorist threat, at
their November summit in N'Djamena, the countries
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel) decided
to pool their efforts in the areas of security and
development. In that regard, we note, among other
measures, the creation of a joint regional military
force and a regional military academy, the launch of a
regional aviation company, the construction of a railway
line connecting the five countries of the region, and the
abolition of visa requirements among them. These new
initiatives strengthen those already undertaken in the
framework of the Ministerial Coordination Platform for
the Sahel, ably chaired by Mali. As I thank that country
for its important efforts, Chad, in its twofold capacity as
entering President of the G-5 Sahel and the Ministerial
Coordination Platform, will continue to emphasize the
need to strengthen multifaceted cooperation in the areas
of security and development in the Sahel in general and
among the members of the G-5 Sahel in particular.

Along these lines, and given the close correlation
between security and development, Chad stresses
the urgent need to mobilize significant international
resources to finance specific projects for young people
and women. Promoting self-employment for those two
social sectors would reduce threats to peace, security
and development, including violent extremism, armed
conflict, trafficking of all kinds, and migration. We
encourage the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
to pursue her efforts to raise awareness and galvanize
development partners with a view to the effective
implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel.

To that end, we underscore the need for the G-5
Sahel countries to participate fully in the definition,
implementation, follow-up and assessment of priority
development projects. We also stress the need to bolster
the Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Sahel and to consider very carefully
the transfer of the Office to the headquarters of the
permanent secretariat of the G-5 Sahel. The countries
of the region have made this request repeatedly, and
it should be considered during the December strategic
review of the Office. In the same vein, given the hope
raised by the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel, the Security Council must meet at least three
times a year to discuss the many challenges in the Sahel
and the implementation of the Strategy.

In conclusion, we recall the utmost importance of
launching a United Nations multi-donor trust fund for
the Sahel so as to meet the immense expectations of the
countries of the region, pursuant to the recommendation
of the Secretary-General in his report.

