Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Madam President, for the
initiative of convening this debate. We believe that it is
very timely for the Security Council to have an open
meeting on the question of Angola in its entirety, that
is, to consider the military, political and humanitarian
aspects of the conflict. I thank Ambassador Gambari,
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General, for his
report and for the excellent work he is doing. I would
like also to welcome the Minister for Social Affairs of
Angola, Mr. Albino Malungo.

The primary responsibility for the serious
deterioration of the military and political situation in
Angola rests with UNITA. There is no doubt that Jonas
Savimbi systematically failed to comply with the
obligations stemming from the Lusaka Protocol of
1994. He failed to rise to the challenge to live in peace
and democracy. Having said that, in our view there is
no viable long-term military solution to the situation in
Angola. Almost 25 years of fratricidal struggle have
borne out this statement. Institutional stability and
sustained economic growth in Angola can be achieved
only through broad-ranging, inclusive and candid
political dialogue, with the participation of all sectors,
particularly civil society.

In our View, the Lusaka Protocol, with the
adjustments required, continues to provide an adequate
basis for the durable resolution of the conflict. Within
the context of bolstering democratic institutions, we
note with satisfaction President Dos Santos' decision to
hold general elections in 2001.

The establishment and effective operation of the
United Nations Office in Angola is a step in the right
direction and ensures the continued presence of our
Organization in that country. With the consent of the
Government of Angola, its structure should be
strengthened gradually. We support a multidimensional
United Nations presence in Angola, because it seems to
us that this would be an important instrument in
seeking effective means of restoring peace and
consolidating the rule of law.

We believe that the sanctions regime imposed on
UNITA is an instrument that is consistent with an
approach based on a political solution, and not an
exclusively military approach, to the conflict. The
effectiveness of the sanctions regime is directly linked
to the peace process. It is a key element on which the
quest for a solution to the Angola conflict rests. In that
regard, we share the view that sanctions imposed by
the Security Council must not be punitive, but rather
must foster the creation of conditions conducive to
dialogue among the parties.

Furthermore, the effectiveness of the sanctions
regimes is directly linked to the confidence of the
Government of Angola in the United Nations. In this
regard, Argentina wishes to underscore once again the
outstanding job being done by Ambassador Robert
Fowler of Canada as Chairman of the UNITA sanctions
Committee. The panel report, contained in document
S/2000/203, is a significant effort to clarify relevant
issues, namely, how sanctions are being violated, who
is violating them and what measures can be taken to
make the sanctions a more effective instrument.

The issuance of the report had a significant
impact, and we believe that it will continue to have
positive effects. Not only has it mobilized the States
mentioned in the report, but it has also mobilized the
diamond industry, arms manufacturers, neighbouring
countries and countries of the subregion. It has also
raised the awareness, as none has in the past, of the
international community as a whole.

The ongoing armed conflict has had a devastating
effect on the civilian population. The Secretary-
General's most recent report is very eloquent in this
regard. As was pointed out in the debate, there are
more than 2.5 million internally displaced persons, and
it is estimated that 1 million people require
humanitarian assistance. Approximately 3 million
people are inaccessible to the humanitarian
organizations. We believe that one of the purposes of
this debate must be to alert world public opinion, and
particularly the donor countries, to the humanitarian
situation in Angola. The international community has
the moral duty not to abandon the Angolan people.

For more than 20 years the international
community has been struggling to find a peaceful
resolution to the Angolan conflict. Argentina can
associate itself directly with these efforts, as it began to
deploy military observers as early as 1989, with the
establishment of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission, and it participated in mine-
clearance work through the White Helmets. As a
member of the Security Council and as the current
coordinator of the zone of peace and cooperation of the
South Atlantic, a forum of dialogue and cooperation
that brings together three South American countries
and 21 African countries, Argentina will do its utmost
to help end the conflict in Angola.

We are convinced that there is no dispute that
cannot be resolved peacefully and fairly if both parties
are motivated by a genuine will to engage in dialogue
and act reasonably and moderately. We believe that
after so much bloodshed, both parties have an
inescapable obligation to the Angolan people to find a
definitive resolution of the conflict.

