Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in French): First, I would like to congratulate you on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month.

(spoke in Arabic)

I would also like to thank you for convening this
meeting on the victims of attacks and abuses based
on ethnic or religious affiliation in the Middle East. I
would also like to thank Mr. Laurent Fabius, Minister
of Foreign Affairs of France, specifically, for attending
and presiding over this meeting.

The Middle East is experiencing a period of
unprecedented chaos and difficulty. Islam is facing
attack from two fronts, both from within and without.
Within, extremist groups cloaked falsely in religious
garb, such as Daesh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
Al-Qaida, Hizbullah and others, are carrying out the
worst forms of killing and persecution, the primary
Victims of which are large numbers of Muslims. The
flames of those acts are reaching many members of
other communities.

From without, Islam is confronting a provocative and
inflammatory media campaign that includes violence
against Muslims in some parts of Europe, Myanmar,
Palestine and other places. That campaign also includes
practices that, though not Violent, are no less harmful.
Those practices include the distortion and disrespect
of Islamic holy and religious sites and figures, such as
the publication of caricatures that are offensive to the
Prophet Mohammed, peace be upon him. Therefore, we
would have wished that the perspective of this meeting
had taken all of those items into consideration and did
not limit itself to the question of attacks and abuses on
minorities in the Middle East, despite the importance
of that subject.

If we were to look more broadly at this topic
and try to understand its historical dimensions, we
would realize that Islam is a religion of tolerance and
openness. It is a religion that does not distinguish or
discriminate among religions. God says in his noble
book, The Koran, that the messenger, the Prophet,
believed in what was revealed to him from his Lord,
and have the faithful have done likewise ever since. All
of them have believed in Allah, His angels, His books
and His messengers, saying that we must make no
distinction among any of his messengers.

Islam requires all its adherents to be rightful and
just to others, as God All Mighty says:

"God does not forbid you to deal justly and
kindly with those who have not fought against you
on account of religion and have not driven you out
of your homes, and does not forbid you from being
righteous towards them and acting justly towards
them."

This religion does not consider its followers' faith
complete unless also they believe in the message of
Jesus, Moses and other prophets of God. Islam is a
religion that recognizes religious freedom. As God
Almighty says, "There is no compunction in religion".
Islam is the religion that has looked after religious
minorities throughout the centuries, including
Christians in Palestine and Jews in Andalusia and
others. Therefore, what the persecution of religious
minorities in the Middle East today is a clear and grave
violation of the law of the noble religion of Islam. The
hateful exploitation and distortion of Islam and its
principles are also often used to justify the oppression
and marginalization suffered by Muslims themselves,
whether at the hands of oppressive and unjust regimes,
such as the Syrian regime, which has killed hundreds of
thousands of Syrians and has displaced millions ofthem
regardless of their faith, ethnicity or sectarian beliefs;
or at the hands of Israel, which continues to persecute
the Palestinian people, Muslims and Christians alike,
and to practice the most heinous forms of killing and
ethnic cleansing against them.

Combating Violence and attacks against religious
minorities in the Middle East and everywhere else
in the world must be based on two main pillars. The
first is the fight against all forms of terrorism and
the isolation of its supporters; the second is the
restoration of rights and the principles of international
justice and the rule of law among and within States.
The Middle East, which suffers from violence and
attacks on minorities, requires and needs from the
Council a profound remedy and solution to its political
problems, first among which is the acknowledgement
of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people and
the enablement of Palestine to exercise its legitimate
right to self-determination and the establishment
of an independent State within the borders of 4 June
1967, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif, noble Jerusalem, as its
capital. It also requires reaching a political solution for
the plight of the Syrian people, based on the Geneva
Declaration, which calls for the establishment of a fully
empowered executive authority that would lead the
Syrian people towards the realization of its aspirations
in justice, freedom and prosperity. It is also important
to prevent extremist forces, such as Hizbullah and the
Houthis, from enforcing their political will over other
groups through the use of armed force. It is important
to combat terrorism everywhere, without hesitation and
with all possible means.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia recognizes and
understands the importance of dialogue with the
followers of other faiths and cultures. Therefore,
in cooperation with the Kingdom of Spain and the
Republic of Austria and with the participation of the
Vatican, we have established the King Abdullah bin
Abdulaziz International Centre for Interreligious and
Intercultural Dialogue in Vienna to foster dialogue
and understanding among the various religions and
communities. We have also sponsored and continue
to sponsor channels of dialogue within the various
communities of Islam. We have combatted terrorism
through participation in the coalition that is confronting
Daesh in the north of our region and the Houthis in the
south. We have participated in the establishment of the
International Centre for Counter-Terrorism, under the
auspices of the United Nations. We have launched our
peace initiative for Palestine. When the bands of Daesh
overwhelmed large tracts of territory in Iraq, we rushed
to provide assistance to our brothers in that country,
and contributed $500 million to assist those who
were harmed by the terrorist attack, regardless of the
religious, communal or ethnic identity of the victims.

Thus, my country continues to combat those who
oppress and persecute minorities, while at the same
time, it continues to try to reach political and cultural
solutions so as to promote understanding, coexistence
and dialogue. That is our path; that is what we call for
with wisdom and good practices.

