Mr. Vondra (Czech Republic): Let me join previous
speakers in congratulating you, Madam President, on
presiding over this very special meeting of the Security
Council.

The United Nations is turning 50, but the idea
behind it is much older. Our Organization was established
as a consequence of the Second World War and is based
on the experience of its predecessor, the League of

 

Nations. It has one clear objective: to rid future generations
of the scourge of war. The Security Council was intended
to play a crucial role in this effort, having been given the
responsibility for maintaining international peace, order and
security.

The fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations leads us
therefore, to reflect not only on the results and the future of
the Organization in general, but above all on further
improvements in the functioning of this vital organ. Post-
cold-war realities in international relations have engendered
a cooperative working atmosphere in the Council. They
have allowed the Council to become a flexible and effective
instrument of the United Nations. The new climate has been
full of promises and expectations. It has also, however,
brought many new challenges.

We have done our best to meet these challenges. My
country is committed to the Security Council's assuming a
greater role in various aspects of conflict management and
in uncovering the very roots of conflicts. The aim of
playing such a role, along with the practice of preventive
diplomacy, has been to create the conditions and
atmosphere for parties in dispute to enter into serious and
sincere negotiations, thus restoring stability and peace in the
regions where tension prevails. Active and complex
approaches to peace-building and peacemaking have been
our primary means of implementing the results of
negotiations.

Continuous improvement in information-sharing
between Security Council members and other United
Nations Member States, enhanced cooperation between the
Security Council and the Secretariat, increased transparency
of the Council's decision-making and increased and
equitable representation on the Council are among the main
instruments for improving the Council's efficiency. Much
has already been achieved. One very important highway
leads us to Security Council reform via the General
Assembly. But other very significant routes for
improvement are fully within the Council's own
competences.

The role of the United Nations peace forces in the
former Yugoslavia and the financial crisis of peace-keeping
in general are forcing us to completely reconsider peace-
keeping. The Czech Republic supports continuously
improving the efficiency of United Nations peace-keeping
activities. We do not subscribe to one-sided, pessimistic
views regarding the results of these operations, but try not
to underestimate their shortcomings either.

My Government supports enhancing United Nations
cooperation with regional organizations and arrangements
on the basis of Chapter VIII of the Charter. The
importance of this is closely connected to the increasing
participation of regional organizations and the division of
labour between those organizations and the United
Nations in peace-keeping, preventive diplomacy and other
areas, in an effort to create a new international security
system. As for such cooperation specifically between the
United Nations and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) in Bosnia and Herzegovina, my
country advocates its increased facilitation.

We support reforming the system of financing peace-
keeping operations, which should, above all, differentiate
Member States on the basis of objective and clear criteria.
The Czech Republic has still not been assigned to any
group of Members and thus has not been contributing to
peace-keeping funds. Let me assure you, though, that we
are prepared to make immediate and full payments of our
share as soon as this is formally requested by the
Secretary-General.

In a few months, the Czech Republic will complete
its tenure on the Security Council. We have reflected a lot
on the role of non-permanent members, above all of small
countries such as ours.

Logically, the role of such countries in global
politics cannot be as significant as that of the permanent
members. Nevertheless, the Czech Republic maintains and
has been pursuing its own foreign policy interests. While
the broad contours of our foreign policy generally
coincide with those of other traditional democratic
countries, we try to offer fresh accents, fresh arguments,
fresh insights and fresh approaches. Through our work on
the Security Council, we have also demonstrated that the
Czech Republic does not focus on European conflicts
alone, to the exclusion of crises elsewhere in the world,
even if their connection with our immediate foreign
policy interests is not readily apparent.

We hope that while working on the Security Council
we have not disappointed those many friendly Member
States that voted for our election. We have been doing
our best to improve the transparency of the Council, to
improve communication between Council members and
non-members, and especially with troop contributors, and
to represent, to some degree at least, also the stance of
other small and medium-sized countries. These are
general themes which we hope all non-permanent
members will pursue in the future.

 

