Mr. Ritter (Liechtenstein): Last week the
international community observed Universal Children's
Day. Meanwhile, millions of children affected by
armed conflict continue to suffer in many parts of the
world. Addressing the extreme hardship of children
affected by armed conflict in this open debate of the
Security Council is therefore both a timely and very
important initiative, for which we would like to
commend the presidency of the Council.

We also thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Coomaraswamy, for her great
dedication and full commitment to bringing this agenda
forward and for contributing to tangible progress
towards the era of application of all relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 1612 (2005).
Full implementation of that resolution will depend, to a
very large extent, on political will. Council members,
in particular the permanent members, have a special
responsibility to show the necessary leadership in
effectively ending impunity for all grave violations of
children's rights in all armed conflicts. Targeted
sanctions by the Security Council will have to be
complemented by the work undertaken by the
International Criminal Court and by national courts in
bringing the perpetrators and instigators of such
violations to justice.

Resolution 1612 (2005) established the
monitoring and reporting mechanism as an essential
basis for the activities of the Working Group of the
Council on Children and Armed Conflict. We would
like to take this opportunity to thank the Working
Group, as well as all actors involved in the operation of
the monitoring and reporting mechanism, for their
efforts and commitment to help children affected by
armed conflict. The independent review carried out by
the Office of Internal Oversight Services acknowledges
the important function of the mechanism in drawing
attention to issues relating to children and armed
conflict at the local, national and international levels.
At the same time, we concur with the assessment that
there is a need to clarify the intended use of the
information gathered through the mechanism, in
particular by identifying how it can service the
information needs of various destinations for action in
an efficient and effective way. This includes the
gathering of information for key destinations that
advance the ending of impunity, as well as in the areas
of child protection and victim assistance.

While recognizing that a comprehensive approach
encompassing all of those aspects of the children and
armed conflict agenda may be difficult to realize in
certain places and circumstances, we wish to stress that
the full use of the potential of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism is in the interests of all actors
involved - Governments, the United Nations, non-
governmental organizations and civil society - as
much as it is to the benefit of the children concerned.

Enhancing the potential of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism also entails the extension of its
scope to all six categories of grave violations of
children's rights. Equally important is the inclusion of
all relevant conflict situations on equal terms. It is, in
fact, difficult to understand how a differential
treatment of grave violations of children's rights in
various conflicts would be compatible with the
universality of human rights and the principles of
international humanitarian law. Political considerations
must not override the fundamental rules of protection
for the most vulnerable members of society.

Liechtenstein has been actively involved in the
development of United Nations mechanisms to address
the plight of children affected by armed conflict since
their inception. We will continue to do so as a member
of the Group of Friends of children affected by armed
conflict, and are therefore looking forward to the
10-year review of the Graca Machel report. At the
same time, we wish to stress that the United Nations,
10 years after the publication of the report, is lagging
behind, given the high expectations in terms of its
ability to alleviate the hardship of millions of children
in armed conflict. The Security Council is best placed
to change this public perception.

