Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
The information provided this afternoon by the High
Commissioner for Refugees on the humanitarian
situation in Guinea paints a disturbing picture given its
dimensions and its potential for creating instability in
this region of West Africa. It is a situation that requires
prompt action on the part of the international
community as a whole, including, of course, the
Security Council.

We would like to thank Mr. Lubbers for the
invaluable information he has given us and for the
personal attention that he is devoting to this emergency
situation, as well as for the efforts of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) to alleviate the situation.

We all know that underlying this humanitarian
crisis are deep-rooted political causes that originate in
the conflicts of the past decade in Liberia and in Sierra
Leone. For this reason, we cannot correct a situation
that has claimed 250,000 lives and created 500,000
refugees and 1.5 million internally displaced persons
by limiting international action to the humanitarian
field.

We have to devise political and security solutions.
My delegation feels that the Council should explore
these options, especially during the upcoming
consultations on the renewal of the mandate of the
peacekeeping mission in Sierra Leone, in the light of
the comments made by the High Commissioner at this
meeting.

It is very clear that many refugees in Guinea are
willing to take the risks involved in returning to their
country of origin rather than be subjected to
intimidation and violence by the rebel groups.

In this respect, we strongly support UNHCR's
efforts to repatriate the refugees and to obtain
guarantees from the Governments in the region and
other armed parties to respect the principles of safe
access for refugees and safe passage to other
destinations.

We are nonetheless concerned by the conditions
that await persons who are repatriated to Sierra Leone.
In a way, the humanitarian problem has come back to
its starting point. We are shifting the poverty, despair
and uncertainty that prevails in the refugee camps from
one country to another. It is clear that the Government
of Sierra Leone is not in a position to offer recent
arrivals medical care or educational services, and less
so the means to start their lives anew. Indeed, it is
already finding it difficult to meet the needs of the
300,000 displaced persons who live in the part of the
territory under its control.

Accordingly, we must strengthen the Freetown
Government's capacity to respond, with the generous
assistance of international donors. We must provide
assistance ranging from emergency aid to development
aid. If we do not act now, we could be sowing the seeds
for the next cycle of conflict in the country and in the
region - that region where the United Nations has
concentrated the majority of its peacekeeping forces.

We must therefore consider political and regional
security options, with the cooperation of regional
stakeholders. The resolution on sanctions on the
Government of Liberia, adopted yesterday, sent a very
clear signal about the determination of the Security
Council to act with resolve.

We must now step up our cooperation with the
other members of the Economic Community of West
African States, including the Governments of Guinea
and Sierra Leone, so that the sanctions will induce
President Taylor to put an end to his support for rebel
groups in the region. We have noted that the regional
organization's commitment to deploy an interposition
force at the border of Guinea has not been translated
into reality.

Perhaps it is necessary, therefore, to review once
again the options offered by the presence of UNAMSIL
in the field and the results of its most recent contacts
with Revolutionary United Front (RUF)
representatives. Although the ceasefire still stands, the
presence of returnees increases the number of civilians
exposed to the threat of conflict, and, as a result, there
will be a greater call to extend protection to the civilian
population.

We would like to thank Mr. Lubbers for his
comments, and I would like to ask him the following
questions.

First, how does UNHCR intend to break the
dependence on assistance which has come about as a
result of the relief operations involving the returnees,
so that these people can return to a normal life in their
own country?

Secondly, how long does he think that the relief
operations can continue before we start seeing the
beginnings of donor fatigue and a decline in
contributions?

Thirdly, what has the RUF's attitude been to the
recent arrivals? Could such recent arrivals be a
potential pool of allies for it in its struggle against the
Government?

