Mr. Lowcock: Mr. President, it is an honour to
speak to you this afternoon for the first time since
taking up my role as Emergency Relief Coordinator.

All Council members around this table are aware
of the devastating effects the conflict has had on
civilians in Syria. I recognize the strenuous efforts
many members have made to promote improvements in
the humanitarian situation. I know that the Council has
worked collectively for increased humanitarian access
and for the protection of civilians, and this remains
high on the agenda of the international community, as
we saw at the general debate in the General Assembly
last week. Humanitarian and protection needs remain
both vast and acute across Syria. I pledge to work with
the Security Council and with all sides to improve
protection and to get aid to people in need.

I welcome the continued progress in de-escalation
following the 4 May agreement signed by Russia, Turkey
and Iran. These developments have had a positive
impact on civilians in certain parts of south-western
Syria, rural Damascus, north-western Horns and Idlib.
As my colleague, Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura, has
said, the last round of talks in Astana have set the stage
for a further reduction in violence. Nevertheless, we
continue to receive reports of violations of international
humanitarian law by all parties to the conflict, and like
Staffan, I am concerned about reports of recent fighting
and air strikes in Idlib and Hama, which have resulted
in significant death and injury and damaged critical
civilian infrastructure.

Reports suggest that an air strike yesterday in the
Wadi Al-Zaib area yesterday in rural Hama may have
killed as many as 80 people fleeing the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). I am particularly concerned
about air strikes reportedly hitting schools and hospitals
in Idlib. Humanitarian partners told us last week that
three hospitals in Kafr Nabl, Khan Shaykhun, and Heish
sub-districts are no longer in service, leaving over half
a million people without access to medical care. Such
attacks result not only in direct human suffering from
the attacks themselves, but they also cause unnecessary
consequential suffering and death by depriving people
of access to medical care for what would otherwise be
treatable conditions.

Further to the east, battles against ISIL in Raqqa
and Deir ez-Zor governorates have resulted in a spike
in violence. As the Syrian Democratic Forces continue
their advances inside Raqqa city, I am concerned about
the estimated 14,000 civilians trapped there. They are
squeezed into an ever-smaller area. Civilians need safe
passage and access to life-saving assistance. In Deir
ez-Zor governorate, air strikes in recent days have
reportedly led to the death of scores of civilians, while
ISIL is reportedly using civilians as human shields.
Nearly 100,000 people from towns in the governorate
along the Euphrates have reportedly been displaced
owing to the intense fighting since 25 August. More
than 50,000 have been displaced in the past week alone.
Many have been forced into other ISIL areas, out of the
reach of relief organizations, and those who have been
able to escape from fighting in those cities, by going
north into Kurdish-controlled areas, continue to face
restrictions on movement.

As front lines continue to shift, humanitarian
access to those in need is also changing. After three
years ofbesiegement by ISIL, as Staffan de Misturajust
said, Government of Syria forces in early September
gained access to Deir ez-Zor city. New commercial and
humanitarian routes have been opened as a result. The
United Nations, through our partner the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent has been able to reach the area by road,
and that means that we were able to end the airdrops
which, through 309 high-altitude rotations since April
last year, dispatched more than 6,030 metric tons of
food and supplies to those in need inside the city.

Following a comprehensive review by the United
Nations, Deir ez-Zor and the 93,500 people in the city
are being removed from the list of those besieged. Some
419,920 people, most of whom, according to UNICEF,
are children, now remain besieged in 10 locations
across Syria. Of those, 95 per cent are besieged by
the Government of Syria; 2 per cent in Fo'ah and
Kafraya are besieged by non-State armed groups; and
3 per cent in Yarmouk are besieged by both non-State
armed groups and the Government of Syria. While the
numbers have been reduced, the plight of those trapped
remains severe. Those sieges must be lifted.

More than 1 million people rely on assistance that
is provided across conflict lines. We are still unable to
reach the vast majority of them on a sufficiently regular
basis. As of September, 9,000 people in the three
besieged towns of Fo'ah, Kafraya and Yarmouk have
been reached, and 25,000 people have been reached
in eastern Harasta, Misraba and Modira, but overall,
under the August and September access plan, we have
reached just 280,500 of the 1.23 million people for
whom we have requested assistance.

There have been periods over the past 18 months
during which the United Nations has reached more than
300,000 people in a single week. I would like to see such
access replicated or surpassed in the future. That will
require overcoming constraints posed by bureaucratic
delays and blockages by all sides. I note that the first
two meetings of the tripartite mechanism comprised of
the United Nations, the Government of Syria and the
Russian Federation have taken place in Damascus to
provide a forum for administrative and security issues.
Those are practical developments that can improve the
lives of Syrians. Regular programming within Syria
allows millions of people to be reached every month
through the most direct routes. Inside Syria, regular
programming reaches more than 4 million people each
month with food, medicine and other essential items.

Through cross-border programming from Jordan
and Turkey, we reach millions more. Since the adoption
of resolution 2165 (2004), the United Nations has
dispatched more than 16,000 trucks delivering health
supplies sufficient for almost 15 million treatments,
as well as non-food items for almost four million
people and water, sanitation and hygiene support for
three million people. Nearly 1 million people per
month on average have been given help with food.
As the Secretary-General says in his latest monthly
report (S/2017/794), those operations complement
the critical role played by international and Syrian
non-governmental organizations. In addition to
providing aid, those organizations provide essential
basic services, including education and health.

The situation remains perilous for humanitarian
workers in Syria, whether they are United Nations staff
or our non-governmental organization partners who
face risks of violence every day. As reported by the
Secretary-General in his latest monthly report, dozens
of humanitarian workers have been killed since the
beginning of the conflict, including staff members of
the United Nations and staff members and volunteers
of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and the Palestine
Red Crescent Society. More than 50 staff members of
the United Nations and the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
remain detained or missing. International humanitarian
law and human rights law set out the responsibilities
of warring parties to ensure the necessary protection
of all humanitarian organizations, including personnel,
facilities and other relief assets. I count on the Council's
vigilance and support to ensure the necessary protection
of all humanitarian workers in Syria.

At the Brussels conference on supporting the future
of Syria and the region held in April some $6 billion
was pledged by more than 40 Governments to meet the
humanitarian and longer-term needs of Syrians and
host communities inside Syria and in the region, but
the 2017 United Nations humanitarian response plan
remains substantially underfunded. I call on the Council
to renew its support for addressing that issue and for
ensuring that all pledges be turned into contributions.
I have sought the agreement of the authorities to visit
Syria so as to see the situation for myself, support the
preparation of the 2018 humanitarian response plan and
subsequently advocate for resources for it.

Syria continues to face deep and difficult
challenges, and the Syrian people remain trapped in a
cycle of violence that must be broken. I will be working
openly and transparently with all sides to find solutions
that place the people at the centre of our collective focus.
I look forward to working with the Council to get more
help to them and provide them with better protection.

