Mr. Vale De Almeida: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union and its 28 member States.

The candidate countries the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania, as
well as Ukraine, align themselves with this statement.

I join others in welcoming High Representative
Valentin Inzko back to the Security Council and in
assuring him of the European Union's continued
support. I also welcome our colleague, the Permanent
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and thank
him for his statement.

(spoke in French)

The year 2016 was very good to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, with progress towards reform and
European integration. Bosnia and Herzegovina
formally applied for accession to the European Union
in February 2016. On 20 September of the same year,
the Council instructed the European Commission to
review that candidature.

At the request of the Council, Mr. Hahn,
Commissioner for European Neighbourhood Policy and
Enlargement Negotiations, presented a questionnaire
to the Sarajevo authorities on 9 December, 2016, to
enable the Commission to deliver an opinion on the
country's preparations. That questionnaire of 3,242
questions will provide a comprehensive overview of the
country's constitutional, political, economic and social
landscape. It will also be a first test for the institutions
of Bosnia and Herzegovina of their ability to work
together, throughout the country.

On the basis of the replies provided, the
European Commission will present an assessment and
recommendations to the EU Council concerning not
only the candidate status of Bosnia and Herzegovina
but also the accession negotiations. Those will include
the priority areas on which Bosnia and Herzegovina
will need to focus if it is to move forward towards
European membership.

(spoke in English)

After years of stagnation, these positive
developments are the result of the reform agenda for
Bosnia and Herzegovina 2015-2018, which Governments
of State and entity levels have crafted in the framework
of the renewed approach of the EU integration process,
and which since 2014 have prioritized social and
economic reforms. The new EU approach has yielded
results, but the implementation of the reforms has
had limited success and the sociopolitical outlook
remains uncertain. It is time for sincere reform efforts.
Without them, an increase in radicalism, socioeconomic
problems and nationalistic tensions could result in long-
term instability.

Bosnia and Herzegovina initially made good
progress, and the pace of reforms should not decrease. We
therefore expect continued and effective implementation
of this reform agenda. Bosnia and Herzegovina has
entered a phase in which it faces difficult decisions
regarding the economy and public administration.
Success in these reforms can bring significant benefits
for citizens and help the country advance in the EU
integration process. The much-improved economic
growth in Bosnia and Herzegovina - more than 3 per
cent in 2016 - and the growth in private-sectorjobs are
signs that, with the right policies, economic progress is
within reach. Thus Bosnia and Herzegovina can make a
positive contribution to regional cooperation, which is
also an important factor in the country's EU path.

Despite these efforts at economic reform, Bosnia
and Herzegovina continues to suffer from agendas
driven by constituency interests, which divert attention
from much-needed reforms. Controversies are pulling
Bosnia and Herzegovina in the wrong direction.
The judiciary should not be instrumentalized
to justify the lack of a common vision. It is the
responsibility of Bosnia and Herzegovina's political
authorities not only to forge a country-wide agenda
but also to comply with judicial decisions once they
have been issued. The rulings of the Constitutional
Court on the election law will have to be addressed in
an appropriate manner by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities. Ensuring the smooth conduct of the general
elections, scheduled for autumn 2018, is key.

But, as I said, 2017 should be used to focus on and
resolve pending issues that present a challenge to the
socioeconomic environment and democratic institutions.

I would also like to encourage the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to move forward its European
agenda and contribute to establishing a democratic
and well-functioning society in which the equality of
Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs and all other citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is ensured.

The EU reiterates its unequivocal commitment to
the territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina as
a sovereign and united country. The European Union
will continue to use all available instruments to support
Bosnia and Herzegovina's stability and progress. The
overall security situation has remained relatively calm
and stable; however, security is not yet fully entrenched.
In that context, the European Union confirms
that Operation Althea of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
through its executive mandate, retains the capability to
contribute to the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities'
deterrence capacity, if the situation so requires, while
focusing on capacity-building and training.

As the country's stability continues to strengthen
and further progress is achieved in reforms and on
the EU path, the European Union looks forward to
continuing, in the appropriate forum, discussions
with the international community on the possible
reconfiguration of the international presence. In that
regard, the European Union calls on the authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to pursue the reform agenda
and to increase their efforts to meet the outstanding
objectives and the conditions for the future closure of
the Office of the High Representative.

(spoke in French)

To conclude, I should like to say that in the course
of the two decades during which the Council has
been considering the situation in the country, we have
witnessed progress in Bosnia and Herzegovina in many
areas - socioeconomic progress as well as advances
in the democratic and security areas. Reconciliation
among its citizens requires, in turn, greater efforts for
continued reform and for inclusivity.

I reiterate what I said yesterday: the doors of the
European Union are open, and it is incumbent on the
political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to take the
measures necessary to solidify this clear prospect and
to join the European Union.

