Let me extend a particularly warm welcome to His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Central African Republic. Like others, we also want to start by strongly condemning yesterday's ambush and extending our condolences to the people of the Central African Republic and to the families of those who were killed or wounded. I would like to focus on three brief points. First, on the elections and the political situation, we fully agree with the assessment expressed by Under-Secretary-General Lacroix that the presidential and parliamentary elections scheduled for the end of this year are absolutely crucial. We commend all actors, and particularly the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and the Government of the Central African Republic, for their ongoing efforts to ensure free, fair, inclusive, credible and transparent elections within the constitutional time frame. In that context, we would also like to welcome and commend the Constitutional Court's decision on this issue and the time frame. We call on all actors in the Central African Republic to engage constructively in the political process before the elections and to resolve potential difficulties through an inclusive dialogue. Election campaigns must be conducted in a reasonable and responsible manner, given the highly fragile security situation. Although it is important that there be active and meaningful participation on the part of all societal groups in the Central African Republic, including women who have been internally displaced and refugees outside the country, all of this must be guaranteed. Another important factor that obviously influences the election and campaign is the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Many of the previous speakers alluded to that issue. Let me just say that this is also, from our point of view, crucial to the safety and the conditions for the elections. We very much welcome the European Union's substantial contribution of $13 million to the United Nations Development Programme basket fund in support of the elections. We believe that the international community needs to provide even more help to the Central African Republic, and we listened to what Under-Secretary-General Lacroix said about the funding gap of approximately $10.5 million. In that context, let me just say that Germany is planning to contribute €500,000 additional to support democratic elections. My second point concerns the implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. We would also agree with others who have said that the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/545) gives a very clear picture of, on the one hand, the accomplishments made in the implementation of the peace agreement and, on the other, of the remaining challenges. This is certainly not a sprint but a marathon, but a marathon very much worth running. Germany welcomes the progress achieved, particularly the legislative progress in implementing the peace agreement that has been made, such as the official establishment of the Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation in April. It is important that the Commission become operational as soon as possible. We also welcome the ongoing work of the Special Criminal Court. For Germany to fight against impunity, the rule of law, transitional justice and reconciliation remain essential elements in achieving sustainable peace and stability. At the same time, we remain, as others, very deeply concerned about the ongoing violations of the peace agreement committed by various armed groups. In this conflict, the recent exit of the rebel group Retour, reclamation et rehabilitation from the peace agreement sets a very negative precedent. The expansion of the group and its challenges to State authority are serious threats that we follow with growing concern. We believe that if other groups were to follow suit, this could be harmful to the peace process as a whole. We are also worried about the lack of progress on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and call on both the armed groups and the Government of the Central African Republic to resume their efforts. My last point is on the humanitarian situation. We remain very concerned about the ongoing human rights violations and conflict-related sexual violence. Attacks against the civilian population and infrastructure, internally displaced persons and humanitarian workers must certainly stop. Germany is one of the largest donors to humanitarian aid in the Central African Republic, and we feel that it is heartbreaking to see the people suffer not only from acute food insecurity but also from the toll taken by the COVID-19 pandemic, which is inflicting additional socioeconomic harm. Germany therefore supports the COVID-19 response by United Nations agencies and the Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement in humanitarian emergencies with additional funding of €300 million. The funds can be used for all countries covered by the United Nations and International Committee of the Red Cross appeals - the Central African Republic, of course, being one. We therefore must step up international support, and we commend the timely and recent efforts by the Peacebuilding Commission to address the impact of COVID-19 in the region. We would like to seize this opportunity to once again reiterate our support for the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and call on the armed groups to translate their rhetorical commitment into action on the ground. Finally, we feel that we need to continue to continue to support the authorities of the Central African Republic in their commendable work on the elections, the political situation, the implementation of the peace agreement and current challenges.
