Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to thank His Excellency Mr. Jean-Max Bellerive,
Prime Minister of Haiti, for his presence here today. I
would also like to thank Mr. Edmond Mulet, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, who has acted
in that position from the very beginning of the crisis.
We wish him every success in further performing his
duties in Haiti. We also congratulate all those who have
worked to respond to the emergency after the
devastating earthquake in January.

Bosnia and Herzegovina aligns itself with the
statement to be made by the observer of the European
Union.

Since the earthquake, the Government of Haiti
has made commendable efforts to address the
challenges faced by its nation. Nevertheless, the
continued attention and support of the international
community to the people of Haiti in their efforts to
rebuild the country are also indispensable. In that
context, we are encouraged by the results of the Haiti
donor conference held on 31 March, and we would like
to take this opportunity to express our appreciation to
all international donors for their generous pledges.

Bosnia and Herzegovina strongly supports the
Government of Haiti's efforts to carry out its duties
effectively and in the best interests of Haiti's people,
including its ambitious plan to proceed with elections
that will allow for a presidential transition in early
2011. We also consider it important that, in a very
sensitive atmosphere, the Government of Haiti and all
political actors come together to address the issue of
the transitional phase and find a way to bridge the
legislative gap from May to the elections. In that
regard, we welcome the dispatch of a United Nations
mission to evaluate requirements and assess options
with regard to a timetable for general elections.

Bearing in mind the importance of international
assistance in preparations for the elections, we support
the Secretary-General's recommendations concerning
the lead role that the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) should play in
coordinating electoral assistance. We hope that these
efforts will enable timely, free and inclusive elections,
with the full participation of women in that important
process.

Furthermore, we consider the rebuilding and
strengthening of the security sector and the judicial and
penal systems to be fundamental to recovery and
development. Assistance to the Haitian National Police
(HNP), which has played an important role in
providing security side by side with MINUSTAH, as
well as in developing a strategic framework for
assistance in line with its reform plan, is of utmost
importance. Cooperation between MINUSTAH and the
HNP in providing the widest possible coverage to the
camps and in addressing violence against women and
children will be essential. With regard to the judicial
and penal systems, we support MINUSTAH's efforts to
provide assistance to the Government of Haiti in that
field, which was also severely affected by the
earthquake.

Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the
Government of Haiti's Action Plan and the
establishment of the Interim Haiti Reconstruction
Commission, which will coordinate financial aid until
a Haitian development authority and a Haiti
reconstruction fund are in place.

In the aftermath of a disaster of such proportions,
the main precondition for rebuilding and vigorous
economic recovery is the restoration of the fabric of
society, above all that of local communities in the
affected areas. Therefore, in anticipation of measures
to rebuild local communities, international
stakeholders and the Government of Haiti should keep
in mind that only programmes and projects that
correspond to the needs of the local community and are
supported by it will be beneficial and sustainable.

In addition to the long-term recovery efforts,
bearing in mind the humanitarian situation, it is
essential that humanitarian aid to the people of Haiti
continue to be delivered. Providing shelter and
sanitation during the rainy and hurricane season has to
be a priority. Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the
efforts of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, humanitarian
agencies and non-governmental organizations to
provide assistance to the population in need.
We urge the Government to make every effort to
further address the issue of the difficult conditions in
the camps for internally displaced persons. We also
support the appeal of the Secretary-General addressed
to MINUSTAH to provide additional technical,
operational and logistical support that will assist the
Government of Haiti in meeting its responsibilities in
this regard.

The United Nations continues to play a vital role
in Haiti, and, on behalf of my Government, I would
like to commend United Nations and MINUSTAH
personnel for the important work they have carried out
to date. Since the earthquake, MINUSTAH has
exercised its mandate in a changed environment.
During that exceptionally hard time, MINUSTAH,
itself severely hit by the earthquake, provided essential
support for rescue and relief operations. At this stage,
which marks a transition from relief to reconstruction,
MINUSTAH must continue to provide technical,
operational and logistical assistance to the Government
of Haiti.

Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina commends the
Haitian people for their admirable dignity and
resilience, and the Government of Haiti and political
and civil society actors for their constructive efforts to
build consensus and ensure political stability, despite
the scale of loss and suffering. We are convinced that,
with the support of the international community, the
Government and people of Haiti will overcome all
challenges and build a stronger and viable Haiti.

