Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to join others in
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency for the month of August, and I
assure you of our fullest cooperation and support in
the effective discharge of your responsibilities. I also
wish to express appreciation to you for organizing
this briefing on preventing terrorists from acquiring
weapons. We are grateful to all the speakers for their
informative briefings. Ethiopia commends Egypt
for its leadership in facilitating the negotiation on
resolution 2370 (2017) and welcomes its unanimous
adoption. I would also like to express, more formally,
my appreciation to Ambassador Liu Jieyi and China
for their very successful presidency last month. I
would also like to say how pleased we are to welcome
the Russian Permanent Representative, Ambassador
Vassily Nebenzya.

Access by terrorists to weapons, both conventional
weapons and small arms and light weapons, poses a
serious threat to the maintenance of peace and security,
particularly in the context of countries affected by
conflict. We endorse all that the President said when
speaking in his national capacity. The proliferation
of weapons that end up in the hands of terrorists has
increased, mainly owing to transnational organized
crime, poor border management, illicit arms-trafficking,
including using the Internet, and gaps in export control
and end-user verification. That, in turn, continues to
pose a significant challenge to the implementation of
the mandates ofpeacekeeping missions, the provision of
humanitarian assistance and the protection of civilians.

The threat posed by improvised explosive devices
(IEDs), particularly in the context of asymmetrical
warfare, continues to lead to enormous challenges.
For instance, in Somalia, IEDs are an increasingly
mortal component of the al-Shabab arsenal as they
become larger and more sophisticated, inflicting
loss of life on civilians and peacekeepers. They also
continue to threaten the operations of humanitarian
organizations, as well as the safety, security and
livelihoods of internally displaced persons returning to
their homes. That is mainly associated with the illicit
flow of explosive elements in dual-use items that could
be used for the manufacture of IEDs, and with gaps in
controlling and regulating their use.

Those growing threats, resulting mainly from the
increased supply of weapons, require all Member States
to adopt a comprehensive approach that would integrate
and coordinate their measures at the national, regional
and international levels, as appropriate, and enhance
their cooperation. The cross-border and international
nature of the challenge also requires all of us to adopt
a multilateral response, complimenting measures
taken at the national level by Member States within
their jurisdictions.

It is also critical for Member States to address some
of the challenges in the context of broader disarmament
discussions. It is in that context that we recognize
the importance of various measures incorporated in
resolution 2370 (2017), which we adopted today, aimed
at eliminating the supply of weapons to terrorists within
the framework of resolution 1373 (2001).

Resolution 1373 (2001) imposes a Chapter VII legal
obligation on all Member States to refrain from providing
any form of support, active or passive, to entities or
persons involved in terrorist acts, which includes the
elimination of the supply of weapons to terrorists. It
requires Member States to take concrete measures to
refrain from providing any form of support, which may
include financing, training or harbouring terrorists.

It also requires Member States to prevent terrorists
from acquiring conventional weapons and small arms
and light weapons. It is therefore important for the
Council to take into account the multi-faceted aspects
of direct or indirect support to terrorists and adopt a
broader outlook when addressing the issue of the access
to weapons by terrorists as called for by resolution 2370
(2017). In that regard, I would like to underline the
critical role that the various sanctions committees can
and should play in ensuring the proper implementation
of relevant arms embargoes and in eliminating the
supply of weapons to terrorists.

I would like to conclude by reiterating our firm
commitment to the fight against terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations and by expressing our readiness to
work with all the relevant actors in the implementation

of the important resolution 2370 (2017) to prevent and
eliminate the supply of weapons to terrorists.

