Mr. Kulla (Albania): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, for the way in which you
are conducting the work of the Security Council and to
thank you for including in the agenda of the Council this
open debate on the occasion of the termination of the
mandate of the multinational protection force in Albania.

As is already known, during the first months of this
year Albania was caught in the middle of a general crisis
which had economic, political and institutional
dimensions. As a consequence of this crisis my country
went through a period in which there was a total lack of
law and order, which brought with it the looting of
military armouries and the dispersal of the weapons to the
population. More than 1,500 people lost their lives in this
chaotic situation, while many private and public properties
were completely destroyed.

The Security Council, through a presidential
statement on 13 March 1997, expressed its concern for
the eruption of the crisis in Albania, and two weeks later,
through resolution 1101 (1997), authorized the
deployment of a multinational protection force in Albania
in order to ensure the distribution of humanitarian
assistance and the establishment of a safe environment for
the activity of international organizations, initially for a
period of three months. Through resolution 1114 (1997)
the mandate of the multinational protection force was
extended for another 45 days.

The Albanian Government expresses its deepest
gratitude to the Security Council for the swift reaction
and for the special attention it attached to the crisis in
Albania. The authorization for an immediate deployment
of the force in Albania prevented a further aggravation of
the situation and increased people's confidence. This was
an excellent example in the history of the operations
authorized by the Security Council to protect international
peace and security.

 

The Albanian Government expresses its special
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his personal
involvement and his continuous attention to this issue and
for the regular briefings to the Security Council.

From 28 March to 14 August 1997, the Security
Council, led by the ambassadors of Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation and the United
Kingdom, discussed ll periodical reports on the activity of
the multinational protection force in Albania. In this context
I thank them all, and I would like to commend also
Ambassador Dejammet of France for his excellent work
and his competent and skilful introductions to the reports to
the Security Council. And outside of the Council, my
appreciation goes at the same time to Ambassador Fulci of
Italy, for his great support and successful work on this
important matter.

The operation of the multinational protection force in
Albania, known as Operation Alba, successfully completed
its mission. This force came to Albania on 15 April. It was
composed of personnel from 11 Member States and had a
total of 7,215 troops. In close cooperation with the
Albanian Government, the force fulfilled its mission in a
neutral and impartial way by fully respecting its mandate,
defined in the above-mentioned resolutions of the Security
Council.

This force had to overcome many difficulties in an
unknown terrain, with weapons spread out everywhere, and
at a time when a Government of National Reconciliation
had just been formed as a result of the compromise that
was achieved among the Albanian political parties in March
this year.

The Albanian people and the Albanian Government
express their profound thanks to the countries members of
the force. Our thanks go to Italy for its excellent direction
of the force, and to Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France,
Greece, Portugal, Romania, Slovenia, Spain and Turkey, as
well as to every single commander and soldier deployed in
Albania. These troops were courageously determined to
create the safe zones for the distribution of humanitarian
aid and for the activity of the international organizations,
governmental or non-governmental, and to increase the
confidence necessary for the activity of the Albanian police
and army, thus easing the work of the Government of
National Reconciliation. The force created a positive
atmosphere of confidence and safety for Albanians and
observer missions of international organizations during the
Albanian parliamentary elections of 29 June 1997.

The Albanian people have correctly understood the
role and importance of this force. They supported it and
showed their hospitality. At a time when there have been
many Albanian casualties, no soldier of this force has
been attacked or has perished during the force's time in
Albania. This fact does not mean that the operation was
not dangerous or difficult. It proves that this endeavour
was successful and effective. At the same time it shows
the appreciation and solidarity of Albanians as regards
this force.

The Albanian Government hails, and express its
gratitude to, the regional international organizations -
such as Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), European Union (EU), the Council of
Europe (CE) and the Western European Union (WEU) -
for their readiness and assistance during the emergency
stage of the Albanian crisis, and to other humanitarian
organizations, governmental and non-governmental, that
guaranteed the delivery of the humanitarian aid to
Albania. This testifies to how successful the United
Nations could be in dealing with the humanitarian crisis.

On 29 June of this year, parliamentary elections
were held in Albania, resulting in the forming of a new
coalition Government, on a broader basis of political
representation. The main priorities of this Government are
the quick re-establishment of public order and the
economic recovery of the country.

We believe that public order and security will be
assured within a short time, and Albania will enter the
path of normal and solid development. At the same time,
we are fully confident that the support of the international
community and the efforts of our country for
reconstruction will continue.

We hope that the donors conference, expected to be
held soon in Italy, following the meeting in Rome of 31
July this year, will reach concrete results regarding rapid
progress and development in Albania.

