Mr. Ney (Germany): I would like to join my
colleagues in thanking Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his report (S/2009/ 135) and Special Representative
Kai Eide for today's briefing. In addition, I would like
to thank in particular Ambassador Tanin for his
intervention.

Germany fully supports the statement of the
presidency of the European Union and shares the
analysis it presented on the situation in Afghanistan. As
an important contributor to civilian reconstruction and
development programmes for Afghanistan and as a
major troop contributor to the United Nations-
mandated International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) operations, Germany would like to highlight
four points.

First, the electoral process in Afghanistan is an
important step for consolidating democratic
development in Afghanistan. The international
community, in particular through the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), is successfully
supporting the Independent Electoral Commission in
preparing these elections. We are looking with keen
interest to the political process in Kabul to ensure a
stable environment for the upcoming elections. We
trust that our Afghan partners will work to ensure a
viable and stable process that leads the country from
May to August.

Germany has continuously supported the United
Nations Development Programme Enhancing Legal
and Electoral Capacity for Tomorrow project by
donating $10 million in 2008. Germany will provide an
additional $12 million for that programme in 2009.
Especially with regard to the election process, security
remains a critical concern. In that context, Germany
will, as indicated earlier, increase the number of troops
on the ground in order to assist in safeguarding free
and fair elections in Afghanistan. Germany strongly
condemns recent attacks on political candidates in
Afghanistan.

With regard to the wider build-up of Afghan
national security forces, Germany has again stepped up
its efforts in police training by providing additional
trainers and mentoring teams and has recently begun
the implementation of the Focused District
Development programme in Mazar-e-Sharif. We intend
to further expand focused district development to other
districts in the course of this year.
Secondly, Afghan ownership and good
governance remain key for the success of the efforts of
the international community in supporting development
in Afghanistan. We encourage the Afghan Government
to fight corruption and the trade and production of
narcotic drugs with further increased dedication.

Thirdly, Germany will continue to support
reconstruction and development in Afghanistan. The
year 2009 is seeing yet another increase in German
contributions, to $220 million overall. We strongly
believe that UNAMA must continue to play the leading
role in coordinating all the civilian efforts of the
international community, as agreed last summer in
Paris. In that respect, we strongly support the process
of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board as the
core consulting mechanism. As a major contributor to
the United Nations budget, we openly supported the
considerable increase of UNAMA's budget for 2009,
and we are looking forward to seeing tangible results.

Against that background, Germany fully supports
the extension of the UNAMA mandate and welcomes
the increase in UNAMA personnel on the ground. We
are pleased to note that, from our point of view, the
increased presence of UNAMA in the regions already
starts to add value including in the areas of Mazar-e-
Sharif, Kunduz and Faizabad.

Fourthly and finally, we would like to emphasize
the importance of a regional approach to solving the
problems we are facing, not only in Afghanistan, and
we encourage an increased level of cooperation in all
fields. That cooperation remains essential for a
peaceful and sustainable future for Afghanistan and
will thus benefit the development of the whole region.

Against that background, we are looking forward
to the conference to be held in The Hague later this
month as an opportunity to signal the readiness of the
international community to continue its support for
Afghanistan and the region.

Let me conclude by thanking Kai Eide for his
tireless efforts and his successful leadership of
UNAMA. The international community and
Afghanistan have come a long way. Despite all the
challenges ahead, we have been able to help improve
living conditions in Afghanistan and to build schools
for boys and girls, hospitals, bridges, streets, et cetera.

That success was only possible thanks to all of
the women and men from all over the world who are
willing to serve in Afghanistan. Let me seize this
opportunity to thank them all for their relentless efforts
and their personal commitment. We would like to thank
all the teams working under the umbrella of UNAMA,
including UNDP and OCHA, as well as the many
non-governmental organizations, members of the
diplomatic corps and, last but not least, all personnel of
the security forces for their efforts to improve the life
of the Afghan people. Germany will live up to its
international responsibilities and continue to support
the Afghan people.

