Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): The
United States welcomes the opportunity to shine the
spotlight at this open debate of the Security Council on
one of the true evils of our time - the forcible
recruitment, use and targeting of children in armed
conflict. That brutal and debilitating practice can
destabilize societies, perpetuate the cycle of violence,
and rob innocent victims of their childhoods and their
futures. We have an obligation and a vital role in
helping to protect the most vulnerable members of
conflict-ridden societies, especially children.

Three years ago, we adopted resolution 1612
(2005) to address the issue. We appreciate the
commitment and efforts of the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict under
the leadership of its French Chair and its staff to make
progress on that issue. In particular, it is encouraging
that members of the Council have demonstrated their
interest in addressing the subject by meeting regularly
in the Working Group and working hard to build
consensus on country-specific situations. We also
welcome the efforts of Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, to highlight and
document the problem. Her country visits have led to
increased dialogue and cooperation among United
Nations partners to bring about more effective
protection for children affected by conflicts. All those
efforts have made a difference.

However, despite our current efforts, the
abhorrent practice of recruiting and using child soldiers
persists in many countries. For example, in Burma, the
military and non-State armed groups continue to recruit
and use children as soldiers, some as young as lO-years
old, and arrest children for desertion. In Sri Lanka, the
Tamil Tigers and a Government-supported paramilitary
group called the Tamil Makkal Viduthalai Pulikal
(TMVP) also continue to use child soldiers. While we
welcome the initial release of 39 child soldiers by the
TMVP, more must be done to ensure the release of the
rest. In the Darfur region of the Sudan, there is ongoing

recruitment and use of child soldiers both by
Government soldiers, such as the Janjaweed militia,
and by various armed rebels, and there is ongoing
recruitment of children from refugee and internally
displaced persons camps on both sides of the Chad-
Sudan border.

"Recruitment" is a gentle term. It often means
abduction, threats and punishment, and forcing
children to commit horrific acts of murder and
mutilation. Besides recruitment, there are other
atrocities committed against children. For example, in
Afghanistan, the Taliban and insurgents have engaged
in systematic attacks on schoolchildren and school
buildings, including a number of killings and
bombings, in a deliberate attempt to intimidate and
prevent girls from accessing education, thereby
stealing their futures. The Taliban has also used
children as human shields and to carry out suicide
attacks.

Another deplorable act committed against
children is the targeting of girls, and not seldom boys,
as victims of sexual violence, including rape, during
conflict situations. For example, the Secretary-
General's annual report on children and armed conflict
indicates that 60 per cent of the cases recorded in the
northern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
involved victims between the ages of 11 and 17.

Given the problems of children and armed
conflict, what more should be done? Currently, the
unlawful recruitment and use of child soldiers are the
only criteria available to the Secretary-General to bring
State and non-State actors to the attention of the
Security Council Working Group. It is time to review
our trigger list and see whether we should include
sexual violence as well. Although the Working Group
of the Security Council has taken steps forward, its
processes for decision-making sometimes take too long
and need to be more efficient and effective. If we are
serious about addressing the problem, we have to come
together and use the tools that are available
expeditiously. Unfortunately, some members talk the
talk, but do not walk the walk. When it comes to doing
things, they oppose effective and timely action.

The time has come to move forward in an
expeditious fashion, focusing on the violators.
Offenders need to know that the Security Council will
take action and utilize the tools of targeted measures,
and that there is no impunity for crimes committed
against children.

Finally, we thank the Vietnamese delegation and
you, Sir, for hosting this meeting on such an important
topic. The recruitment, use and targeting of children in
armed conflict are intolerable. The United States
remains committed to using the tools available,
including regular monitoring and reporting, the
deployment of child protection advisors in United
Nations peacekeeping operations and political missions
as appropriate, public condemnation, targeted measures
against violators, and support for reintegration efforts
to deal with that tragedy. We are counting on Viet
Nam's support.

