We express our appreciation to Deputy Minister Vershinin for presiding over today's meeting. Allow me to take this opportunity to welcome to the Security Council the Foreign Minister of the State of Palestine, Mr. Riad Al-Malki, and thank him for his participation today. I would also like to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his frank and useful update on the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory. South Africa welcomes his Office's concerted efforts aimed at resolving the long-standing conflict that arises out of the occupation of Palestinian territories, and we urge him to continue those efforts so that the United Nations may, as the representative of the international community, play a key role in finding a solution to the Palestinian- Israeli matter. We took note of the remarks by the new Israeli Permanent Representative to the United Nations and the recent events in the Middle East between Israel and United Arab Emirates, Bahrain and the Sudan, three members of the League of Arab States. We had hoped that those events would lead to less suffering of Palestinians in prisons, or in exile or internally displaced from their homes. As we heard from Special Coordinator Mladenov today, Israel continues its illegal settlement expansion, in blatant violation of resolutions of the Security Council, the General Assembly and international law. Earlier this month saw Israeli authorities announcing the advancement of over 5,000 new housing units in the occupied West Bank, making 2020 the year of the greatest settlement expansion since 2012, with over 12,000 units being advanced. While recent bilateral agreements have shown Israel to have agreed to suspend its annexation plans, this continued and increasing settlement activity contradicts those agreements and calls into question the benefits they offer for peace, as they have not eased the occupation. In fact, those agreements appear to coincide with increased illegal settlement activity and destruction of Palestinian agricultural land. While formal annexation may have been suspended, de facto annexation continues through those illegal practices. Those newly forged relations and ostensibly transactional agreements have done nothing to improve the lives of Palestinians, who continue to be denied their basic human and civil rights while living under illegal military occupation. As evidenced by the increase in settlement activity, we can see that Israel has no intention of halting its de facto annexation efforts. South Africa reiterates that settlements are illegal under international law and directly contravene resolution 2334 (2016). These violations and inhumane actions by Israel serve only to undermine any prospects for peace and jeopardize a permanent and sustainable resolution to the conflict. We often ask ourselves, and now we ask our fellow Council members, why resolutions on certain issues are dealt with in a completely different manner than other issues and resolutions on the Council's agenda. We see this with the matter of Palestine, and we are also seeing it this week with Western Sahara. Israel continues to violate Security Council resolutions and international law. Why, then, has there been no action to hold Israel accountable for those illegal actions? If this were occurring with almost any other issue on the Council's agenda, we would not have hesitated to take action. Surely these double standards, in a body whose responsibility is to maintain international peace and security, is not acceptable. It is the responsibility of the Security Council to remain impartial, as partiality and bias undermine and discredit the role of the Council and of the United Nations as a whole. From 1991 to 2007, there were a number of international conferences on the question of Palestine. We had the Madrid Conference in 1991, which led to the Oslo Accords in 1993, and which saw the first face-to-face agreement between leaders of the Israeli authorities and the Palestinian Liberation Organization. The Annapolis Conference in 2007 saw the parties committing to the road map for peace. Each of those meetings was an important milestone in the Israel-Palestine peace process. The initiatives by the Arab League and the Russian Federation have also played vital roles in the peace process. South Africa therefore fully supports President Abbas' call for an international conference, with the participation of all parties concerned, for discussions on a genuine peace process, including the resolution of all final-status issues. We urge the Council to heed the Secretary-General's call for a collective and fresh push for peace and reconciliation in the Middle East region. South Africa will continue to work with all like-minded countries to support international efforts aimed at the establishment of a viable Palestinian State existing side by side in peace with Israel within internationally recognized borders, based on those existing on 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in line with all the relevant United Nations resolutions, international law and internationally agreed parameters. As South Africa's Minister for International Relations and Cooperation, Mrs. Naledi Pandor stated at last week's debate on the situation in the Gulf region, sustainable peace and stability in the Gulf and the wider Middle East region requires an end to its core peace and security challenge, namely, the occupation of Palestine (S/2020/1037, annex 7). In order to resolve this, any initiative to end the conflict and bring an end to Israeli occupation must take into account the needs and aspirations of the Palestinian people. No peace plan or initiative can have any merit or succeed if all parties to the conflict are not included in such talks from the very beginning as equal partners. South Africa is encouraged by the Palestinians' efforts at unity, including efforts to agree on the dates for holding elections. In conclusion, South Africa is deeply concerned about recent media reports that Israel is refusing to renew visas for officials working for the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. That has resulted in 9 of 12 officials conducting critical work and reporting in the occupied Palestinian territory having to abandon their posts and leave the country. We therefore call on Israel to uphold its obligations as a responsible State Member of the United Nations to ensure that the Organization and all of its various agencies, bodies and partners are able to continue their vital work in the occupied Palestinian territory. As it has demonstrated over the years, and based on its own history and recent past, South Africa is ready to assist parties in resolving this long-standing, indeed decades-old, question. Its resolution will transform the Middle East into a zone of peace and unprecedented economic development.
