Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Let
me thank Argentina for organizing this open debate
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Three
months before the presentation of the next report of the
Secretary-General on that subject, and six months after
the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2013/2 in
the framework of February's debate (see S/PV.69170),
today's debate gives us an opportunity to undertake an
interim assessment in the light of recent developments.

Luxembourg fully aligns itself with the statement
to be made by the observer of the European Union.

The statements by the Secretary-General, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the Emergency Relief
Coordinator and the Director for International Law and
Cooperation of the International Committee of the Red
Cross - whom I thank for their statements - have
shown that, unfortunately, a significant gap still exists
between the commitments and obligations of States,
on the one hand, and the often tragic situation on the
ground, on the other.

Among the five challenges that the international
community must address in order to improve the
protection ofcivilians in armed conflict, five challenges
that the Secretary-General highlighted in his 2012
report (S/2012/376), there is one that is particular urgent
in our view in the light of recent developments. I am
referring to improving humanitarian access, especially
in the context of the Syrian conflict.

The statistics speak for themselves: since the
beginning of the crisis, more than 100,000 people,
mostly civilians, including many women and children,
have been killed. Millions others find themselves in
a disastrous humanitarian situation. We all know that
an end to the crisis cannot come about until a political
solution is found. But the millions of civilians who
are trapped in the conflict cannot wait for a political
solution. They need assistance, and they need it now.
They don't just need assistance, they are entitled to
it in the light of the most basic humanitarian criteria
codified in international humanitarian law.

Immediate, free and unimpeded access is essential
to reach the people in need who everyday are more and
more dependent upon humanitarian aid from outside.
The issue of access, which is very sensitive, must not
be compromised in any way.

However, humanitarian actors, including United
Nations agencies, encounter numerous bureaucratic
obstacles on a daily basis. The conditions for granting
humanitarian visas are done in an arbitrary manner.
Checkpoints are increasing. Convoys are ordered to
surrender medical supplies. Equipment intended for
humanitarian purposes - armoured vehicles, surgical
equipment and communication tools, to mention but a
few - are systematically held up in customs.

Those are just a few of the unacceptable elements
that tend to limit or prevent humanitarian assistance to
the Syrian populations who are suffering. It is urgent
that Syria respond to the demands of humanitarian
players and facilitate immediate, free and unimpeded
access to the affected populations through the most
effective channels, including through the front lines
and across borders.

When we speak about the protection of civilians, we
are led inexorably to raise the issue ofthe responsibility
to respect and to ensure respect for international law.
The application of international humanitarian law is the
best guarantee for the protection of civilians. A strong
commitment by States is required in that regard, which
can be shown in particular through the ratification of
existing international instruments. I would encourage
all States that have not yet done so to become parties
to the two main additional protocols to the Geneva
Conventions, but also to other relevant instruments,
such as the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child with regard to children in armed
conflict. With regard to non-State actors that are not
parties to international legal instruments, it is important
that they also be engaged, and in a stronger way. In that
context, I would like to mention the example of two
armed groups in Nepal and in Sri Lanka, respectively,
that have signed and implemented action plans for
children in times of armed conflict. Thanks to that
commitment, an end was put to the recruitment and the
use of children by those armed groups.

We believe in the virtues of persuasion. However,
it has to be said that violations of international
humanitarian law are taking place despite all the
commitments that have been taken. Holding the
perpetrators accountable for their actions is vital in
many ways. First, a strong message would be sent to all
violators to show that no crime will go unpunished. That
dissuasive and preventive aspect ofjustice is important.
In that context, I would like to note the important role
played by the International Criminal Court, a role that
was recently recognized by the Council, and I welcome

that fact. Luxembourg has, sincejanuary, called for the
situation in Syria to be referred to the Court.

Secondly, when we are unable to eliminate the
suffering of victims, justice may provide moral
compensation for the harm suffered. Allow me,
however, to insist on a third element to be taken into
account. That is the issue of reparations to allow injured
parties to start new lives. That too be addressed. Many
opportunities exist at the national and international
levels provided that such projects are adequately
funded. It is important that we mobilize more in that
regard.

On the anniversary of the attack against the United
Nations headquarters in Baghdad, which claimed the
lives of 22 people and wounded many others, I would
like to conclude by joining colleagues before me in
paying homage to the men and women of the United
Nations who, day after day, put the protection of
civilians at the centre oftheir action, sometimes risking
their own lives.

