Mr. Fall: I would like to wish you every success
in your endeavours, Mr. President, and to congratulate
you warmly on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council and on the outstanding manner in
which you, Ambassador Ouane, Permanent
Representative of Mali, are guiding its work. I would
also like to pay tribute to your predecessor,
Ambassador Mignonette Patricia Durrant of Jamaica,
who guided the work of the Council in exemplary
fashion last month.

Of course, I am deeply indebted to you, Sir, and
to your colleagues on the Security Council, for having
so generously given the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People the
opportunity to address the Council, through me, in this
important debate.

This debate has been made necessary by an
explosive situation that has followed the exacerbation
of violence in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem - a perverse sequence of
indiscriminate or targeted assassinations, outbursts of
anger and extreme and disproportionate retaliatory
measures on the part of the Israeli troops, and almost
desperate retaliatory actions, to say nothing of heinous
acts of opportunism on the part of well-known
unrepentant extremists.

The Council will not be surprised to hear that our
Committee is particularly disquieted, given the extreme
and ruthless measures taken by the occupation
authorities - measures that have been referred to by
earlier speakers, and I do not need to recall them.
These measures negate, in effect, the agreements that
were entered into by both parties. This inflicts upon the
long-suffering Palestinian people new suffering and
unacceptable collective sanctions.

Instead of pacifying the situation and creating a
climate conducive to the implementation of the
Mitchell report and Tenet document, these vengeful
acts that have caused so many deaths and massive
destruction of property could, if we are not careful,
degenerate into a disastrous confrontation with
unpredictable consequences for the region and the
world at large.

Even worse, the Israeli Government disregards
the Palestinian Authority's efforts to stop the violence
and punish those who perpetrate violent acts. Our
Committee strongly condemns such acts, regardless of
whether they are committed by the Palestinian or the
Israeli side. Our Committee has noticed that at times,
the Israeli Government has wanted to exploit a tragic
international situation, and that it tried to capitalize on
the legitimate emotion generated by the tragic events
that the people of the United States and the community
of nations lived through recently.

Mr. President, you and the other members of the
Security Council will acknowledge that frustration,
exasperation and rage are looming. The situation has
become unacceptable and so explosive that the
international community is duty-bound to do something
to mitigate or banish the horrible consequences of a
tragedy that is all too well known.

Under the circumstances, the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People urgently calls for the immediate, unconditional
and total withdrawal of the Israeli forces from the
occupied Palestinian territories and the immediate
cessation of all acts of violence and provocation,
together with the deployment of a protection or
observation force in the area. We call for respect for
the principles enshrined in the 1949 Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War and respect for the provisions
of the relevant United Nations resolutions. Those
principles that have been reasserted in the Declaration
of the Conference of the High Contracting Parties,
convened in Geneva on 5 December this year. We also
demand a resumption of the peace negotiations
according to the timetable already agreed, in
accordance with the recommendations of the Mitchell
report and the Tenet document, together with the
implementation of a mechanism of supervision.

Finally, we ask that a just and durable overall
settlement be arrived at in accordance with resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973) of the Security Council, in
keeping with the principle of land for peace, as
reaffirmed in resolution 56/36 of the General
Assembly, adopted only a few days ago. The
Committee of which I am Chairman welcomes the most
recent statement made by the representative of Israel
regarding his commitment to peace and a resumption of
the peace negotiations, and also that Israel will comply
with the implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973) of the Security Council.

This situation tests the credibility of the Security
Council, as well as of the General Assembly, because
Israeli-Arab relations stumble constantly on the
question of Palestine. The fact that this long-standing
issue is central to any lasting solution to the Middle
East problem necessitates the restoration of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people on the basis
of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations.

Our Committee has said many times that peace
cannot thrive, nor can there by any development, in the
region as long as Palestinians and Israelis, who are
destined to live together, fail to develop relations of
trust as sovereign States within secure and
internationally guaranteed borders. The State of Israel
and the future State of Palestine each has a right to
existence, peace and development in dignity and
security.

In the wake of statements made earlier by the
representatives of Palestine, Egypt, Tunisia and others,
our Committee has just stated its position, which flows
directly from the position of the General Assembly
regarding the explosive situation on the ground and its
serious threat to international peace and security. It is
growing late, and at a time when everyone is justifiably
questioning the future of the peace process, the Council
is duty-bound to shoulder its responsibility - nothing
more and nothing less, without procrastinating - to
send a clear message and adopt concrete and decisive
measures dictated by the urgency of the circumstances.

It is growing late, and this Council has no
alternative but to act with diligence, lucidity and
firmness, but also with a keen sense of discernment, by
adopting unanimously the draft resolution presented by
Tunisia and Egypt. The principles and philosophy of
that draft resolution are in accord with the Promethean
vision and objectives developed by American Secretary
of State Colin Powell in his famous Louisville
statement. This must be done before the advocates of
violence, hatred and conflagration come together in a
league of extremism of all stripes to exploit the current
situation to try to promote their dark doctrine and
proceed with their lethal designs, at the expense of the
humanistic brotherhood of civilizations.

