Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I thank the Venezuelan presidency of the Security
Council for having convened today's debate on respect
for the principles and purposes of the Charter of the
United Nations as a key element for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Following the debate
convened by the Uruguayan presidency in January on
the protection of civilians (see S/PV.7606), it is useful
for 2016 to begin with a review of our fundamental
principles. The Charter of the United Nations is first
and foremost a charter of our values and the core of
our action. It is a legacy to be treasured and remains as
relevant as ever.

Our concept note (S/2016/103, annex) invites us
to focus on the purposes and principles of the Charter
and, more specifically, on its Preamble and Chapter
I. On closer reading, we are struck by two challenges
that remain a concern for us. First, in the wake of a
devastating war, our main priority was to maintain
international peace and security. That remains a concern
for us 70 years later. As the concept note recalls, our
Organization has made considerable progress in that
regard thanks in particular to peacekeeping operations,
in which uniformed personnel from 123 countries
participate. Since 1948, 3,438 of them have lost their
lives. We mourn those lives lost and pay special tribute
to them. We owe our security to them. In basing its
actions on the Charter, the Security Council must not
only be able to address crises that threaten international
peace and security, but also know when to withdraw
once the situation has normalized.

The maintenance of international peace and
security has become an increasingly complex challenge
because of the rising terrorist threat. Terrorism affects
all continents. It undermines our societies and even
destabilizes some States. Resolution 2249 (2015)
describes Da'esh as an unprecedented global threat
to international peace and security. We must act
together to combat terrorism with unwavering resolve,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and in line with respect for our human rights and
international humanitarian law commitments.

The maintenance of international peace and
security is not the only objective set out in the United
Nations Charter. The Second World War was freedom's
fight against disdain for the human person. That is

why those who drafted the Charter stressed respect for
human rights as being inextricably linked to economic
and social progress and development. That is the second
concern that emerges from any reading of the purposes
and principles of the Charter, as well as the Preamble.
In those two areas, I believe that we have the strength to
unite to confront formidable challenges. I will briefly
mention a few of these.

First, humanitarian crises ushered in 2016,
beginning with the tragedy in Syria, which is indeed
becoming a black hole that is crushing our very
values. The communique published in Munich by the
International Syria Support Group offers a glimmer
of hope that all players involved will honour all their
commitments tangibly and in good faith. In Syria, as in
Yemen and all situations of armed conflict, it is crucial
to comply with international humanitarian law. Such
compliance is not only a requirement for the peoples of
the United Nations, whom the Charter stipulates that we
protect, but it is also the best guarantee that the worst
will not occur in conflict situations and that peace
and reconciliation remain achievable. Now more than
ever, it is useful to stress that respect for international
humanitarian law is not a concession or a favour, but an
obligation.

The second challenge is upholding the rule of law
and international law. Such collective standards are
recalled in Article 2 of the Charter; they seek to restrict
the use of force within the boundaries of collective
responsibility. It is imperative that we do our all to settle
disputes by peaceful means. At The Hague on 18 April,
the International Court of Justice, whose Statute is
part and parcel of the Charter, will mark the seventieth
anniversary of its first public hearing. I pay tribute to
its central role in settling disputes and strengthening
international law.

Thirdly, France remains convinced that the best
protection against conflict is harmonious development
of States and societies, in all its aspects, while upholding
human rights. Are we rising to these challenges
contained in the purposes and principles of the Charter?
I think that 2015 saw two developments that restored
confidence in and vigour to multilateralism and our
Organization, demonstrating our ability to continue to
set collective goals and norms.

The first action was the adoption by the General
Assembly on 25 September 2015 of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1) and its
17 Goals to build a sustainable future and eradicate
poverty. The second action was the adoption of the Paris
Climate Agreement on 12 December 2015, less than one
month after the attacks that drowned the city in blood.
The Venezuelan Minister for Foreign Affairs, who is
presiding over this meeting, helped us by facilitating
the drafting of the preamble, which underscores the
intrinsic link between combating climate change, fair
access to resources and eradicating poverty. Other
ministers, ambassadors and facilitators contributed
in an inclusive and transparent manner to a universal
and ambitious Agreement to preserve our planet. They
made it possible for the Paris Agreement to become the
first universal environmental agreement that explicitly
refers to mandatory respect for human rights.

We will be opening the legally binding Paris
Agreement for signature here in New York on 22 April.
It is to be hoped that the largest number of countries
possible will sign the Agreement on that date, ifpossible
at the level of Head of State and Government, and then
ratify it as soon as possible. I pay tribute here to the
untiring initiative and support of Secretary-General
Ban ki-Moon for our collective efforts in this regard.

These last two outcomes demonstrate that the
multilateralism embodied by the United Nations is still
alive and overcoming the often violent paradoxes of
our time. Inclusive and transparent discussions open
to those who mandate pursuant to the Charter - we
the peoples - have allowed us to create new collective
rules within the Organization. It is now our obligation to
implement them. In that context, France has proposed,
with the suppport of more than 90 countries, that
the permanent members voluntarily and collectively
abstain from the use of the veto when mass atrocities
have been perpetrated.

This year of 2016 should be a year of action to find
solutions together to the conflicts in Syria, Yemen, the
Middle East and Libya; to prevent others, such as in
Burundi; to consolidate peace processes, such as in
those in Mali and the Central African Republic; and to
provide the serious and swift response called for by the
most recent provocations of North Korea following a
new nuclear test and the launching of a ballistic missile
under the pretext of a rocket launch.

I would like to conclude my statement by quoting
from the concept note before us, as follows:

"the United Nations remains the best option we
have to face, from a perspective of peace and
cooperation, the large and complex challenges to
be faced by humanity" (S/2016/103, annex, p.2).

This is indeed the basis of France's commitment.

