Mr. Shinyo (Japan): The Government of Japan
deeply deplores the situation in Gaza, in which many
Palestinian civilians have become victims during the
recent Israeli military operations. We especially
deplore the fact that more civilian lives were claimed
on 8 November, in the shelling by the Israel Defense
Forces of private houses in Beit Hanoun.

It is necessary for all parties concerned to
exercise maximum restraint in order to avoid further
aggravation of the situation. Japan strongly calls upon
the Government of Israel, in particular, to avoid any
action that may lead to further civilian casualties. We
urge the Government of the Palestinian Authority to
take appropriate measures to bring an immediate end to
the violence by Palestinian extremist groups, including
rocket attacks against Israel.

The deteriorating humanitarian situation among
Palestinians is a matter of deep concern to our
Government. Japan reiterates the importance for the
international community of continuing to provide
necessary assistance in order to address this situation.
For our part, we have been steadily implementing our
pledge of $25 million in humanitarian assistance to the
Palestinian people, announced at the time of the visit of
former Prime Minister Koizumi to Palestine in July.
Japan will continue to cooperate with the international
community in working to achieve the mitigation of
tensions and the restoration of stability in the region.

It is necessary that any statement from the
Council be balanced and that it carefully reflect the
relevant aspects of the situation. The Government of
Japan shares with the other Council members the view
that the Council should act in unity and with all due
haste to take appropriate action in the light of the tragic
event in Beit Hanoun, which we consider unjustifiable.

Based on this recognition, Japan participated
constructively in the discussions on the draft resolution
proposed by the representative of Qatar. We highly
appreciate the flexibility shown by our colleagues from
Qatar, who endeavoured to reflect in the draft
resolutions some of our concerns raised in the process
of discussions. However, the Government of Japan
believes that the text before us (8/2006/878) is not yet
sufficiently balanced and that further discussion is
needed. It is regrettable that the differences of opinion
on a few points have not been successfully bridged. We
therefore abstained in the voting.

