Mr. Mazeiks (Latvia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for having organized today's debate on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. I also thank the
Deputy Secretary-General, the Vice-President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and
the Senior Humanitarian Policy Advisor of Oxfam for
their briefings.

Latvia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union.

Today, far too many conflicts around the globe have
a devastating impact on civilians. Innocent civilians,
including women and children, often constitute the vast
majority of victims or they are deliberately targeted.
Lately, almost every single day we hear about the most
terrible crimes such as killings, torture, sexual violence,
kidnapping, slavery and other crimes perpetrated by
parties to the armed conflict or violent extremists in
many regions. The increasing role of illegal armed
groups and terrorist organizations in conflicts creates
an even more challenging environment for civilians
in conflict zones. Conflicts and Violence force people
to leave their homes, leading to the highest number of
displaced persons and refugees since the Second World
War. A generous international response to the growing
humanitarian needs of people in dire and complex
crises is required on a daily basis.

A failure to protect civilians is tantamount to
disrespect for international law - humanitarian law,
refugee law and human rights law. While at the normative
level there has been progress - the relevant Security
Council resolutions play an important role - the lack
of respect for international humanitarian law and the
existence of impunity on the ground are increasing.

States bear the primary responsibility to protect
their populations from atrocity crimes. Therefore,
Latvia fully supports the joint appeal of the Secretary-
General and the President of the ICRC of 31 October
2015 to make every effort to achieve political solutions
to conflicts, to ensure compliance with international
humanitarian law, hold perpetrators of violations
accountable, grant unhindered access to and protect
humanitarian and medical personnel and facilities, and
respond to the needs ofinternally displaced persons and
refugees. Latvia is a strong supporter of the principle
of the responsibility to protect. We look forward to
reaffirming that commitment via a General Assembly
resolution.

Latvia believes that promoting the protection of
civilians in all United Nations activities is essential.
The Security Council must view the matter as a priority
when addressing situations of concern. Its failure to act
promptly in order to prevent or stop a conflict, and to
demand accountability, is a severe blow to the victims.
We call on the permanent members of the Security
Council to refrain from using the veto in situations
of atrocity crimes and, in that regard, we strongly
support the initiatives of France and Mexico, and the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group.

Strengthening conflict prevention and the reading
of early warning signs are key. We applaud the
Secretary-General for promoting his Human Rights
Up Front initiative, which has been created to regard
human rights and the protection of civilians as a system-
wide responsibility ofthe Organization. Latvia believes
that all three United Nations reviews - on women
and peace and security, on peace operations and on
the peacebuilding architecture - will contribute to a
strengthened United Nations response to conflicts. We
are especially encouraged that the reviews recognize
the role of women in all areas of achieving peace and
security.

Latvia welcomes the fact that protecting civilians
in conflict has come to the forefront of many peace
operations. However, the effective implementation of
protection mandates remains a challenge and must be
improved through the ongoing peacekeeping review.
Latvia is willing to contribute to United Nations
peacekeeping efforts and, in addition to our engagement
in the European Union, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and NATO missions,
has decided to join a United Nations peacekeeping
mission for the first time. Last week, the Parliament
of Latvia supported the participation of Latvian troops
in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, but we will also increase
our practical engagement in the global coalition to
counter the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, also
known as Daesh, and will contribute to the training of
Iraqi security forces.

We cannot become immune to human suffering
and calls for help. Remaining, as well as emerging,
challenges to the protection of civilians in conflicts
from Syria to Ukraine, as underscored by the recent
report of the Secretary-General, must be addressed
with a sense of urgency. The international community
must step up its commitment to providing stronger
protection to civilians.

