Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing. We have
been following the escalation of Violence in the
occupied Palestinian territory and the high number of
Palestinians killed and injured in the Gaza protests. Let
me join others in expressing our deepest sorrow and
sympathy for the loss of lives. We wish the injured a
speedy recovery.

I would like to echo what the Secretary-General
said yesterday through his spokesperson:

"Israel security forces must exercise maximum
restraint in the use of live fire. Hamas and the leaders
of the demonstrations have a responsibility to prevent
all Violent actions and provocations."

We are also holding this meeting against the
backdrop of ongoing discontent from Palestinians and
the region over the latest development surrounding the
issue of the city of Jerusalem. We have expressed our
position on this issue unequivocally, which is in line
with the African Union position reiterated yesterday
by Chairperson Moussa Faki. We believe the Jerusalem
issue is a final-status issue that must be resolved through
direct negotiations between the two parties on the basis
of the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions, while taking into account the legitimate
concerns of both the Palestinian and Israeli sides.

It is self-evident that, unless the peace process is
advanced and the underlying problems are resolved
peacefully, the current tragedy would only happen again
and again, eventually reaching the point of no return.
That is where we seem to be headed. The situation
is that grave. Much greater violence is becoming
increasingly imminent, as a natural consequence of the
current circumstances.

That is why preserving the possibility of reaching
a two-State solution is absolutely critical and cannot be
avoided. There is no other viable option. All arguments
to the contrary are unrealistic and are not consistent
with the firm commitment to seek a just and democratic
resolution of the problem.

That is why it is so critical that ways and means
be found to limit the damage that would be caused and
to try, no matter how difficult, to continue the peace
process and save the two-State formula, which is a long-
held position of the United Nations and the international
community. But there is no denying the fact that the
formula may soon become unviable - a situation from
which no one would benefit, jeopardizing the aims
of achieving greater security or promoting national
aspirations. The basic elements required for reliable
and sustainable peace between the Palestinians and
Israel are two, that is, dependable security for Israel,
on the one hand, and the realization of the national
aspiration of Palestinians, on the other. Any attempt to
run away from this reality or to ignore it can lead only
to the tension, violence and bloodletting we have been
witnessing. Whether done openly and without qualms
or in a less transparent manner and far from public gaze,
the attempt to make the Palestinian quest for justice and
fairness a footnote to other issues that the region has in
abundance would no doubt lead to perpetual turmoil
with unimaginable consequences for all.

The writing is on the wall, and the trajectory is by
no means unfathomable. Nevertheless, it is the parties
that should show flexibility to engage in direct and
meaningful negotiation to reach a final settlement on all
issues. However, the international community - and
particularly the Security Council - should discharge
its responsibility in helping and encouraging the two
sides to do so.

It is also in that context that we support initiatives
that have been under way to facilitate negotiation
between the Israelis and the Palestinians with a View to
achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting resolution.
The efforts of the Middle East Quartet, the Quarter's
road map, the Arab Peace Initiative and the work of
countries within and outside the Council are very much
appreciated and should be encouraged to continue.

I want to conclude by expressing profound
appreciation to Mr. Mladenov for the very honourable
way he has been discharging his responsibilities. We
realize how heavy that responsibility is.

