Mr. Kafle (Nepal): I have the honour to convey
Nepal's appreciation to the Japanese presidency of the
Security Council for convening today's timely and
important initiative. I also thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive briefing and his emphasis on
peace diplomacy.

We live in a world where everything but human
beings travels freely without any geographical
hindrances. We have witnessed the movement of
information, cultures, ideas and capital. which has
made a positive contribution to our quality of life.
However, contemporary, non-traditional sources of
complex challenges, such as climate change, pandemics,
transnational organized crime, drug trafficking,
trafficking in persons, and natural disasters, among
others, have transcended geographical boundaries with
severe ramifications.
Similarly, tensions, deepening inequalities within
societies, political exclusion and poor governance
have also been found to fuel intraState conflicts. The
factors spurring conflicts within a country also have
the capacity to exacerbate regional and global peace
and security. Moreover, such factors are interdependent
and interlinked as in a domino effect. Complex and
multi-layered threats require a multidisciplinary
response. It is also true that no one country can deal
with such threats on its own. Only concerted and
comprehensive efforts at the regional and global levels
can meaningfully address those challenges.

Studies have established the hazardous
consequences of climate change and their security and
economic implications. Climate change and natural
disasters will increase the number of environmental
migrants. It is the shared responsibility of all States
Members of the United Nations to ensure a secure
future for environmental migrants. My country,
Nepal, is one of the hardest hit in that regard. Effects
have included a shifting snow-line, floods caused by
glacial-lake outbursts, the extinction of rare flora and
fauna, and excessive pressure on fresh water and food
security. The Security Council has the duty to play its
part in holistically addressing climate change, with a
strong political message showing its commitment.

The Council members that contribute to
greenhouse-gas emissions must lead others by example.
It is equally important to garner political support for
ongoing climate-change frameworks and to enhance
international cooperation for capacity-building in the
least developed countries, which are most vulnerable to
climate change.

Apart from environmental threats, human
activities continue to add to the list of emerging
challenges. Terrorism, organized crime, separatism
and drug trafficking, among others, are often used as
tools by some groups for their benefit, jeopardizing the
safety and security of others. People are themselves
the ultimate source of many of the threats. We must
therefore focus on empowerment through education, as
well as on non-military tools of conflict prevention and
resolution, as envisaged in Chapter VI of the Charter
of the United Nations. Preventive measures, such as
early-warning systems, mediation and peacebuilding
efforts, are effective in preventing local tensions from
escalating into large-scale conflicts.

As a country that provides troops to peacekeeping
missions, Nepal believes that as peacekeepers carry
out their mandate to protect civilians, their safety
and security must also be ensured. The Council could
increase its engagement with other intergovernmental
organizations and relevant regional institutions in
that endeavour. Similarly, national capacities could be
enhanced to ensure the rule oflaw and the provision of
public services.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that the
ultimate focus should be on protecting people from
emerging threats by empowering them with resources
and capacities, resolving local conflicts and making
full use of indigenous wisdom, and putting people first
in conflict prevention and resolution, as well as by
engaging all three pillars ofthe United Nations -peace,
development and human rights.

