Mr. Malloch Brown: I must say that, listening to
this debate, two thoughts are uppermost in my mind.
The first is the seriousness of all speakers with regard
to dealing with the breakdown of systems and, in some
cases perhaps, corruption. I think we all are very sober
about that. Everybody recognizes that we have to solve
these problems. The second very strong sense I have is
the difficulty of dealing with these evolving
management issues, where we have investigations
under way, in a political forum such as this. I say that
at several levels; first, because words matter.
Unintentionally, people can imply guilt when there is
still not a completed investigation. Unintentionally,
people can exaggerate - or indeed understate - the
extent of problems. All of this leads to great difficulty
for us on the management side to act in a steady, fair
and balanced way towards all involved.

The President asked, in his national capacity,
whether I would confirm that I had indeed asked a
senior official, who happens to be an American, to
brief the press. I will confirm that I certainly did so.
The reason that I asked him to do it was because there
had been a leak, which was already in the press and
which was doing severe damage to the reputation of
the Organization and to the individuals who had been
named. What I asked him to do was to explain the steps
we were taking to make sure that the audit reports were
followed up. We did not ask him to, and he did not, lay
out the findings of this report, because those indeed
should properly first go to the Member States. But,
because the report had been leaked, it was very
difficult for that official to keep his briefing separate
from the findings in the report. But, again, I come back to
the point that words matter. Journalists took observations
that were made in that press conference as evidence of
proven corruption. The official did not intend them that
way; and he would have had no basis to claim them
that way, because investigations continue.

As Chief of Staff to a Secretary-General who
believes profoundly not so much in the national but in
the international civil servant concept, I would like to
speak up for another American official, the Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations. It was
suggested that perhaps she too should have been
suspended. I just want to say that this is where words
become so difficult, because, with great respect to the
Permanent Representative of Singapore, these are two
very different cases. One revolves around an investigation
into actions that the individual he named took, which we
very much hope will exonerate him. The Secretary-
General felt that, until that investigation was
completed, it was not appropriate that he continue with
his functions. Against the other individual no such
allegations, by any stretch of the imagination, have been
made. It is an issue of where the buck stops in a system of
decentralized management and accountability. In our
response to the report of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services (OIOS), we made it clear that we feel
that management at all levels - the Secretary-General,
those of us who work for him and the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations and his senior
colleagues: all of us - have to take responsibility for a
breakdown of this kind. But we think it would be very
unfair to single out one senior official at the expense of
others.

Again, just on the point that words matter, many
participants listened carefully to what I said about the
$300 million that was identified in the OIOS report.
But to those who again described it as one bundle, let
me again say that a big portion of it pertains to over-
budgeting of resources, not a penny of which we have
any reason to believe was lost to the Organization. The
second part of that figure pertains to an extrapolation
of sums from two missions studied: What if the same
thing had happened in all missions? But those were
two new missions, which have much greater
vulnerability to difficulties in the area of procurement
than do established missions that have systems well in
place. The third large part of that figure has to do with
weak compliance with procedures, which again may
mean that there was something funny going on, but not
necessarily, given that we believe those procedures are
unduly complicated and not suitable for the field
operations that they cover.

Having said all that, we acknowledge that within
the $300 million there is a much smaller percentage
that, on the face of it, is extremely alarming and may,
at the end of investigations, lead to charges against
individual colleagues. But I think that a sense of
proportion is extremely important in all of this.

I would like to make two final points.

Again, we must not let politics get in the way of
the difficult management task we have before us. The
Secretary-General was very happy to have me come to
brief the Council at the request of the President. But he
warned the Council that he was extremely concerned
that this might become a kind of showdown between
the General Assembly and the Security Council about
their respective roles. None of us want that, at a time
when we all have to work together both to solve a
problem of this kind and, more important, to push
through critical reforms of our Organization, including
establishing the Human Rights Council and dealing
with management reform, which comes up next week.
We cannot do it if we are divided about the different
roles that the Council and our Governments must play.

Finally on the issue of management reform, let
me just say - to, if you like, pre-sell what you will
hear from us next week - that, as I have told the
Council, there is a 50 per cent vacancy rate in field
procurement staff. That is against a 30 per cent
vacancy rate in field staff generally. We have to
improve their conditions of service. Their families are
not with them, they are on short-term contracts and
they are very disadvantaged as compared with those of
us who work here in New York. We have to correct that
if we want a stable, motivated workforce that prevents
problems of these kinds from arising.

With regard to the issue of training, guess what
the training budget is for the 70 members of the
procurement department here at Headquarters. It is a
princely $20,000 per year. Yet we have a major issue in
this area with regard to retraining and retooling, which
we need to address. As was mentioned by several
Permanent Representatives, unless we create an
information technology (IT) platform to underpin
procurement, and for that matter all of our
decentralized management arrangements, we are not
going to get to the bottom of these issues. New IT
systems are also expensive. Do not, therefore, expect
next week's management reform report to be cheap on
the pocketbook. If we want a United Nations that lives
up to what all of those around this table have said this
week, it will cost us. But I think it will be an
investment well worth making.

