The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this important
discussion. Ensuring peace and security for the people
of Africa is not only at the very core of the United
Nations agenda; it is also a top priority for me
personally. I wish to act with a strong sense of urgency.
I want to emphasize the importance of results, action
and delivery.

Many African countries are confronted with
daunting peace and security challenges. But
encouraging signs are emerging. Progress has been
achieved on several fronts. The successful conduct of
elections in Sierra Leone is the most recent
manifestation of the positive trends. The Governments
2

and peoples of Africa must be commended for their
determined efforts to address the challenges. But
African peacemakers alone cannot tackle the
continent's conflicts.

(spoke in English)

That is why the United Nations is working to
strengthen its partnerships with regional organizations,
such as the African Union (AU). The goal is to enhance
the capacities to address conflicts. Together we must
respond in a more timely and complementary manner
to the crises in Africa.

The hybrid operation for Darfur represents an
unprecedented partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union. It is an expression of our
collective commitment to end the tragedy of Darfur.
More broadly, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations is working with the AU to develop an
African standby force to help maintain durable peace
on the continent as a whole.

But we must invest more in prevention and
mediation so that disagreements do not develop into
violence. Efforts to prevent conflict require much
fewer resources than do peacekeeping operations. Next
month, I intend to propose to the General Assembly a
significant strengthening of the Department of Political
Affairs to make more effective use of my good offices.
I count on the Council's support.

I also seek its continued assistance in our efforts
to consolidate peace in fragile post-conflict countries
in order to help prevent a relapse into violence. The
Peacebuilding Commission has so far helped bring
increased international attention to recovery efforts in
Burundi and Sierra Leone. We anticipate more
referrals, including of African countries, for the
Commission's consideration.

Climate change brings additional challenges to
Africa, including in peace and security. As underscored
at the high-level meeting I convened yesterday,
decisive international action to address global warming
is crucial. It is particularly important for Africa, as the
impact of climate change will fall disproportionately
on some of its poorest countries.

Equally pressing is the need to make
development work in Africa. Fighting extreme poverty
is key to preventing conflict. That is why I recently
launched the Millennium Development Goals Africa
Steering Group, together with the African Union, the
07-51572
World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the
European Commission and other partners. The aim is
to galvanize international action to reach the goals on
the continent by 2015.

(spoke in French)

Along the continuum from conflict prevention to
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding in
Africa, I am committed to ensuring that the United
Nations plays its role to the fullest extent possible.

