Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
appreciate Colombia's initiative to hold this open
debate on the question of Haiti. I would also like to
thank President Santos Caldero'n for his presence today
to preside over this meeting. I also listened carefully to
the statements made by Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and
former United States President Clinton, and President
Preval of Haiti.

Last year, Haiti suffered a series of setbacks as a
result of the earthquake and the cholera epidemic. It
now faces the long-term and daunting task of
maintaining security and stability and rebuilding the
country. China is concerned about the current political,
security and humanitarian situation in Haiti. The
international community should continue to focus on
Haiti and to provide proactive assistance and support.
Today, I would like to focus on four points.

First, our priority for Haiti now is to drive
forward its political process and to ensure a peaceful
and smooth transfer of power after the election. China
hopes that the second round of the presidential election
will be a significant impetus to the democratic process
and political reconciliation in Haiti. We also hope that
the Haitian parties concerned will maintain their unity
and strengthen their mutual trust so as to create
favourable conditions for political stability and early
reconstruction.

Secondly, in ensuring security and stability in
Haiti, the international community should increase its
assistance to Haiti for post-disaster reconstruction and
development. To date, the pace of recovery and
rebuilding in Haiti remains slow. We call on the
international community to pay greater attention to
Haiti's existing difficulties and real needs so as to
accelerate fulfilling the commitments made at the
United Nations donor conference on 31 March last year
and to ensure that the resources are obtained and the
projects carried out.

Thirdly, the Government and people of Haiti bear
the primary responsibility for maintaining their
national security and stability, rebuilding their country
and achieving sustainable development. The
international community should respect Haiti's
ownership and leading role. China believes that the
international community's priority should be to help
Haiti to maintain security and stability, to restore and
strengthen the institutional capacity of the
Government, and to accelerate post-disaster
reconstruction. The parties concerned should improve
their division of labour and strengthen cooperation and
coordination.

Fourthly, China appreciates the contributions
made by the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) in helping Haiti to maintain
security and stability. China supports MINUSTAH's
ongoing implementation of its Security Council
mandate to focus on assisting Haiti to maintain security
and stability, to drive forward its political process, and
to support the capacity-building of Government
institutions, in particular in the security, police and
judicial sectors, so as to create a safe and stable
environment conducive to the reconstruction and
development of Haiti.

