Sir Jeremy Greenstock: I will not take long. I
wish first to thank Member States for their
interventions this morning, which have been interesting
and very positive, and to express appreciation to them
also for the tremendous amount of hard work that is
going into the whole process of the interaction between
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and Member
States. What they are doing in their capitals and what
they are doing in their delegations matters a
tremendous amount to them, and it is nearly all being
done very well.

I think there is a sense from this morning of
overall support and momentum from Member States,
which is extremely important to the CTC. Members of
that Committee are very conscious that we have to
continue to earn it in the future, but it is Vital to us.

I think it was the representative of Fiji who talked
about the many threads of our activity in this very
complex operation against a nasty threat. In the
Committee, we have become increasingly conscious
that we have to create a global network. It has to be
pervasive and comprehensive, and that, increasingly, is
what we are trying to do. I think it is reflected very
well in the declaration contained in resolution 1456
(2003). I think it is reflected in the CTC's response to
that, which - although it looks quite bureaucratic in
the follow-up paper that we have put round behind my
remarks this morning - is very comprehensive and
becoming increasingly operational. I think Member
States are appreciating that.

I want to assure Members of the United Nations
that, in that follow-up - I think it was the
representatives of Egypt and South Africa who referred
to this point - we will take Member States on their
merits. There are different capacities and different
speeds of work that are possible. So long as every
Member State is working to its own full capacity, then
it has a willing partner in the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. There was an enormous amount of
comment - a very encouraging amount of comment -
on the regional activity that is going on. Paragraph 5 of
the declaration annexed to resolution 1456 (2003) says,
"States should assist each other to improve their
capacity", and States are beginning to do that.

I want to be invidious for a moment and say that,
in my personal view, the Organization of American
States is still, in the lead amongst regional
organizations for its cohesiveness and for the detail
that it is putting into its programmes. But all the
regional organizations are way ahead of where they
were 18 months ago. I think that that is a very
encouraging development. They realize as
organizations and as individual States that it is in their
interest to keep terrorism out. There are deep
economic, social and political disadvantages in
allowing terrorism to take place or to grow on one' s
territory.

I think that it was South Africa, again, that
brought out very clearly the importance of the
collective in achieving the interests of each Member
State. The fact that that is realized is very valuable.
There is a growth of machinery in these organizations.
There is a growth of bilateral and multilateral exchange
activity and operational coordination. There is a growth
of seminaring and conferencing. There is a growth of
the exchange of best practice. All of this is
tremendously valuable.

I think that it was Fiji that talked also about the
areas of vulnerability. There is a growing realization in
all States that there are gaps in their performance and
in their makeup against terrorism about which they are
learning from participation in the collective activity. I
hope that our conference on 7 March will be not just a
collection of written and oral information handouts but
also an exchange on how these points of vulnerability
can most easily be filled by action learned from best
practice elsewhere.

My thanks go also to those States that are
contributing to the assistance programmes and indeed
to the international organizations as well. The
European Union is coming up fast now on this front,
but the United States, Japan, Australia and Canada, in
addition to member States of the European Union, have
all made clear how much they are putting into,
particularly, their own regions. Yes, this needs
prioritization. And yes, the CTC will help - Canada
mentioned this - with developing priorities for the
assistance programme. It is something that Ambassador
Ward is working on.

Some mention should also be made of the
connections with international organized crime and
weapons of mass destruction. The Committee is going
to get further into this in the near future, but up to, I
think, 10 Member States mentioned this this morning.
It is my hope - I hope it is not a dream - that the
structures that we are beginning to put into place for
counter-terrorism in the global network will also prove
valuable in the activity against other forms of
international organized crime and eventually in
providing a much more cohesive and effective structure
for keeping weapons of mass destruction out of the
wrong hands.

The requests for greater proactivity, transparency
and help with guidelines that we heard this morning -
Israel and Liechtenstein touched on those points - are
being listened to by the Committee. I think that we
must be careful as a Committee not to try to do
everything ourselves. The right professional
organizations should be the ones calling for
conferences and operational action on civil aviation,
shipping, other forms of communication, customs work
and arms control. There are much better bodies than
the CTC to do that. But we will be a switchboard for
making sure that this activity happens.

As for guidelines on compliance, which was
Liechtenstein' s point, the fundamental guideline is the
text of resolution 1373 (2001). We will not stop
advocating that. But I think that the 7 March meeting
will usefully get into global standards as guidelines in
each of the main areas. Delegations will find that as the
published material of the Committee and its sister
organizations increases, that corpus of written work
will provide an extremely useful set of guidelines and
information to Member States as they devise their own
national programmes.

I think that after a further period of time - and
we will talk about this in the future - the Committee,
under my successor, Ambassador Arias, will eventually
need to develop into a more professional body. I think
that we should start brainstorming on that, and we will
do it over the coming period.

I end with warm thanks to you, Mr. President, for
organizing this meeting, to the Committee for its
continued hard work and increasing professionalism, to
our excellent body of experts and to our Secretariat
help, which is, as we said this morning, increasing in
effectiveness and experience all the time.

I think that we have now discussed, analysed and
planned enough. The next period will be for action.

