Mr. Bermudez Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I thank Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock for his very complete briefing.

As we do every month, let me acknowledge the
constant work, sacrifice and courage of the staff of
the Office for the Coordination for Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) and of its partner agencies in Syria
and bordering countries, who risk their lives every day
to try to alleviate the living conditions of millions of
Syrian civilians.

In a scenario that unfortunately, month after
month, is presented as negative, yesterday we received
the much-anticipated news of a ceasefire, the lifting of
the siege and the entry of humanitarian assistance to
the area of eastern Ghouta. According to the reports,
conditions in that area are desperate due to famine and
malnutrition and the continuous bombings of recent
days, despite being one of the violence de-escalation
areas under the Astana process. We hope that the
conditions that made that agreement possible will be
maintained and that we will not return to a situation
of extreme violence and destruction, neither in eastern
Ghouta nor in any other part of the Syrian territory.

That announcement, which took place at the
beginning of the eighth round of intra-Syrian
negotiations in Geneva, is a sign that we are on the right
path i a confidence-building measure that can make
possible the bridging of positions in order once and for
all to discuss issues of great importance for the political
transition in Syria, such as a constitutional process and
a call for future elections.

We have little to add that we have not said in relation
to this conflict and the suffering of the Syrian people.
Nevertheless, we would like to reiterate some messages
that are very important for Uruguay.

Over the past two years, Uruguay, as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council, has
made the protection of civilians and international
humanitarian law a central focus of its efforts,
constantly working to prevent the hindering of access
and the distribution of aid throughout Syrian territory,
including besieged and hard-to-reach areas, without
distinction between besieged and besiegers. We are
concerned that humanitarian access continues to face
serious difficulties every month. Immediate, safe and
unhindered access is needed to serve all those in need
in Syria. We appeal to countries with influence over
Syrian authorities to take steps to ensure that access
is guaranteed by way of permanent cooperation and
coordination with OCHA.

In view of the pressing needs still facing the
Syrian people, we believe that it is of the utmost
importance that the Security Council be able next
month to renew resolution 2165 (2014) and subsequent
resolutions in order to allow the entry of cross-border
aid from neighbouring countries. We reiterate that the
Government of Syria has the primary responsibility
to allow its own population access to food, water,
medicines and supplies for their survival until the
conflict is definitively ended.

We have also constantly called for ensuring the
protection and safety of humanitarian workers as
they carry out their tasks. As we have said so many
times before: civilians are not targets; hospitals are not
targets. Humanitarian principles, human rights and
international humanitarian law must be respected in
all conflicts. When they are violated, as has happened
blatantly and repeatedly in Syria, and when very
serious crimes have been committed that constitute
war crimes and crimes against humanity, the only
option is to find a way to hold those responsible for
such acts accountable to justice. In that regard, we once
again support the call by Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres that cases committed in Syria be referred to
the International Criminal Court. We also hope that
full cooperation will be given to the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic, which was
established at the end of last year.

With regard to the Astana process, it must be
emphasized that it and other regional initiatives to
achieve a cessation of local hostilities made possible
a significant reduction in violence. However, the
continuous bombing of eastern Ghouta by the Syrian
Government and its allies shows that the terms
announced at the beginning of May by the three
guarantor countries have not been fully respected.
Although there have been important advances, it is
necessary to ensure unrestricted access by the United
Nations and to humanitarian aid in those areas,
including freedom of movement to enter and leave those
territories voluntarily, which would afford guarantees
that the basic principles of international humanitarian
law are being respected.

The priorities in Syria are clearly defined: a
political solution must come about that puts an end to
the war and ushers in a peaceful transition in Syria;
the ceasefires must be consolidated until a cessation of
hostilities is achieved throughout the entire territory;
all sieges must be lifted; and humanitarian access
must be guaranteed for the millions of people who still
depend on assistance for their subsistence.

In conclusion, in the next stage, which we hope will
not be too far-off, reconstruction, national reconciliation
and the return of the millions of internally displaced
persons and refugees in third countries will also
become a priority and a course of action for the future.

