Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): At the outset
allow me to commend you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting on the situation in the Great
Lakes region. I also wish to thank Mr. Ibrahima Fall
and Ms. Liberata Mulamula for their presentations.

Let me also take this opportunity to express my
delegation's appreciation to the Government of Kenya
for hosting the Second Summit of Heads of State and
Government of the International Conference of the
Great Lakes Region. The Conference, which was
convened under the auspices of the United Nations and
the African Union, offered member countries and other
international partners the opportunity to exchange
views on ways to transform the region into an area of
sustainable peace and security, political and social
stability, shared growth and development.

The Great Lakes region has suffered a long
period of conflicts with devastating consequences. An
area that had over a decade become a theatre of
internecine conflicts that have led to all sorts of
violence - including forced internal and external
displacement of people, most of whom were already in
a state of desolation - now seems to be gradually
returning to normalcy.

In this regard, we welcome the signing of the
Pact on Security, Stability and Development in the
Great Lakes Region in Nairobi on 15 December 2006.
The desire of the regional leaders to settle disputes
through negotiation, good offices, investigation,
mediation, conciliation or any other political means
based on a mechanism mutually agreed upon is highly
commendable.

The Great Lakes region, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in particular, is endowed with enormous
natural resources. Therefore, given stability, the area
could see tremendous development. The successful
conduct of the elections and the smooth transition in
Congo and the other countries in the region -
Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda - provide them an
atmosphere conducive to continuing their political and
economic reconstruction processes towards the
establishment of stable and democratic societies and
modern State institutions, based on the rule of law.
We also welcome the fact that the States of the
region have agreed to put in place regional rules and
mechanisms for combating the illegal exploitation of
natural resources. Such exploitation constitutes a
violation of the States' right of permanent sovereignty
over their natural resources and represents a serious
source of insecurity, instability, tension and conflicts in
the region. In this connection, we urge member States
to seriously consider putting in place useful
mechanisms such as the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme. This Scheme has proved to be
quite useful in containing the illegal exploitation and
smuggling of diamonds and, hopefully, in effectively
limiting the financing of conflicts.

It is important that political systems are
democratic and inclusive, and that they engender a
climate of trust and participation by all. Good
governance and the rule of law will create an
environment conducive to reconstruction. It is essential
to take decisive actions against corruption, ensure
respect for human rights and fight the climate of
impunity and politically driven justice prevailing in the
wider region. The International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda and the International Criminal Court have a
central role to play in the efforts to bring to justice
those responsible for serious human rights violations
and war crimes.

The disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, repatriation or resettlement of the various
armed groups is a cardinal component of the plans for
stabilizing the whole region. It is important that the
international community not disengage too rapidly and
that an adequate United Nations presence be
maintained in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and in Burundi.

The future of the countries in the region must be
built on good neighbourliness and regional
cooperation. Reviving the Economic Community of the
Great Lakes Countries could prove promising for
fostering and strengthening regional economic
integration.

We applaud the Peacebuilding Commission for
approving $25 million for Burundi for post-conflict
reconstruction. We hope that sometime in the future,
when all is settled in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Peacebuilding Commission will also
consider the case of that country.

We also wish to appeal to the leadership in the
area to show commitment and determination in
ensuring the speedy and effective implementation of
the Pact. Needless to say, the determination of the
leadership to transform the region into an area of
lasting peace, stability and prosperity will require
sustained and coordinated support by all parties
involved, including the countries of the region, the
African Union, the United Nations and the Group of
Friends, co-chaired by Canada and the Netherlands, as
well as other international partners. The Security
Council should remain supportive of this undertaking.

To that end we support the plea for an extension
of the term of office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, who has been doing excellent
work, for another year. We also wish Ms. Mulamula
success in her new assignment.

