Mr. Agam (Malaysia): Malaysia condemns
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and has
joined in international efforts to combat this menace.
Malaysia, also, does not reject the use of sanctions
provided for in the Charter as a necessary coercive
measure as long as the sanctions are taken as a measure
of last resort short of the use of force, are targeted,
have minimal humanitarian impact on the population at
large and have a specific time-frame.

It was for these reasons that my delegation
supported resolution 1267 of 15 October 1999, which
imposed sanctions on the Taliban, in spite of a number
of reservations we had on the resolution. However, we
have difficulty in supporting the additional measures
being contemplated against the Taliban contained in the
draft resolution before the Council, on both procedural
as well as substantive grounds.

Paragraph 6 (c) of resolution 1267 had tasked the
Afghan sanctions committee to undertake periodic
impact assessments of the sanctions. We believe that
only through such assessments will the Council be able
to evaluate the effectiveness of the sanctions and their
effects on the population of Afghanistan, which is not
the target of the sanctions and should therefore not be
adversely affected by them. Regrettably, no such
periodic assessments were carried out. Instead, in a
belated attempt to "comply" with resolution 1267, a
joint impact assessment was made by the two most
interested members of the Council. This joint impact
assessment does not satisfy, procedurally or
substantively, the specific requirement of resolution
1267 for the simple reason that it was submitted to the
sanctions committee just before the submission of this
draft resolution and therefore cannot, in all seriousness,
be described as a periodic report to the Committee.
Neither was it an "objective" or "impartial"
assessment, given the fact that it was jointly submitted
by the two most interested members of the Council,
who are most directly involved in the entire exercise
and have the most vested interest in the subject. The
joint report does not reflect a serious effort to improve
the design of the sanctions regime and is at variance
with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs' (OCHA) own authoritative and comprehensive
study drawn from extensive observations of the
situation on the ground.

The design of any sanctions regime should be a
careful and well-thought-out process, with emphasis on
its effectiveness and, more importantly, on
minimization of its humanitarian impact. OCHA asserts
that the direct impact of current measures on the
humanitarian situation is indeed limited but not without
some indirect impact that is both tangible and
intangible. The high levels of vulnerability of the
people of Afghanistan are likely to exacerbate the
impact of what would otherwise be fairly insignificant
effects of the sanctions regime. The imposition of
additional measures will exacerbate the sense of
isolation and despair of the people of Afghanistan,
living as they are in an impoverished, landlocked
country, and suffering from the debilitating effects of a
long and protracted war and the worst drought in a
generation. These additional measures might also lead
to the deterioration of the humanitarian operational
environment in the Taliban-controlled areas in
Afghanistan, especially if the Taliban were to withhold
its cooperation with the ongoing activities of the

S/PV.4251

 

international humanitarian agencies operating in its
areas of control. Given the high dependence of the
Afghan population on international humanitarian
assistance for their survival, these additional measures
against the Taliban may pose serious risks to current
and future humanitarian programmes on the ground.
These are risks we should not gamble on. We should be
mindful of the warning given by the Afghan Support
Group - the group of international donors - about
the inherent risks of doing anything that may cause yet
more misery for the long-suffering civilian population
of Afghanistan.

My delegation is also concerned at the negative
impact of such measures on the peace process - a
process which the Council had strongly supported. The
Secretary-General's Special Representative on
Afghanistan, Mr. Francesc Vendrell, in a recent
briefing of the Council, expressed the hope that the
beginning of a new negotiating process among the
conflicting parties might lead to substantive talks and,
in a direct reference to the additional measures being
contemplated, he in fact cautioned about their timing.
We should heed his cautionary words of advice. We
believe that every effort should be made to support the
fledgling peace process and that Mr. Vandrell, who,
after all, has only recently undertaken his mission,
should be given the opportunity to exhaust his efforts,
which are at the initial stage. In the quagmire of
Afghanistan, any glimmer of hope, any chink of light,
should be pursued. The Council should be supportive,
not dismissive of any peace effort, however
unpromising its prospects in the short term. Rolling
back the threat of international terrorism - important
though it is - is only one aspect of the business of the
Council. Furthering the peace process is an equally
important mission, which should not be relegated to the
back-burner simply because of impatience or
frustration at the slow or insignificant progress made
thus far.

My delegation also has reservations on the
imposition of measures against the Taliban that, in
effect, interfere with the country's civil war. The one-
sided arms embargo on the Taliban is a measure that, in
our View, compromises the essential neutrality of the
Council. Without that necessary neutrality the Council
will undermine its own role and credibility. Also, while
we support the ban on acetic anhydride, the wording of
the operative paragraph sends out the wrong signal and
might compromise the work of the United Nations anti-
drug programme in the region. It would imply that the
sale, supply or transfer of the chemical to non-Taliban-
controlled areas is tolerated. We would, of course, have
supported a universal arms embargo and a complete

ban on the chemical in Afghanistan.

The Council should empathize and sympathize
with the plight of the despairing people of Afghanistan,
rather than impose measures that further isolate them
and some of which will have a direct or indirect impact
on their well-being, given the fact that the Taliban
controls over 90 per cent of Afghanistan's territory.

My delegation had wished that we could have
joined other members of the Council in supporting the
draft resolution. We had wished that most of our
reservations would have been taken on board and that,
above all, precedence would have been given to
following the correct procedure rather than to political
expediency, which seems to be the case judging by the
manner in which the draft resolution has been steam-
rolled through. As a legal measure, every care should
have been taken to ensure that the sanctions regime
against the Taliban is not politicized. Under the
circumstances, my delegation will abstain on the draft
resolution.

