Mr. Inderfurth (United States of America): The
United States has just cast its vote in favour of a
resolution which in effect removes the arms embargo
placed upon the previous Government of Rwanda. The
current Government of Rwanda has been seeking this
change for a number of months, and we have supported
its request from the beginning. The Government of
Rwanda faces a threat from extremists in the militias and
former army, who will - according to the terms of
today's resolution - continue to be restricted from
buying arms. With the adoption of this resolution, the
Government of Rwanda will be better able to deter
violent action by these groups or, if necessary, defend the

 

new Rwandan society it is trying to build. The Government
of Rwanda has agreed to certain conditions, such as
reporting its purchases to the Council, in order to assuage
the concerns of Council members and neighbouring States.
We appreciate the flexibility shown by the Government of
Rwanda on these issues. We fully support its right of
self-defence, but underline that an unwarranted stockpiling
of arms should not take place.

This step, however, goes only part of the way towards
normalizing the situation in Rwanda. The prompt
submission by the Secretary-General of recommendations
for a commission of inquiry into allegations of arms flows
to former Rwandan armed forces and the speedy
establishment of such a commission are also necessary for
the reduction of tension and the creation of a climate of
trust.

Today's resolution underlines the expectation that the
Government of Rwanda will shoulder all the responsibilities
of an effective government, including creating the
conditions of trust and confidence which are necessary for
the safe and voluntary return of refugees.

One key element in creating such a climate of trust is
an immediate improvement in the overcrowded conditions
of Rwandan prisons. The United States is gravely
concerned about the humanitarian crisis caused by the
detention of more than 50,000 prisoners. We believe the
Government of Rwanda should take measures as soon as
possible to reduce the prison population through the release
of young and elderly prisoners whenever possible, to reach
agreement with international humanitarian organizations on
steps to alleviate the overcrowding, to reduce the number
of arrests to the absolute minimum, and to take steps to
establish a functioning judiciary in Rwanda, beginning with
naming a new Supreme Court.

The Council's action today takes one step towards
addressing the problems of the region. We trust that the
Secretary-General and the Governments of Rwanda and its
neighbours will also take steps which are necessary for
improving the situation. The Council, for its part, will
surely be taking further actions to address the multifaceted
situation in Central Africa.

