Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, Sir, I would like to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. We assure you of our
constructive cooperation and we are confident of your
successful management of the Council's affairs. I
would also like to express our appreciation for the
efforts of our colleague the Permanent Representative
of China and his team and for the efficient manner in
which they guided our proceedings last month.

We would also like to thank Mr. Edmond Mulet,
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his briefing and for the optimism that
he has expressed with regard to the prevailing
situation.

Indeed, the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/662) and Mr. Mulet's briefing are encouraging,
as evidenced by Mr. Mulet's observation that there
were no major violations of the ceasefire agreement
during the reporting period and that implementation of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) is slow,
but steady. It is worth noting that there has been a
noticeable improvement in the security situation in the
area of operation of the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan (UNMIS). The Abyei Road Map Agreement has
continued to be implemented by the two sides under
the supervision of the Mission. Moreover, the Joint
Integrated Police Unit assumed its responsibilities in
maintaining security after the departure of the forces of
both sides from Abyei, and a Chief Administrator and a
Deputy Administrator for the Abyei Interim
Administration have been appointed. Internally
displaced persons (IDPs) are returning to the city
voluntarily. Although their return continues to be slow,
it is, nevertheless, a positive indicator.

We have also noted a decrease in Violence in
Southern Kordofan among ethnic groups, a start to the
integration of previously closed areas around Kauda
and Julud, as well as the absorption of thousands of
personnel of the Sudan People's Liberation Army
(SPLA) into civil service departments and police
structures, as stipulated by the CPA.

Also worth noting is the great progress in the
redeployment of the Sudanese Armed Forces: 97 per
cent of SAF personnel have been redeployed,
according to UNMIS, although SPLA redeployment is
still modest, barely exceeding 10 per cent. It is also
encouraging to see estimates that 2.37 million refugees
and IDPs have returned home since the signing of the
CPA in 2005.

Furthermore, we would like to commend the
progress in preparing for the elections, with the
completion of the national census and adoption of an
electoral law. Moreover, discussions continue on the
appointment of the members of the National Electoral
Commission.

We believe that the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme is a very important
element in implementing the CPA and in guaranteeing
stability. Thus, we welcome the holding of a round-
table conference for donors this month to discuss ways
to fund that programme.

While those are all positive indicators that should
be commended and welcomed, that does not mean that
there are no challenges that require a great deal of
effort on both sides. However, we are optimistic
because of the spirit prevailing between the two parties
and the fruitful cooperation that they have displayed.

We commend the efforts of UNMIS to implement
the various aspects of its mandate, in particular training
police units, demining and raising awareness about
HIV/AIDS. We also wish to commend the ongoing
cooperation between UNMIS and various United
Nations entities as well as the link that it has
established with the African Union Mission in the
Sudan (AMIS) and with other missions: those in
Darfur, the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Chad.

We welcome the Sudanese Government's
appointment of a Special Prosecutor to investigate
allegations of human rights abuses committed in
Darfur since 2003. That is a positive step that the
Security Council must take into account when
assessing the existence of conditions conducive to
progress in the peace process. Furthermore, we believe
that the Sudan People's Forum, a national effort to
resolve the Darfur crisis, could lead to practical
measures that would help to resolve the crisis. We
express our support for the Forum and call on the
international community, represented by the Security
Council, to support it in every way possible. We also
commend the efforts of Mr. Djibril Bassole, African
Union-United Nations Joint Chief Mediator, to
persuade all rebel factions to join the political
settlement process in Darfur.

Last but not least, we agree with paragraph 81 of
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/662),
which states that

"developments in the Sudan will be influenced to
a large extent by the relevant activities of the
08-58804
International Criminal Court," - such as the
indictment of President Al-Bashir - "and its
actions could have the potential to profoundly
affect the work of the United Nations in the
Sudan, including humanitarian efforts, and the
ongoing peace process in the Sudan".

Therefore, we call on the Security Council to heed that
clear warning and, at the proper time, to take the
necessary decision, namely, at a minimum, to activate
article 17 of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court.

