I wish to congratulate Estonia on its election as a non-permanent member of the Security Council and on assuming the presidency of the Council this month. In addition, we thank it for organizing today's debate on the issue of working methods of the Security Council. Working methods, not only of the Council but also of other organs of the United Nations, have always been an issue of interest for a large number of delegations, as they are intrinsically linked to the functioning of our Organization as the cornerstone of global multilateralism. The issue of working methods has once again come to the fore as we collectively try to overcome the various challenges the coronavirus disease pandemic presents to the international community. In this regard, I wish to thank the successive presidencies of the Council - China, the Dominican Republic and Estonia - for taking all the necessary steps to enable the Council to continue conducting its important work in maintaining international peace and security. Once the current restrictions will have been lifted and the United Nations membership is able to return to holding regular, in-person meetings, we will have to thoroughly reflect on the approaches we will have devised in the face of the pandemic and their effects on the functioning of multilateral institutions or, more generally, on the very conduct of diplomatic relations itself. However, it would be premature to have that reflection now. Accordingly, I wish to address some general issues pertaining to the working methods of the Council. Almost 14 years have passed since the adoption of the first note 507 by the President of the Security Council (S/2006/507), on 19 July 2006, after intensive work by the Security Council's Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions, currently chaired by Ambassador Inga Rhonda King of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. My delegation had the opportunity to chair the Informal Working Group in 2007, right after the able leadership of the Working Group by Japan. Our chairmanship aimed at ensuring a wider implementation of the first note 507. We are happy to see that, since then, two revised versions of the note, in 2010 and 2017, respectively, were subsequently elaborated under separate Japanese chairpersonships. The latter note, adopted on 30 August 2017 (S/2017/507), addresses nearly all aspects of Security Council practice. It is important to continue to strengthen efforts to implement the existing measures and commitments set out in ยง/2017/507. Similarly, the improvement of the working methods and the pursuit of greater transparency, inclusiveness, representativeness and accountability of the Council must remain an ongoing and consistent process. While recognizing achievements made and mindful of remaining challenges, my country is of the view that, in future, more attention should be given to the following areas. First, efforts aimed at enhancing openness in the work of the Security Council, including the work of its subsidiary bodies, should continue. Interaction and dialogue between the Security Council and States that are not members of the Council, in particular those directly concerned and affected, should be further enhanced and broadened. Secondly, substantive engagement of the Council with troop- and police- contributing countries should be further improved to strengthen the basis for decision-making in the Council and increase the incentive for the general United Nations membership to support peace operations. Thirdly, the timely submission of the annual report of the Security Council to the General Assembly would enable more substantive consideration of the report, in line with the mandate of the General Assembly as the main deliberative organ of the United Nations. The discussions on such an important report must not be conducted in a perfunctory manner. Fourthly, reporting cycles for various reports of the Secretary-General should be adjusted so that they reflect the situation on the ground more genuinely. Otherwise, the unnecessarily frequent submission of some reports may result in their not constituting a meaningful substantive contribution to the deliberations of the Council. In contrast, the Council may benefit from shortening the reporting cycles on matters of priority or urgency. Fifthly, further development of more active and meaningful relationships with the Peacebuilding Commission and the Human Rights Council and other relevant bodies could increase the Security Council's effectiveness in responding to conflicts and strengthen its role in conflict prevention and sustaining peace. We are convinced that the expertise, insights and recommendations of the Peacebuilding Commission should be used more frequently and more effectively by the Security Council, as they represent a very important contribution to better-informed deliberations of the Council. Such an approach should not be limited to country-specific configurations, but extend to thematic issues like women, peace and security, youth, peace and security, and security sector reform. Sixthly, further consideration should be given to ways of improving the work of the subsidiary organs of the Security Council, which are crucial for the implementation of Council decisions. That is especially relevant for the various sanctions committees, considering the impact and the scope of the sanction regimes and their effects on human rights and due process. The role of the non-permanent members in shaping and codifying Security Council working methods has proven to be very valuable and constructive. Having said that, I would like to wish the Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions, as well as you, Mr. President, as Vice-Chair, every success in guiding its important endeavours.
