Mr. Malmierca Diaz (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Ibrahim Gambari for the information he has given us.
As he himself has said, in the time that has passed
since the Council held a meeting similar to this one, on
19 October 2006, the situation has not improved in the
Middle East, and especially in occupied Palestinian
territory - quite to the contrary. The assassination of
Lebanon's Minister for Industry is fresh evidence of
that fact. We condemn that act and extend our sincere
condolences to the Government and people of Lebanon
and to the family of the Minister.

As the Non-Aligned Movement has set out in
recent statements, the ongoing deterioration of the
situation in occupied Palestinian territory is a matter of
concern, especially as a result of the disproportionate,
indiscriminate and excessive use of force by Israel,
which has resulted in great loss of life and injuries to
Palestinian civilians.

Despite the continuing deterioration of the
situation, including the terrible massacre that took
place in Beit Hanoun on 8 November 2006, the
Security Council has not been able to act and continues
to fail to fulfil its responsibilities for the maintenance
of international peace and security. As we know, on
11 November 2006, the United States cast its thirty-
first veto in connection with a text having to do with
the question of the Middle East. The draft resolution in
question was a balanced document introduced at the
Council by the delegation of Qatar on behalf of the
Arab Group. The draft resolution failed owing to that
veto, despite the fact that it received a favourable vote
from the majority of the Security Council, including all
the countries of the Non-Aligned Movement that are
currently members of the Council. The Council's
inaction seriously affects not only its already
diminished credibility; it also strengthens the Israeli
Government's sense of impunity, which feels fully
protected by the unjustifiable United States veto.

In the face of the Security Council's paralysis
resulting from the abuse of the veto, there was no
alternative but to go to the General Assembly, a forum
in which we all participate on an equal footing and
where there is no place for the anti-democratic and
obsolete right of veto.

By an overwhelming majority, the Assembly
adopted, at its resumed tenth emergency special
session, a resolution setting out specific measures.
Cuba calls for the immediate and full implementation
of that resolution in all its aspects, including the
dispatch by the Secretary-General of a fact-finding
mission on the attack that took place in Beit Hanoun,
with a view to informing the General Assembly within
a 30-day period.

The Security Council cannot continue to remain
idle in the face of Israel's flagrant violations of its
resolutions. It is unacceptable for this organ to
continue to shirk its ongoing responsibility with
respect to the question of Palestine while this issue has
not been resolved in all its aspects on the basis of
international law.

The Security Council must immediately adopt the
measures necessary for Israel to put an end to the
occupation and to its illegitimate and illegal practices
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including the
illegal construction of the wall, which have as a goal to
seize and to annex Palestinian land and property and to
alter the demographic and geographical nature of the
Palestinian territory.

Cuba reaffirms its commitment to a just and
peaceful solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and
to the right of the Palestinian people to exercise their
right to self-determination and sovereignty in an
independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.

We reiterate also our request that Israel comply
with resolution 497 (1981) and that it withdraw from
the entire occupied Syrian Golan back to the line of 4
June 1967, in compliance with resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973).

Cuba welcomes the seriousness with which the
Government of Lebanon has been complying with its
obligations under resolution 1701 (2006), including the
deployment of the Lebanese army in the southern
region of the country and for its excellent level of
cooperation with the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL).

Lebanon's sovereignty and territorial integrity
must be fully respected. The Government of Israel
must comply with its obligations and immediately
cease all acts of provocation against Lebanon,
including the ongoing violations of that country's
airspace.

I should like to conclude by reiterating the urgent
need to put an end to the protracted and illegal Israeli
occupation of all of the Arab territories occupied since
1967 and to resume the Middle East peace process.

In that respect, we would underscore the
importance of the Arab Peace Initiative adopted at
Beirut in 2002, as well as the recent call made by the
Arab summit held at Khartoum in March to revitalize
the Arab Peace Initiative.
